

ONLINE LIBRARY OF LIBERTY


A collection of scholarly works about individual liberty and free
markets. A project of Liberty Fund, Inc.



JOHN STUART MILL, _THE COLLECTED WORKS OF JOHN STUART MILL, VOLUME XXIX – PUBLIC AND PARLIAMENTARY SPEECHES PART II JULY 1869 – MARCH 1873_ [1869]


Edition used:

John Stuart Mill, _The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume XXIX
– Public and Parliamentary Speeches Part II July 1869 – March 1873,_ ed.
John M. Robson and Bruce L. Kinzer (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1988).
http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/263

About this Title:

Vol. 29 of the 33 vol. Collected Works contains Mill’s electoral and
parliamentary speeches from 1869-1873, including women’s suffrage
education, and land reform. It also includes an essay by Helen Taylor on
War and Peace.

Copyright information:

The online edition of the _Collected Works_ is published under licence
from the copyright holder, The University of Toronto Press. ©2006 The
University of Toronto Press. All rights reserved. No part of this
material may be reproduced in any form or medium without the permission
of The University of Toronto Press.

Fair use statement:

This material is put online to further the educational goals of Liberty
Fund, Inc. Unless otherwise stated in the Copyright Information section
above, this material may be used freely for educational and academic
purposes. It may not be used in any way for profit.

Table of Contents:

-   Contents
-   PUBLIC AND PARLIAMENTARY SPEECHES 1869–1873
-   July 1869 to March 1873
-   143.: The Cobden Club 10 JULY, 1869
-   144.: Women’s Suffrage [1] 18 JULY, 1869
-   145.: The Education Bill [1] 25 MARCH, 1870
-   146.: Women’s Suffrage [2] 26 MARCH, 1870
-   147.: The Education Bill [2] 4 APRIL, 1870
-   148.: Election to School Boards [1] 22 OCTOBER, 1870
-   149.: Election to School Boards [2] 9 NOVEMBER, 1870
-   150.: Women’s Suffrage [3] 12 JANUARY, 1871
-   151.: The Cumulative Vote 13 FEBRUARY, 1871
-   152.: Discussion of the Contagious Diseases Acts 23 FEBRUARY, 1871
-   153.: The Army Bill 10 MARCH, 1871
-   154.: Land Tenure Reform [1] 15 MAY, 1871
-   155.: Land Tenure Reform [2] 18 MARCH, 1873
-   APPENDICES
-   Appendix A
-   The Manuscripts
-   Appendix B
-   Questions before Committees of the House of Commons (1866, 1868)
-   I.: Select Committee on Metropolitan Local Government
-   FIRST REPORT
-   SECOND REPORT
-   II.: Select Committee on Extradition
-   Appendix C
-   Petitions in the House of Commons (1866-68)
-   1866
-   1867
-   1868
-   Appendix D
-   I.: Manuscript Draft of The Westminster Election of 1865 [2] (1865)
-   II.: Manuscript Draft of Representation of the People [2] (1866)
-   III.: Manuscript Draft of Women’s Suffrage [1] (1869)
-   IV.: Manuscript Draft of The Education Bill [1] (1870)
-   Appendix E
-   Missing Speeches
-   Appendix F
-   War and Peace, by Helen Taylor (1871)
-   Appendix G
-   Textual Emendations
-   Appendix H
-   Index of Persons, and Works Cited, with Variants and Notes
-   BRITAIN
-   PARLIAMENTARY PAPERS
-   STATUTES
-   FRENCH STATUTES
-   IRISH STATUTES

Edition: current; Page: [i]
COLLECTED WORKS OF JOHN STUART MILL

volume xxix

Edition: current; Page: [ii]
The Collected Edition of the Works of John Stuart Mill has been planned
and is being directed by an editorial committee appointed from the
Faculty of Arts and Science of the University of Toronto, and from the
University of Toronto Press. The primary aim of the edition is to
present fully collated texts of those works which exist in a number of
versions, both printed and manuscript, and to provide accurate texts of
works previously unpublished or which have become relatively
inaccessible.

Editorial Committee

john m. robson, General Editor

harald bohne, j.c. cairns, j.b. conacher,

d.p. dryer, marion filipiuk, francess halpenny,

samuel hollander, r.f. mcrae, ian montagnes,

f.e.l. priestley, ann p. robson, f.e. sparshott

Edition: current; Page: [iii]
Public and Parliamentary Speeches

by JOHN STUART MILL

July 1869 - March 1873

Edited by JOHN M. ROBSON University Professor and Professor of English,
Victoria College, University of Toronto and BRUCE L. KINZER Associate
Professor of History University of North Carolina at Wilmington

Introduction by BRUCE L. KINZER Textual Introduction by JOHN M. ROBSON

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS

ROUTLEDGE

Edition: current; Page: [iv]
© University of Toronto Press 1988

Toronto and Buffalo

Printed in Canada

ISBN 0-8020-2693-1

London: Routledge

ISBN 0-415-03792-1

ISBN 0-415-03793-X (set)

archival

Printed on acid-free paper

Canadian Cataloguing in Publication data

Mill, John Stuart, 1806-1873.

[Works]

Collected works of John Stuart Mill

Includes bibliographies and indexes.

partial contents: v. 28-29.

Public & parliamentary speeches /

edited by John M. Robson and Bruce L. Kinzer.

ISBN 0-8020-2693-1 (v. 28-29).

1. - Collected works. 2. - Collected works.

I. Robson, John M., 1927-

II. Title.

B1602.A2 1963 192 C65-188-2 rev.

This volume has been published with the assistance of a grant from the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada

Edition: current; Page: [v]


Contents

-   

    July 1869 to March 1873
    -   

        143. The Cobden Club (10 July, 1869) 371
    -   

        144. Women’s Suffrage [1] (18 July 1869) 373
    -   

        145. The Education Bill (25 Mar., 1870) 381
    -   

        146. Women’s Suffrage [2] (26 Mar., 1870) 386
    -   

        147. The Elementary Education Bill (4 Apr., 1870) 391
    -   

        148. Election to School Boards [1] (22 Oct., 1870) 396
    -   

        149. Election to School Boards [2] (9 Nov., 1870) 398
    -   

        150. Women’s Suffrage [3] (12 Jan., 1871) 402
    -   

        151. The Cumulative Vote (13 Feb., 1871) 409
    -   

        152. Discussion of the Contagious Diseases Acts (23 Feb., 1871)
        411
    -   

        153. The Army Bill (10 Mar., 1871) 411
    -   

        154. Land Tenure Reform [1] (15 May, 1871) 416
    -   

        155. Land Tenure Reform [2] (18 Mar., 1873) 425

-   

    Appendices
    -   

        Appendix A. The Manuscripts 435
    -   

        Appendix B. Questions before Committees of the House of Commons
        -   

            I) Select Committee on Metropolitan Local Government (1866)
            437
        -   

            II) Select Committee on Extradition (1868) 542

    -   

        Appendix C. Petitions in the House of Commons (1866-68) 572
    -   

        Appendix D. Manuscript Drafts of Speeches
        -   

            I) No. 6 (1865) 594
        -   

            II) No. 16 (1866) 599
        -   

            III) No. 144 (1869) 604
        -   

            IV) No. 145 (1870) 610

        Edition: current; Page: [vi]
    -   

        Appendix E. Missing Speeches 614
    -   

        Appendix F. War and Peace, by Helen Taylor (1871) 615
    -   

        Appendix G. Textual Emendations 618
    -   

        Appendix H. Index of Persons and Works Cited 623

-   

    Index 681
-   

    Facsimiles
    -   

        “Miss Mill Joins the Ladies” Judy, 25 November, 1868, pp. 46-7
        vii
    -   

        “Poor Ireland!” Fun, 28 March, 1868, facing p. 28 432

Edition: current; Page: [vii]
[lf0223-29_figure_001.jpg]
“Miss Mill joins the ladies” Judy, 25 November, 1868, pp. 46-7

Edition: current; Page: [371]


PUBLIC AND PARLIAMENTARY SPEECHES
 1869–1873


July 1869 to March 1873


143.: The Cobden Club
 10 JULY, 1869

Daily News, 12 July, 1869, p. 2. Headed: “The Cobden Club.” Reports (all
in the third person) appeared in the Morning Star, the Daily Telegraph,
and The Times. The annual dinner of the Cobden Club was held at 6 p.m.
on Saturday in the Ship Hotel, Greenwich, with about 150 members and
guests taken there by steamer from the House of Commons Stairs. George
Douglas Campbell, Duke of Argyll, was in the Chair; Thomas Bayley
Potter, Honorary Secretary of the Club, was Vice-Chair. Mill, “who was
supposed to be in Paris, unexpectedly entered the room, and was loudly
cheered.” Argyll, in proposing the health of the Queen, made reference
to despatches to India, and mentioned his friend Mill, “who knows so
much more of India than I can pretend to do, and who has taken, as we
all know, the fair sex under his chivalrous and eloquent protection
(laughter),” and went on to mention the death of the Begum of Bhopal,
calling her state “one of the best governed of all the native States”—a
comment that elicited “ ‘Hear,’ from Mr. Mill.” The other toasts to the
Royal Family were followed by Argyll’s proposing the toast of the
evening, “the Prosperity and Welfare of the Cobden Club,” to which G.C.
Brodrick responded. Mill was then called on to toast “The Honorary
Members and Guests,” and rose to loud cheers.

when i entered the room I had no expectation of being selected, as the
organ of this society, to propose the health of their distinguished
honorary members and guests. Fortunately, it is the less necessary that
I should say much on this topic, as your grace has already expressed the
sentiments of this club with your accustomed skill and good taste. As to
the gentlemen who are the subjects of my toast, it is quite superfluous
that I should say much of them; for among those who desire and watch the
progress of European opinion, where is it that Mr. Cobden is honoured
and that M. Michel Chevalier1 is not honoured? (Cheers.) In him we
recognise the Cobden of France; but for him it is very unlikely Mr.
Cobden would have succeeded as he did in producing the great results he
achieved. M. Michel Chevalier, at times when there were but a few
enlightened men among Frenchmen who saw the advantages of free trade,
was exerting himself in every way in which a man could exert himself to
promote it. He is still a grand pillar of the cause of free exchange in
France, and it is not in that only he has rendered service to his
country and Europe. To see this Edition: current; Page: [372] one has
only to watch his conduct as a member of the Senate, where he has
entitled himself to the highest praise which it is possible for a member
of a legislative assembly to deserve, for on more than one occasion he
has not feared to stand up alone on behalf of great principles. He has
often been the single solitary voter in a minority of himself. (Cheers.)
The most remarkable occasion of that kind was in the cause so dear to
our Cobden—the cause of peace. (Cheers.) This is the more meritorious
because M. Michel Chevalier is well known to be a supporter of the
present Imperial Government. As to M. Arlès-Dufour,2 all who know
anything of that distinguished man know that the influence he has long
exercised upon commerce and manufactures in the city of Lyons, and
thereby throughout France, has been exercised in the cause of free
trade, in the cause of general peace and good will between nations, and
I may say in every other good cause that has been at stake throughout
his life. (Cheers.) I do not think I am exaggerating when I say this. We
have here, too, many distinguished Americans. One of them, Mr. George
Walker,3 is well known throughout the United States by the spirit and
energy and enlightenment with which he has exerted himself, and by the
reproach, and attack, and ill-will he has braved in the great cause of
free trade, and, on behalf of that universal peace and good-will among
nations, which is inseparably bound up with it; and I do say it is not
possible that a nation that has, at an incredible expenditure of blood
and treasure, put into effect this grand principle of economy by setting
free its slaves—it is not possible in a nation in which educated
intelligence goes down to the very lowest ranks—in which there is the
freest and openest discussion of all great questions which come home to
the understandings of every man, and, I may add, every woman throughout
the community—(laughter)—it is, I say, impossible that this great nation
should go on in the superstition of protection, and that it should not
see that the interests of its citizens are sacrificed every day and
every hour to the interests, or supposed interests, of a few. (Cheers.)
It is impossible that the fallacies which our great Cobden energetically
dispelled and drove out of the minds of the prejudiced among our own
people should not also be driven out of the minds of the people of the
United States. (Cheers.) It is impossible, now that the great question
of negro labour is settled, but that the question of free trade will
come into the foremost rank, and when it does become the question of the
United States the time is not far distant when it will be impossible to
sow dissension between them and Great Britain, when it will be
impossible there should be any ill-will between the two nations, but
when all differences will be cleared up by explanation and argument.
(Cheers.) When that time comes we shall all recognise that the grand
work of Cobden, and his great coadjutors in France, in Europe generally,
and in the United States, is complete. Edition: current; Page: [373]
Then, and not till then, will this club consider its work to be
executed. aI consider that we owe a great debt of gratitude to the
distinguished foreigners who have made the late Mr. Cobden’s cause their
own, and I, therefore, have great pleasure in proposing the toast
entrusted to me.a The toast is, “Our honorary members and American
guests.” (Loud cheers.)

[Chevalier spoke next, in French, concluding with a toast to Cobden’s
memory; he was followed by Arlès-Dufour, and George Walker of
Massachusetts, and then Potter proposed the Chair’s health, and after
Argyll responded, the company separated, most returning by the same
steamer.]


144.: Women’s Suffrage [1]
 18 JULY, 1869

Report of a Meeting of the London National Society for Women’s Suffrage,
Held at the Gallery of the Architectural Society, in Conduit Street,
Saturday, July 17th, 1869 (London: [National Society for Women’s
Suffrage,] 1869), pp. 7-14, 34. Reported on 19 July in the Morning Star,
from which the responses are taken, and the Daily Telegraph. Collation
indicates that Mill was following closely his untitled holograph
manuscript (Mill-Taylor Collection), reproduced in full in Appendix D.
The afternoon meeting, largely attended by both men and women, was, on
Mill’s motion, chaired by Clementia Taylor. In her opening remarks, she
indicated that the Society’s growth and success in the past two years
had been in large measure the result of Mill’s “fearless and eloquent
advocacy”; she alluded to his amendment to the Reform Bill (see No. 55
above), and said “every woman in Great Britain” owed him “a deep debt of
gratitude. (Cheers.)” The Secretary, Caroline Biggs, read a brief
report, which was accepted. Mill then rose to loud and continued
applause.

the first thing that presents itself for us men who have joined this
Society—a Society instituted by ladies to procure the protection of the
franchise for women—is to congratulate them on the success of this,
their first effort in political organisation. The admission of women to
the suffrage is now a practical question. What was, not very long ago, a
mere protest in behalf of abstract right, has grown into a definite
apoliticala aim, seriously pursued by many thousands of active
adherents. No sooner did a few ladies of talent and influence, fostered
in those principles of justice, and believing in those elements of
progress, which are now renewing the life of every country of the
world—no sooner bdid a few of these ladies give the signal that the time
was come to claim for women ctheirc share in Edition: current; Page:
[374] those blessings of freedom, which are the passion and the glory of
every noble nation, than there rallied round them unexpected thousands
of women, eager to find expression for aspirations and wishes which we
now learn that multitudes of our countrywomen have long cherished in
silence. The thousands who have signed the petitions for women’s
suffrage, year after year, are evidence that I am not exaggerating when
I say this. For my part, I have all my life held the opinion, that women
have the same right to the suffrage as men; and it has been my good
fortune to know many ladies very much fitter to exercise it than the
majority of the men of my acquaintance. (Laughter and cheers.) I may
say, too, to the credit of my own perspicacity, that I have long been of
opinion that dmost ofd the disclaimers of all wish for political or any
other equality with men, which, until quite lately, have been almost
universal among women, are merely a form of that graceful and amiable
way of making a virtue of necessity, which always distinguishes women.
Nevertheless, I must acknowledge, I did not expect the amount of
sympathy, enaye of more than sympathy, of ardent and zealous support,
which this movement has called forth among women, and men also, of all
franksf and all parties. We have had a success quite out of proportion
to our apparent means, and which would be unaccountable, were it not for
gsome potentg allies that have been working for us.

First of these precious auxiliaries is the sense of justice. When not
stifled by custom or prejudice, the natural feeling of justice is on our
side. We are fighting against privilege on one side, disabilities and
disqualifications on the other. We are protesting against arbitrary
preferences; against making favourites of some, and shutting the door
against others. We are claiming equal chances, equal opportunities,
equal means of self-protection for both halves of mankind. The political
suffrage, which men are everywhere demanding has the sole means by which
their other rights can be secured to them, we, for the same reason, and
in the name of the same principles, demand for women too. We take our
stand, therefore, on natural justice; and to appeal to that, is to
invoke a mighty power.

The other auxiliary which is working for us, with ever increasing force,
is the progress of the age; what we may call the modern spirit. All the
tendencies which are the boast of the time—all those which are the
characteristic features and animating principles of modern improvement,
are on our side. There is, first, the growing ascendancy of moral force
over physical—of social influences over brute strength—of the idea of
right over the law of might. Then there is the philanthropic spirit;
that which seeks to raise the weak, the lowly, the oppressed. There is
the democratic spirit; the disposition to extend political rights, and
to deem any iclassi Edition: current; Page: [375] insufficiently
jprotectedj unless it has a voice in choosing the persons by whom the
laws are made and administered. There is the free trade spirit; the
desire to take off restrictions—to break down barriers—to kleavek people
free to make their own circumstances, instead of chaining them down by
law or custom to circumstances made for them. Then there is the force of
what, to the shame of past history, I am obliged to call the new
conception of human improvement and happiness—that they do not consist
in being passively ministered to, but in active self-development. And,
over and above these specific practical forces, actively at work in
society, we have with us one of the strongest and best modern
characteristics—not pointing, as those do, to a particular line of
outward action, but consisting in a general disposition of our own
minds: the habit of estimating human beings by their intrinsic worth—by
what they are, and by what they do: not by what they are born to, nor by
the place in which accident or the law has classed them. Those who are
fully penetrated with this spirit cannot help feeling rich and poor,
women and men, to be equals before the State, as from the time of the
Christian era they have been proclaimed equal in the sight of God. And
this feeling is giving us powerful aid in our attempt to convert that
Christian ideal into a human reality.

lTo show how unequivocally and emphatically the spirit of the age is on
our side, we need only think of the different social improvements which
are in course of being attempted, or which the age has fully made up its
mind to attempt.l There is not one of those improvements which would not
help the enfranchisement of women; and there is not one of them which
the enfranchisement of women would not help. mNot one of them can be
literallym realised unless women, with their moral and intellectual
capabilities properly developed, are associated in the work. From the
moment when society takes upon itself the duties required of it by the
present state of civilisation, it cannot do without the intelligent
co-operation of women; and the pedantic nonsense now talked about the
sphere of women, will appear thoroughly ridiculous when pleaded as an
excuse for excluding women from the minor matters of politics, when
their assistance cannot be dispensed with in the most arduous. (Cheers.)

Look at education, for example. That is almost the one great cry of the
day. Statesmen, scholars, public writers, all join in it: great and
small, rich and poor, Tories, Whigs, and Radicals, the higher, the
middle, and the working classes, with one voice declare, that the
country cannot get on without a good national education, descending to
the very bottom of society, and (give me leave to add) ascending also to
the top. The best people have said this for generations; but after the
political changes recently made, and with the prospect we have of more,
the Edition: current; Page: [376] necessity has become evident to all.
We say, then, to rich and poor, Tories, Whigs, and Radicals,—Are you
going to educate a nation without women? Let alone the equal right of
women to ntheir share ofn the benefit; I ask—Can it be given to the rest
of us without women’s direct help? When we set about really teaching the
children of all oranks of the peopleo—it will not be like the nominal
teaching they mostly receive now—we shall need a vastly greater number
of schoolmasters than we can afford to pay, if we reject the assistance
of half, porp much more than half, the available force. Women are the
acknowledged best teachers of young children; and numbers of them are
eager, both as professionals and as volunteers, to put their hand to the
work. The only hindrance to their being equally capable instructors of
more advanced pupils, is that they cannot teach what they have not been
allowed to learn. (Hear, hear.) They will have to be taught all the more
valuable branches of knowledge, if only that they may teach them to
others. In the country where there is the widest diffusion of popular
qeducationq, the Northern States of America, a large majority of the
teachers are already women, and that not exclusively in the elementary
schools; and they are found to be particularly efficient teachers of
male pupils. Is it likely, then, that when women find themselves, side
by side with the men of the present, teaching and training the men of
the future, they will believe in any right of their pupils to political
rsupremacyr over them? (Hear, hear.) Will they feel themselves less
worthy of a vote, think you, or less entitled to it, than the men who
have been taught by them how to use their svotes? And I should like to
see the face of the man, so taught, who would stand up and refuse it to
them. (Cheers.)

Let us turn next to the management of the poor: and by the poor I mean
those in receipt of public relief—the pauper population. That formidable
difficulty is weighing upon the spirits of all our thinkers, and of all
conscientious public administrators; and the more they think, the more
they seem to be overwhelmed with its arduousness. I venture to predict
that this great national, and more than national, this human concern,
will never be successfully treated until women take their share, perhaps
the principal share, in the management of it. A wide experience has
taught to thoughtful men that the right principle of a poor-law, is to
give relief, except of a very temporary kind, to adults, nowhere but in
public establishments—workhouses, and, for those who need them,
hospitals. And this method has been tried: but the workhouses and the
workhouse hospitals have been so execrably managed, the pillage has been
so profligate, and the unhappy inmates so brutally neglected and
ill-used, that the system has broken down, and public feeling shrinks
from enforcing it. If this is ever remedied, it will be when pauper
Edition: current; Page: [377] establishments are looked after by capable
women. As mere visitors, it is to them we in great part owe the
discovery of the enormities by which the public have been sickened, and
which has escaped the watchfulness of men specially selected as fit to
be inspectors of poorhouses. The fittest person to manage a workhouse is
the person who best knows how to manage a house. The woman who has
learnt to govern her own servants, will know how to do the same with
workhouse servants. Few are the male guardians and inspectors
sufficiently conversant with details, to be competent to check the
dishonesty, to stimulate the zeal, or to overcome the indolence, of all
the people concerned in administering to the wants of any large
agglomeration of human beings. Every experienced traveller knows that
there are few comfortable inns where there is no hostess. And the
gigantic peculation of the commissariats of armies, as well as the
dreadful sufferings of the wounded soldiers from the insufficiency of
the medical and nursing staff, all bear testimony to the fact that men
do not possess the heaven-born faculty they arrogate to themselves for
doing well on a large scale what they disdain to serve an apprenticeship
to doing on a small scale. If home is ta woman’s natural spheret (and I
am not at all called upon to ucontradictu the assertion) those
departments of politics which need the faculties that can only be
acquired at home, are va woman’s natural spherev too. But there are
great spheres and little spheres; and some people want women to be
always content with the little spheres. I don’t.

In the same manner, in all that concerns the details of public
expenditure: what superintendence and control would be equal to that of
an experienced mother of a family, who knows, or has learnt to find out,
what things ought to cost, and whose daily business it has been to
discover and check malversation or waste in every department of a large
household? Very few men have had much of this sort of practice;
multitudes of women have had it. If we are to meet the demand of the age
for a government at once cheap and efficient, which shall cost little,
but shall give us all we ought to have for the money, the most vigilant
and capable agents for making the money go as far as it can will
generally be found among women. (Applause.)

One important public function, at least, has devolved on women from the
commencement. Nursing the sick is a privilege which men have seldom
denied to women. (Laughter.) The nursing of the sick in most public
establishments is, from the necessity of the case, mainly carried on by
women; and it is now understood that they ought to be educated women. No
ignorant person can be a good nurse. A nurse requires to know enough of
the laws of health and the treatment of disease, to be at least able to
observe sanitary rules, and to understand the meaning of symptoms. But
much more than this will be required when the prevention and cure of
disease become a branch of public administration; and to this things are
rapidly Edition: current; Page: [378] tending. There are many
difficulties in dealing with the poor—many hindrances, both moral and
economical, to our doing for them what most of us would like to do: but
one thing the nation wis, I think, makingw up its mind that it will not
grudge them, and that is, the xcarex of their health. In this one
respect it is felt that our poor-law, instead of doing too much, does
not do nearly enough. The medical staff of our unions is wretchedly
underpaid, and nothing like so numerous as it ought to be. And how is it
to be made efficient—how can the localities afford the expense necessary
for providing a sufficient number of persons with the required
qualifications, if we persist in shutting the door upon those women who
claim from us medical education, to fit them for such duties as these?
Until the medical profession is opened to women, there will never be an
adequate supply of educated medical practitioners for any but the rich.
And independently of regular practitioners, there are numbers of women
who, from their domestic occupations, cannot give all their time, but
would willingly give part of it, either as volunteers or at a small
remuneration, for work which would be too costly if paid for at the
value of the time of medical men in good private practice. But when
women are entrusted with public functions like these, and educated for
them, will they be content to be excluded from the common privileges of
citizenship? and how long will it be possible to exclude them?

Society is feeling every day more and more, that the services of women
are wanted for other uses than “to suckle fools and chronicle small
beer.”1 (Laughter.) Many are now saying that women should be better
educated, in order that they may be able to educate men; and truly if
they are to educate men, the education of a well-educated man can hardly
be denied to them. (Hear, hear.) But these very moderate reformers fall
into the mistake about women that was made about the working classes.
People were willing to educate the working men, but expected them, after
being educated, to content themselves with the same treatment which they
had met with before. They would be quite happy, it was thought, when
their improved faculties qualified them to be more useful servants, and
would not think of claiming their share of mastership, or a voice in the
choosing of masters. It has not so turned out with the working classes,
neither will it so turn out with women. Those who are fit to train men
for their work will think themselves fit to share in the work; or, at
the lowest, in the choice of those who are to direct it. The higher
education of women, and their political emancipation, are sure to go
forward together. (Applause.)

We may safely affirm, then, that our cause has a powerful backing; since
it has for its allies the great forces which are at work everywhere,
striving to improve the world. Our success would greatly strengthen all
these forces: and they, by their Edition: current; Page: [379]
increasing strength, help to accelerate our success; illustrating the
truth, that improvements aid one another. All good causes are allied;
whoever helps forward one ybeneficialy object, proves in the end to have
promoted many more. (Hear, hear.) In the assurance that it will be so
with us, our business is to go on doing what, as a Society, we have
hitherto done—to strive for the suffrage, and for the suffrage only. The
suffrage, while it is the road to other progress, commits no one as to
what other things progress consists of. Let us but gain the suffrage,
and whatever is desirable for women zmustz ultimately follow, without
its being necessary at present to adecidea, or indeed possible to
foresee, all that bisb desirable. The mere fact of claiming the suffrage
cis giving an impulse, such as never hasc been given before, to all
proposals for doing away with dinjustice to women. Since the suffrage
has been claimed, a bill for allowing married women to be the owners of
their own property, which had been laid on the shelf for ten years with
other uninteresting trifles, has been reintroduced into Parliament with
good prospect of success;2 and the movement for the higher education of
women is spreading in all directions, with a considerable diversity of
means, insomuch that women have a chance of obtaining a really good
education almost as soon as men. We of this Society shall best promote
these important movements by taking no part in them as a Society,
whatever any of us may think it erighte to do as individuals; but
pressing forward with all our efforts what virtually includes them all,
the suffrage. With it, we shall in time obtain what is needed, whatever
that may be; but till the suffrage is gained, we have obtained nothing
that may not be resumed any day at the caprice of our rulers. In these
days, the great practical distinction, the line of fseparationf between
those who can protect themselves and those who are at the mercy of
others, is the political franchise. All who have rights to protect now
look to that as the only effectual means of protecting them. (Hear,
hear.) Even in America it was found that to abolish slavery was not
enough; the negroes gcould not beg really free until they had the
suffrage. Representative assemblies, in the election of which they had
no voice, inflicted or hpermittedh treatment which Edition: current;
Page: [380] would ihave brought them back to a servitude almost worse
than their previous state. In a political age, such as the present is,
jlet the laws in other respects be what they may,j women will never be
of equal account with men, will never be felt to be entitled to equal
consideration, so long as men have votes and women have not. The kgreatk
extension of the suffrage to others, so long as women are excluded from
it, is a positive injury to them, since it is rapidly making them the
only excluded class; the only persons whom the law either deems unworthy
of a voice in choosing their rulers, or does not sufficiently care for
to lgivel them that protection. The suffrage is the turning point of
women’s cause; mit alone will ensure them an equal hearing and fair
play. With itm, they cannot long be denied any just right, or excluded
from any fair advantage: without it, their interests and feelings will
always be a secondary consideration, and it will be thought of little
consequence how much their sphere is circumscribed, or how many modes of
using their faculties are denied to them. Let us, then, continue to
concentrate our exertions on the suffrage; inviting all who wish for the
nbettern education of women, all who desire justice to them in respect
of property and earnings, all who desire their admission to any
profession or career now closed to them, to aid our enterprise, as the
surest means of accelerating the particular improvement in which they
feel a special interest. (Loud cheers.)

oMr. Mill then moved the 1st Resolution:

“That this Society declares its strong conviction that it is in the
highest degree unjust and impolitic to make sex the ground of exclusion
from the exercise of political rights.”

[Charles Kingsley seconded the resolution, which was supported by Henry
Fawcett and approved. Millicent Fawcett moved a resolution pledging the
Society to work by all lawful means to obtain the franchise for women;
in seconding, Houghton referred to a passage from Mill “to the effect
that laws would never be improved unless there were numerous persons
whose moral sentiments were better than the existing laws,” and Morley,
supporting the motion, mentioned that he had been converted to sexual
equality by reading Mill’s Dissertations and Discussions while at
Oxford. After the resolution passed, a third was successfully moved,
congratulating the society on the progress already made. The meeting
concluded after a motion thanking the Chair, moved by Stansfeld, who was
followed by Mill.]

I beg to second the motion. It is quite unnecessary that I should make
any remarks, or add anything to what has been said. I am sure the whole
meeting feels Edition: current; Page: [381] the grace, the dignity, as
well as the business-like spirit in which the proceedings have been
conducted by Mrs. Taylor, and all will join most heartily in voting
thanks to her.o


145.: The Education Bill [1]
 25 MARCH, 1870

Speech by John Stuart Mill, Esq., at the National Education League
Meeting, at St. James’s Hall, London, March 25, 1870 (Birmingham:
printed Hudson, 1870). Collation indicates that Mill was following
closely his holograph manuscript (Houghton Library, Harvard University,
printed in full in Appendix D below), which is headed in his hand:
“Speech at the meeting of the Education League at St James’s Hall, March
25, 1870.” Reported in full on 26 March in The Times, and in the Daily
Telegraph. The Daily News has a summary in the third person. The
audience’s responses are taken from the Daily Telegraph. Writing on 28
February about the issue to Charles Dilke (who was President of the
London branch of the National Education League, and was to chair the
meeting at which Mill spoke), Mill says that if he were in Parliament he
should oppose the Government’s measure because of its denominational
bias, adding: “Ever since I saw that the League was going to make a
stand on this point I have been desirous of helping it by some
expression of opinion, but I have not yet made up my mind how I can best
do so. I rather dislike writing private letters to be published in the
newspapers, of which there has been a great deal in my case already
without my consent” (CW, Vol. XVII, p. 1703). The evening public meeting
was held to support the objections of the National Education League to
the Government’s “Bill to Provide for Public Elementary Education in
England and Wales,” 33 Victoria (17 Feb., 1870), PP, 1870, I, 505-42
(enacted as 33 & 34 Victoria, c. 75). The objections were (1) that
school boards were not provided for every part of the country, (2) that
education was made compulsory in a partial and uncertain manner, and (3)
that the bill extended the denominational system. After the Chair’s
introductory remarks, it was moved and seconded “That this meeting
condemns the power given to school boards to found denominational
schools at the public expense; and therefore receives with pleasure the
assurances of Mr. Gladstone that this portion of the Bill shall be
redrawn,” and Mill was called upon, “to receive whom the entire audience
rose cheering”

(Daily News).

the resolution which has been moved relates to a defect which, as the
Bill was originally adrawna, was its greatest blot: and even after the
great concessions—for they are great concessions—which we may now
consider to have been made by the Government, enough of evil remains to
demand a strong protest. Though there are many other things in the Bill
that we wish altered, those other defects are chiefly of the nature of
shortcomings: what is done we approve, but we wish that it were done
more thoroughly: the difference between what the Bill gives and what we
desire is the difference between good and better, but in the present
case it is the Edition: current; Page: [382] difference between good and
bad. (Applause.) The Bill does not simply halt and hang back in the path
of good, it does positive evil; it introduces a new religious
inequality.1 Even the battenuations that are promisedb leave untouched a
great part of the evil, for they leave the whole of its principle.
Teachers are still to be employed and paid by the entire community to
teach the religion of a part. True, this is now to be done out of school
hours,2 and I would by no means depreciate the value of this concession.
I should be glad to forget as soon as possible what the Bill would have
been without it. Though brought in by a Government which has cearnedc
such high distinction as the destroyer of religious inequality in
Ireland,3 a more effectual plan could scarcely have been devised by the
strongest champion of ecclesiastical ascendancy for enabling the clergy
of the Church of England to deducate the children of the greater part of
England and Wales in their own religion at the expensed of the public.
Hitherto instruction has only been given to those who asked for it, but
we are now going (at least we hope so) to teach every child; and the
Bill gave up to the local bodies, which in the rural districts means the
squire and the parson, all the neglected children—the children of all
who care little about religion, of all who are dependent, of all who are
under obligations for charitable offices, of all who are too timid to
risk displeasing their superiors by sending in a solemn refusal in
writing to do what they are wanted to do.4 (Loud cheers.) And because
the Nonconformists would not stand this they were told (but I must do
the Government the justice to say, not by them) that their motive could
not be religious or political principle, but could only be eunworthye
sectarian jealousy. By the promised concessions this blot is in great
part—I wish I could even now say entirely—taken out of the Bill. But the
principle remains of teaching the religion of a part with funds raised
by taxation from the whole; and a measure infected by this bad principle
cannot be satisfactory to any but persons of the dominant creed, nor to
impartial persons of any creed. (Cheers.)

fIt is true we may be toldf that the Dissenters can teach their own
doctrines if they please and in the school-buildings too.5 They can, if,
after deducting the Edition: current; Page: [383] school hours and the
gextra hours set apartg for Church teaching, sufficient time remains;
but they must pay the whole expense and their share of the cost of the
Church-teaching besides. (Laughter.) We may be told too that in places
where the Dissenters are the strongest, it will be they and not the
Church that will be enabled to teach their own doctrines at other
people’s expense.6 As if an injustice in one place were cured by an
injustice in another. (Cheers.) But this permission to hbe unjusth in
their turn, wherever they are strong enough, the Dissenters are so
extremely unreasonable as not to value. It is well known that they do
not desire their distinctive doctrines to be taught in schools; and,
indeed, there are probably few places in which any one denomination is
sufficiently numerous to make this ieasilyi practicable. The system
deliberately chosen by the Dissenters is that of the British schools,
where religious teaching is limited to reading the Bible without note or
comment. Besides, we jknow that the practical strength of the Dissenters
is in the large towns, or districts equivalent to towns; where they
happen to be in a majority anywhere else, we see by the example of Wales
how little it avails them. But in large towns, even where the Dissenters
are the strongest, the Church party is sure to be strong enough to
reduce them to a compromise, and make the Boards either subsidize
existing Church schools, or, if they make use of the power the Bill
gives them of founding others,7 to found a Church school by the side of
every unsectarian one. So that the Church party will kprobably, in notk
a single instance, be in that position of victims, which it is supposed
ought to be so great a consolation to the Dissenters for being victims
in three-fourths of the Kingdom.

Another thing that is said is that what we complain of as a new
grievance exists already: by the national grants in aid of
denominational schools we are all of us taxed for teaching religions not
our own.8 Well, perhaps there are some of us who might have a good deal
to say against this too as a permanent institution, and who live in hope
of its ultimate absorption into something of which they can more
thoroughly approve. But we are not going now to begin this system; it
exists. When it was first introduced nothing better could have been
obtained; and it still does good, though we may learn—if we do not
already know it—from Mr. Mundella’s speech, how sadly the result falls
short of the claims made for it.9

But we do not desire to destroy what we have got until we have replaced
it by Edition: current; Page: [384] something better. The worst feature
of the system, the bigotted refusal of laidl to secular schools, is to
be abandoned; and the Bill provides that if the Boards, instead of
founding new schools, elect to subsidize the old, they must subsidize
all denominations impartially,10 secular schools, I hope, included. For
this the framers of the Bill are entitled to our cordial thanks. But it
is puzzling to find such opposite principles acted on in mdifferent
parts of the same Bill, and such different measure meted out to the old
schools and to the new. It looks like the result of a compromise between
two parties in the Government, on the plan of giving something to each:
the sort of thing, in short, which makes our legislation the jumble of
inconsistencies that it is. (Loud cheers.)

Some have the face to tell us that the ratepayer after all is not taxed
for the religious instruction, for the rate is so limited by the Bill
that he in reality only pays for the secular teaching. Indeed! Then who
does pay for the religious teaching? Do the Church party intend to raise
the money by voluntary subscription? The Times of last Monday throws out
a suggestion of the kind:11 if one could hope that it would be adopted I
should not have another word to say; except indeed, that since, after
Mr. Gladstone’s concessions, the religious is no longer to be mixed up
with the secular teaching, it may as well be given by a different person
altogether, when the impartiality would be complete. But if the expense
is not paid by subscription it must be paid by the Privy Council, that
is by the taxpayer. And do not Dissenters pay taxes? Is there a
conscience clause nagainstn the tax gatherer? (Cheers.)

One more thing is said which might well amaze any one who is not past
being astonished at any of the tricks that are played with words. We are
told that in our care for the conscience of the minority, we violate
that of the majority who conscientiously disapprove of schools in which
religion is not taught. Now, if what their conscience objects to is
sending their own children to such schools, there is no compulsion; they
are free to found schools of their own. It is necessary to say this, for
the oprincipal supporters of the Bill12 in the House of Commonso did not
seem to be aware of it; they seemed never to have heard of such an idea;
they charged us with expelling religion from the schools, as if there
were no schools to be had but those supported by rates; as if we were
proposing to prohibit all schools except secular ones, or to throw some
great obstacle in their way; while all we demand is, that those who make
use of the religious teaching shall pay for it themselves instead of
taxing others to do it. So that the conscientious scruple which we are
Edition: current; Page: [385] accused of violating is a scruple not
against going without the religious instruction but against paying for
it, and their conscience requires them to get it paid for by other
people. (Cheers.) Is not pthisp a singular spectacle of the richest and
most powerful part of the nation, who with two thirds of their expenses
sure to be paid by the Privy Council qorq the School Rate, cannot bear
to do what the smallest denomination of Dissenters cheerfully does—pay
for their own religious teaching? But is not this precisely because they
are the rich and powerful? rThe poor and the weak neverr dream of
throwing their personal pecuniary obligations upon the public. It is a
privilege only ssoughts by those who do not need it, but who think they
have a right to it because they have always had the power to exact it.
(Cheers.) tBut it seemst some of these people have a conscience so
extremely delicate that it is wounded, not uif their own children, but
if any other people’s children, attend schools in which religion is not
taughtu. The vbarev existence of a secular school within the country, at
least with aid from the State, is a burden on their consciences, as the
wexistence of heretics was on the conscience of the Grand Inquisitor.
And we, because we decline to defer to this remarkable conscientious
scruple, disregard the rights of conscience! But the rights of
conscience do not extend to imposing our own conscience as a rule upon
somebody else. I dare say we should be told, if it were anyone’s
interest to affirm it, that we are no lovers of liberty because we do
not permit kings to take the liberty of hanging or guillotining people
at their pleasure. But the liberty we stand up for is the equal liberty
of all, and not the greatest possible liberty of one, and slavery of all
the rest. (Cheers.) There ought to be room in the world for more than
one man’s liberty; and there ought to be room in the world for more than
one xman’sx conscience. Let all parties have what religious teaching
their conscience approves and they are willing to pay for. But when a
man tells me his conscience requires that other people shall have
religious teaching whether they like it or not, and shall have it in
schools though they would prefer having it elsewhere, and shall not be
helped like other people with their secular teaching unless they consent
to accept religious teaching along with it, I tell him that he is not
asserting his own freedom of conscience but trampling on that of other
people. (Cheers.) If this is a right of conscience it was bigotry and
prejudice to complain of the persecutions of the Vaudois and of the
Protestants. The case is less flagrant but the principle is the same.
(Loud cheers.)

[After several speeches, the resolution was passed unanimously. Another
Edition: current; Page: [386] resolution was moved against Clause 66,
which gave school boards discretion over compulsory education, and in
favour of guaranteed education for every child; it too was approved
unanimously, and then it was moved that elected school boards be
established in every district; this passed, a petition to Parliament
embodying the resolutions was endorsed, and the meeting ended with the
customary vote of thanks to the Chair.]


146.: Women’s Suffrage [2]
 26 MARCH, 1870

Report of a Meeting of the London National Society for Women’s Suffrage
Held at the Hanover Square Rooms, on Saturday, March 26th, 1870 (London:
London National Society for Women’s Suffrage, 1870), pp. 4-9. Reported
on 28 March, 1870, much abbreviated and in the third person, in the
Daily News, the Daily Telegraph, and The Times; though the reports
differ in length (apart from their coverage of Mill’s speech), they are
so similar in wording as to suggest a single source. The responses are
taken from the newspaper accounts. For Mill’s plans for the meeting, see
CW, Vol. XVII, pp. 1697-8, 1701. At the well attended Saturday meeting
Clementia Taylor took the Chair; her remarks were followed by Mill’s. On
rising, he was greeted with repeated cheers.

since the first general meeting of this Society in July of last year, we
have had ample reason to be satisfied with the progress that has been
made by our cause. That progress has manifested itself not only by the
increased number of our friends, but, still more, by the altered tone of
our opponents. During the year which has just elapsed, much has been
written in various publications against the equality of the sexes, but
it is remarkable how few of the writers have expressed any great
disapprobation of that which is the direct object of this Society, the
admission of women to the suffrage. Many of them have even said in
express terms that to thus much of concession they, perhaps, might not
object. A vote at elections is now, with many of them, a small thing,
which they can afford to concede; if women wish for it, they may as well
have it as not; but what shocks and scandalises them is, that a claim
should be made for women to equality of rights in civil life, and
especially in marriage. This is of good augury, and I begin to hope that
I may live to see the whole discussion transferred to this point. Those
of us who claim for women complete equality of rights have always said
that this is a totally different question from the suffrage. The
suffrage is a thing apart; no woman, by claiming it, is in the smallest
degree committed to the larger demand; if women were, by an inherent and
inevitable necessity, subject to the authority of men, they would need
the protection of the suffrage all the more. Every plea, either of
justice or policy, which speaks for granting the suffrage to any man,
applies equally to women.

Edition: current; Page: [387]
But there is a side of the question on which I should like to say
something: the particular manner in which the addition of women to the
electoral body is likely to affect the character of Parliament, and to
modify the mode in which public affairs are carried on. I think that the
most marked effect, in the immediate future, would be to infuse into the
legislature a stronger determination to grapple with the great aphysical
and morala evils of society. (Hear, hear.) Women electors, I think, will
be more difficult to persuade than men that those evils must be
accepted—cannot be cured, cannot even be much mitigated—and that we may,
with an untroubled conscience, avert our eyes from them, with an
occasional grumble at what they cost us in rates, taxes, and charities.
Women, I think, will find it hard to believe that legislation and
administration are powerless to make any impression on these frightful
evils, and that the acme of statesmanlike wisdom is to let them alone. I
should consequently expect, from the political influence of women, a
considerable increase of activity in dealing with the causes of these
evils. I know there are many men who regard any increased activity in
that direction with alarm, thinking that it means inconsiderate
benevolence, injudicious legal regulation, and general increase of
meddling. But there is wise as well as unwise meddling; well-directed as
well as ill-directed benevolence; and there is a tendency in the present
day to confound the two. It is my conviction that, if the State employed
all the means it possesses of raising the standard of morality, and
even, in some respects, of physical well-being, in the community, it
would find that it has much more in its power than it is now the fashion
to believe; and that Governments in these days are quite as blameable in
neglecting the right means of promoting those objects, as in days yet
recent they were in pursuing the wrong. The time has passed away when
Governments, speaking generally, were actively tyrannical; their
favourite sins in the present time are indolence and indifference.
Whatever scruples they have about doing ill, they have, in general, none
at all about leaving ill alone, but allow mountains of mischief to be
piled up from age to age, without any serious attempt to check the
accumulation. (Hear.) There is something in the nature of government by
men alone, which encourages this easy self-satisfaction. Men are more
mentally indolent than women, and are far too ready to believe that they
have done everything, or that there is nothing to be done. Their
consciences and feelings need rousing, and the stronger active impulses
of women are wanted to do it. If I am now asked whether, in my opinion,
those active impulses can be depended on for prompting the most
judicious line of conduct—whether women will discriminate well between
good and bad modes of combating evils, and will not be apt to mistake
the most direct mode for the most efficacious; I freely confess that the
political education of women must be greatly improved, before as much as
this can be affirmed with any confidence. But this would only be a real
objection, if we were going to disfranchise the men, and turn over the
whole power to women. All Edition: current; Page: [388] we want is, that
the two should be obliged to take counsel together. We want the ship of
the State to have both sail and ballast, and not, as is too often the
case now when the navigation is troublesome, all ballast and no sail.
(Laughter.) There is little danger that the over-zeal of women will not
be quite sufficiently tempered by the over-caution of men. In these days
we do not fail, in matters of government, for want of a curb, but of a
spur; and women, even with the present defects of their education, are
well qualified for that office. (Laughter.) As their education improves,
they will do more; they will not only be a stimulus to others, but will
themselves be capable of doing their full share of the work. Women, on
the average, have more contriving minds than men; in things they are
really interested in, they are readier in finding means for the
attainment of an end; especially in undertakings the success of which
greatly depends on the details of the execution. Now this is
emphatically the case with attempts to correct the great physical and
moral evils of society. These are works of detail. Men form great
projects, sound in principle perhaps, and rational in their general
conception, but which, when applied to practice, break down, from
unforeseen failure of efficiency in the execution. Many more of these
projects would succeed if women had a share in planning them.

These, I think, are the most marked effects on the general course of
government and legislation, which would flow from the admission of women
to a share in the functions of citizenship. To this we must add, that
the wrongs and grievances which specially affect women would no longer
be considered too unimportant to be worth any serious attempt to put an
end to them. To take one example among many: if women had votes, there
would be a much sterner repression of those outrages on women, which
bmake the necessity working women are under of going out alone a serious
danger to themb; outrages which have only reached their present height
through the inexcusable leniency with which they are treated by the
courts of justice. (Hear, hear.) If women had had votes, we should not
have had the “Contagious Diseases Acts”;1 under which the wives and
daughters of the poor are exposed to insufferable indignities on the
suspicion of a police-officer; and must be so, if the Acts are to be so
enforced as to have any chance of being effectual for their object. If
those Acts are repealed—if they are not extended to the whole country—it
will be owing to the public spirit and courage of those ladies, some of
them of distinguished eminence, who have associated themselves to obtain
the repeal of the Acts;2 a courage and public spirit which can only be
duly appreciated Edition: current; Page: [389] by those who have noticed
the impudent and shameless character of some of the attacks which have
been made on them in print by anonymous writers. To those worthier and
more honourable opponents, who think these ladies mistaken, and the
course they have adopted an unfavourable indication of the use they are
likely to make of increased political influence, I would say—Suppose the
Acts to be as beneficent as I hold them to be pernicious; suppose that
the ladies who disapprove of them are not actuated by any reasonable
view of their nature and consequences, but by an excess or a
misapplication of the particular moral sentiment which men have
inculcated on them as their especial and principal virtue. What then? Is
it no evil that the laws of a country should be repugnant to the moral
feelings of confessedly the most moral half of the population? If the
repugnance is grounded on mistake, ought not time to have been given,
and explanation and discussion used, to rectify the mistake; instead of
leaving them to find out, years afterwards, that laws had been passed,
almost in secret, revolting to their strongest feelings? That women’s
suffrage would put a check upon such proceedings as this; that it would
compel legislators to take into account the moral feelings of those in
whom such feelings are the strongest, and to carry those moral feelings
with them, instead of contemptuously setting them aside—must be counted
among the benefits that would result from the grant of the suffrage.

There are men—not a few—liberal and enlightened on general topics, whose
own feelings would incline them to be just to women, but who dread the
immediate effect of admitting them to the suffrage, because they think
it would greatly increase the power of the clergy. I have never denied
that if the suffrage were given them to-day or to-morrow, something like
this might possibly, for a time, be the result. And, differing as I do
in opinion and feeling on many important topics from the great majority
of the clergy, I am not a likely person to undervalue this objection.
But it is to me obvious that if the clergy have now too great an
ascendancy over the minds of many women, especially in the middle class,
it is because the other influences by which the human intelligence is
acted on, and opinions formed, have not been allowed to reach them. They
have had no encouragement to read the books, or take part in the
conversations, which would have shown them that any of the opinions they
hear from the clergy are disputed, and disputable. Even if there were no
direct discouragement, they have not been so brought up as to take
interest in such readings or conversations: while they have been trained
in the belief that it is women’s part to accept the opinions they find
prevalent, and that the thoughtful consideration of great subjects, and
the formation of well-considered opinions by hearing both sides, is none
of their Edition: current; Page: [390] business. How then is it possible
that they should not fall under the influence of those who address them
through the only feelings and principles they have been taught to
cultivate? And consider another thing. What is it that makes clergymen
in general, even where professional prejudices do not directly
interfere, such unsafe advisers in politics and the affairs of life? It
is because they are too much in the position of women; they are treated
too much as women are: under a show of deference, they are shut out from
the free and equal discussion of great practical questions, and are
taught to think themselves concerned with only one aspect of any
subject—the moral and religious aspect, in the narrow sense in which
they use those terms; for, in a larger sense, all questions in which
there is a right and a wrong are moral and religious. Is not this very
like the condition of women? To those who dread the influence of the
clergy on women’s minds, I would say this: If the clergy have more of
such influence than belongs to their character and to the degree of
their cultivation, let us be just, and admit that they have fairly
earned it. The clergy are the only persons who, as a class, have taken
any pains with women’s minds; the only persons who have appealed
directly to their own principles and convictions; who have addressed
them as if they had themselves a moral responsibility—as if their souls
and consciences were their own. The clergy are the only men who have
seemed to think it of any consequence what women think or feel, on any
subject outside the domestic sphere. Those who show this respect to
women, deserve to have influence with them: and will continue to have
more than enough, until other men employ the same means of acquiring
such influence which they have done. If the fathers, brothers, and
husbands of these women took equal pains with their minds—if they
invited them to interest themselves in the subjects in which the
fathers, brothers, and husbands are interested, as the clergy do in
those which interest them; and if they were taught, by the
responsibility of a vote, that the formation of an intelligent opinion
on public questions is as much their right and duty as it is the right
and duty of men—they would soon find themselves more competent and
better judges of those subjects than the clergy are; and there would be
no danger whatever of their surrendering their own judgment into the
hands of their clerical instructors. Whatever is excessive or hurtful in
the clerical influence over them would be weakened, exactly in
proportion as they took part in the affairs of life; and only that which
is salutary would remain. Instead, then, of regarding the clerical
influence as a hindrance to giving women votes, I look upon the vote as
the most effectual means of emancipating them from the too exclusive
influence of the clergy. But if this danger were far greater than it is,
it would be an unworthy thing, on account of such an apprehension, to
refuse to one half of the species that necessary means of
self-protection, so highly prized by the other half. Every portion of
mankind has its own special liabilities to error; and he who would
refuse the suffrage to others because he is afraid of their making
mistakes, would find good reasons for disfranchising everybody but
himself. Safety does not lie in excluding some, but in Edition: current;
Page: [391] admitting all, that contrary errors and excesses may
neutralise one another. And of all who ever claimed the suffrage, or for
whom it was ever claimed, there are none in whose case there is so
little reason for apprehending any evil consequences whatever from their
obtaining it—none for whose continued exclusion the excuses are so
insignificant, so fanciful, as in the case of women.

cHe concluded by moving the following resolution: “That this meeting is
of opinion that the extension of the franchise to women will tend to
promote among them a more cogent sense of their special duties as
citizens, and of their general responsibilities as concerned with the
advancement of the highest moral interest of the whole community.”c

[The motion (supported by Harriet Grote) was carried. A resolution
(supported by Helen Taylor) expressing satisfaction at the introduction
into the House of Commons by Jacob Bright and Charles Dilke of a bill
for removing the electoral disqualifications of women3 was also passed.
A final resolution, expressing the view that the general extension of
the suffrage, while women were excluded, was a positive injury to them,
was approved, and then a vote of thanks to the Chair brought to a close
the meeting, “which throughout was of a very enthusiastic character”
(Daily News).]


147.: The Education Bill [2]
 4 APRIL, 1870

Sessional Proceedings of the National Association for the Promotion of
Social Science, III (1869-70), 348-51 (fascicle for 7 April). Reported
in a U.S. paper (not identified) from which there is a clipping in the
Mill-Taylor Collection. The meeting was held under Edwin Chadwick’s
Chairmanship to consider further his “On the New Education Bill,”
Sessional Proceedings, III (10 Mar., 1870), 261-84.

mr. john stuart mill said Mr. Chadwick had done a great service by
bringing before this Association the most important part of the whole
education question: the quality of the education. Mr. Chadwick had the
very great merit on this subject, as he had on many others, of being the
first person to bring before the public many great principles of
administration resting on the double evidence of theory and
experience—experience in a sufficient sum, though it might be a limited
sphere of trial. Many persons must have remarked, and perhaps blamed too
severely, the little attention paid to the question of quality, in the
discussions going on in and out Edition: current; Page: [392] of
Parliament on Mr. Forster’s Bill.1 But it was not surprising that people
should look first to asserting the simple and admitted principles which
they fully understood; such as the principle of religious equality.
Those principles must be secured against infringement, and all anxiety
and strife concerning them must be at an end before people would give
their minds to questions of detail; even in that meeting they had got
back to the question of denominational teaching, which really could not
be helped, and would continually recur until the question was settled.
Mr. Chadwick, in his most valuable paper, had furnished one more
argument, and a most important one, against denominational education; an
argument which the League2 had not used, but which he hoped they would
use; grounded on the principle so strenuously enforced by Mr. Chadwick,
that schools, to be either efficient or economical, must be large.3 A
denominational school could not be a large school; at least it could not
be so large as a comprehensive school, and the schools of denominations
which were locally small must be small schools. Large schools were
efficient and economical for several reasons. Suppose there were ten
schools, each with fifty scholars and one master, and suppose they could
get them together into a single school of 500 scholars. In the first
place, the single school probably would not need so many as ten masters.
But suppose that it did. In the ten schools every master must be
competent to teach all the classes, and to teach everything. But in the
single school of 500, only the head master need be able to teach the
highest class, and persons of inferior qualifications, more easily and
cheaply obtained, would suffice to teach the other classes. The third
reason was the strongest of all, and had been admirably illustrated by
the course pursued in America, as described by Mr. Zincke, that if they
had a very large number—say 500—in a single school, they would be able
to form as large classes as any one person could teach, composed of
pupils, all of whom were nearly of the same degree of proficiency.4
Instead of every class being composed of some who were above the
average, and some who were below, every class would be composed of
children who were all about the same standard, and the same teaching
would do for all. That would remedy the great defect of schools. Now, it
was complained that the masters gave their chief time and attention to
the quick and clever, and neglected the great mass. It was not unnatural
that when the same teaching did not suit them all, the master should
give most attention to those who would do him most credit, and the
consequence was that in England and in most other countries Edition:
current; Page: [393] the majority of those who had gone through the
nominal course of teaching went out knowing little or nothing. Would it
be said of the future schools, as was said of the present by the Bishop
of Manchester, that the teaching in one-third was tolerable, the
teaching in another third was indifferent, and the teaching in the
remaining third worthless?5 And this, not judging by any high standard,
but by one so humble as to aspire to no more than teaching reading,
writing, and arithmetic before the age of fourteen. The League,
therefore, in protesting against denominational schools, were working
for one of the most important of the great principles proclaimed by Mr.
Chadwick. The League also agreed with Mr. Chadwick on another point;
they objected to the local boards, and insisted that they should be
larger and of different composition; and here they did not go far
enough; they had still much to learn from Mr. Chadwick. But they were
thoroughly right as far as they went. The school districts ought to be
much larger, if only that it might be possible to have large schools. In
rural districts they could not get together within a space over which
children could go daily a sufficient number to make very large schools;
but they could have them in much larger numbers than if they were cut up
by the different denominations. They could also have much larger schools
if, in the first place, boys and girls were taught together; and, in the
next place, the poor and those who were not poor received instruction
together. Why should not the middle class and the poorer class receive
that part of their education which was to be the same together, and from
the same teachers? Rich children did not require a different reading and
writing from poor children, or a different mode of learning it. The mode
which was good for one was good for the other. The only difference was
that the better-off parents could afford to keep their children longer
at school, to learn additional things. And if those additional things
were taught in the same place, the more ambitious and aspiring children
of the poor would be fired with a desire to go further and learn that
which the daughters and sons of the middle class attained to; and thus
the result referred to by a former speaker6 of a child rising from the
most elementary even to the highest grade of instruction would be
frequently attained, especially if the aid were realised which might be
given by means of exhibitions. The school board districts, however,
would require to be larger than the district of a single school. If the
boards were parochial, there would, in the rural districts, be here and
there a school of great excellence (as far, at least, as was compatible
with its necessarily small size), where there chanced to be an
enlightened and patriotic clergyman or an enlightened and patriotic
landowner; but, in the greater part of the country, the schools would be
little better than nothing. The district of each school board ought to
be large enough to give a Edition: current; Page: [394] reasonable
chance, that in every board there would be at least one person who knew
what good education was, and who cared about it. But suppose this done:
let the district, however, be ever so wide, they could not trust the
education of the poor to local boards. Take the rural districts. They
might almost as well do nothing for the education of the poor
agricultural labourer as leave it to the farmers to determine what the
education should be. And even in the towns, would they leave the
regulation of education to vestries? What did they think of the St.
Pancras Vestry?7 Would anybody think of leaving anything which had to be
done for the good of the poor to such a board as that? And yet they
could count up very easily all the towns in Great Britain and Ireland
that were larger, more wealthy, and more populous than the parish of St.
Pancras. It was a great town in itself, and it contained surely a
sufficient number of the best elements to give it a right to the best
local government; it had its full share of well-instructed people—people
who had access to all the means of instruction, to all the sources of
political excitement and discussion, and there was the result. Again,
look at the boards of guardians. A Poor Law union is fully as large a
district as the school board districts are likely to be. The boards of
guardians had full control over a most important part of the education
of the country. They had the education of all the pauper children. How
had they fulfilled this office? If the boards of guardians had done
their duty, we should not at this time have had an education question.
If they had done their duty, or if the duty had been taken out of their
hands and assumed by the State, as Mr. Chadwick, thirty-five years ago,
proposed; if Parliament had not struck out the clauses which Mr.
Chadwick and his enlightened colleagues of the first Poor Law Commission
inserted in their Bill,8 we should by this time have been at the end
instead of at the beginning of the work. Does any one think that if the
pauper children had been properly educated, all other children would not
have been found to be educated too? Would they have been content to be
thrown out of all the skilled employments, and those which required
intelligence and education, by the children of the paupers? For
thirty-five years have the boards of guardians had this charge upon
them: much more than a generation. And after thirty-five years, Mr.
Chadwick is still here, continuing to press upon unwilling ears the
great duties Edition: current; Page: [395] which, during all that time,
have been disregarded. So much for the rural districts. But perhaps the
towns, perhaps the municipal bodies would do better. Well, and what have
they done? A valuable Act of Parliament had given them the power to
establish free libraries.9 How many of them have done it? A few have
done so, and a most valuable institution those libraries have proved.
But the great majority have not done it—have even rejected it when
proposed to them. Yet this is an indispensable part of national
education. Education is something more than to read, write, and cast
accounts. He would not disparage the benefit, in developing the
intelligence, of even the mere fact of learning to write and calculate.
But if they wanted the “poor to make real use of what they were taught
at school;” if they wanted them not to forget it, and lose the very
power of reading, they must have books to read, and good books too, and
a wish to read them. There will never be a real national education until
there is a public library in every school district, not necessarily
free, but open at a subscription not higher than every poor family in
average employment could afford to pay. It would not do, then, to trust
the management of education to local bodies, however constituted. There
must be an authority above all these to take the initiative. Different
people had very different ideas of popular government; they thought that
it meant that public men should fling down all the great subjects among
the people, let every one who liked have his word about them, and trust
that out of the chaos there would form itself something called public
opinion, which they would have nothing to do but to carry into effect.
That was not his idea of popular government, and he did not believe that
popular government thus understood and carried on would come to good.
His idea of popular government was, a government in which statesmen, and
thinking and instructed people generally pressed forward with their best
thoughts and plans, and strove with all their might to impress them on
the popular mind. What constituted the government a free and popular one
was, not that the initiative was left to the general mass, but that
statesmen and thinkers were obliged to carry the mind and will of the
mass along with them; they could not impose these ideas by compulsion as
despots could. Centralisation and decentralisation were words which had
been much abused: what was wanted was the union of both: one authority,
which should be a centre of information and of the best ideas to be
found in the country, and many popular bodies to whom those ideas should
be offered for their assent. A Minister of Education was good. It was
good that there should be such a Minister, but it was not good that this
Minister should be one to change with every Administration. But whether
there was a Minister of Education or not, there ought to be a permanent
board composed of people selected for their zeal for education and the
amount of intelligent study they had given to the subject. If they had
such a board, with emissaries of all kinds, inspectors and assistant
commissioners going about the country promoting the best ideas and the
best Edition: current; Page: [396] methods of education, they would have
a chance of attaining to something really national in the way of
education.

[There were further comments, and the meeting concluded.]


148.: Election to School Boards [1]
 22 OCTOBER, 1870

Beehive, 29 October, 1870, p. 580. Headed: “The Cumulative Vote and the
London School Board.” Brief summary reports appeared on 24 October in
the Pall Mall Gazette, the Daily News, and The Times. Writing to Edwin
Chadwick on 29 October, 1870, Mill refers to “the general indifference
to considerations of special qualification” for service on school
boards, adding that the leaders of “the working classes do not seem to
share this indifference: it was much complained of at a meeting of the
Representative Reform Association last Saturday in which Odger,
Mottershead, and Lloyd Jones took an active part; and the response was
general to what I and others said of the bad quality of the instruction”
(CW, Vol. XVII, p. 1770). The Saturday meeting of the Representative
Reform Association was held in its rooms, 9 Buckingham Street, Strand,
with Thomas Hare presiding. Hare opened the proceedings by outlining the
conditions of the cumulative vote, which was to be used for the first
time in the school board elections. He was followed by Mill.

mr. j.s. mill said that it was of very great importance that the
ratepayers should exercise their best judgment in the selection they
make of persons to constitute the new board of education. They should be
particularly careful in putting on the board persons who had made the
question of education their study, and who were well qualified in other
necessary respects. Of course, those who were denominationalists and
undenominationalists would most probably vote for candidates whom they
might find to be of their own respective ways of thinking and believing,
and this division of feeling could not, perhaps, be avoided. He did not
want denominationalists to give up any of their peculiar desires, and he
was equally willing to allow undenominationalists to take care of their
interests as far as they can fairly do so. All he had to say on this
point was that persons who were opposed to each other through religious
motives ran into the danger of overlooking the most important part of
the question so far as it affected the great body of the people—that is,
the bringing within the reach of all classes and all communities alike,
not alone the means of education such as we had had it up to the
present, but the acquisition of an education of a greatly improved
character. Education was really a subject which required a large amount
of practical knowledge and experience, and it was of the first
importance that there should be on those school boards men who had given
their minds for some length of time to the study of the question. At the
meetings lately held this had not been sufficiently attended to. (Hear,
hear.) A good deal had been said in Parliament from time to time on the
question of education; but he Edition: current; Page: [397] regretted to
find that the quantity of education seemed to have been attended to more
on those occasions than the quality (hear, hear). See what the Bishop of
Manchester had said of the education we had in this country. The right
reverend prelate said that of the education provided for the people of
England, one-third of it was tolerably good, another one-third was
passable, and the remaining one-third was as bad as no education at
all.1 When such a man as the Bishop of Manchester made in public such an
assertion as this of the education now given—and made it with,
unfortunately, such good foundation—it behoved all who had an earnest
desire to have the people of England properly educated, to see that the
new School Board be composed of men who would be willing and able and
determined to turn the Education Act of last session2 to the best
possible account. In fact the question the electors had to decide was
whether they would have a School Board which would improve the quality
of the education hitherto given as well as provide all possible
facilities for bringing that improved education within the reach of all
(hear, hear). That was what had to be done. If any class of persons
wished to elect a representative on account of that representative being
of their way of religion and political thinking, let them by all means
do so, but let them take care that that representative possessed also
the all-important qualification of a matured knowledge of the particular
question he should have to legislate upon. Provided the representatives
were otherwise fitted, he thought it would be a wholesome and a useful
thing to have the board composed of men of different areligiousa and
political opinions. To accomplish to the full the great end for which
the Education Act of last session was drawn up, the electors must bear
these facts and probabilities in mind during the coming elections. It
was well that an association like that which called the present meeting
together should inform the public respecting the cumulative vote.3 He
hoped the electors would make themselves thoroughly acquainted with its
peculiarities, and take advantage of the power which it gave them to the
fullest extent. It was not more schools which were required so much as
good schools (hear, hear).

b[In the discussion,] Lloyd Jones said that some districts had been
arranging for the election by dividing the candidates among the
different sects. He did not complain of the proportions, but he thought
this was the wrong way to go to work, for instead of being a battle of
the citizens, the election would be a battle of the sects.]

Mr. Mill said that it was of importance that no one class should have
preponderance in the Board, and it was rather a good thing that there
should be several classes upon it.b

Edition: current; Page: [398]
[A resolution was accepted unanimously that the Association should as
soon as possible after the elections ascertain how much the cumulative
vote had been used, and the “amount of electoral power that had been
wasted through various unavoidable circumstances.” It was then moved
that the Chair communicate with Forster to urge the fullest
investigation of the working of the elections to the school board; Mill
seconded, and another unanimous vote ensued. The meeting concluded with
a vote of thanks to the Chair.]


149.: Election to School Boards [2]
 9 NOVEMBER, 1870

The Times, 10 November, 1870, p. 4. Headed: “The Education Act” (the
article begins with a general account of candidates and meetings). A
full report of Mill’s speech also appeared in the Daily Telegraph (again
in the first person), and brief third-person accounts were published in
the Pall Mall Gazette and the Beehive (12 Nov.); the Daily News had an
even briefer report. The evening meeting, attended by over 1000 of the
ratepayers of Greenwich, Deptford, and the surrounding area, was held in
the Literary Institution, Mill presiding, to consider the proper
qualifications for members of the London School Board, and to hear the
candidates’ views. The four candidates supported by the Church of
England each wrote a letter declining to attend. Mill, on rising, was
loudly cheered.

this meeting, as you know, has been called to consider the
qualifications which should be required in candidates for the School
Board. Those who have called us together, and at whose request I have
consented to take the chair, think it desirable that before we commit
ourselves to the support of particular candidates we should confer
together concerning the principles that should direct our choice. For it
is to be feared that while we are contending very properly each for his
own opinion on a single point—the question of religious teaching in
rate-appointed schools—we may lose sight of other points quite as
important, and perhaps confide the charge of the education of London to
persons who care very much for its being sectarian or unsectarian, but
who, when they have taken care of that, think that they have done
everything. This would be a sad failure. We all, I suppose, have our
opinions as to whether education paid for by rates should be
denominational or should be in some way or other religious without being
denominational, or should be purely secular, leaving religious teaching
to the religious bodies. But whatever importance we justly attach to
these differences of opinion, it is even more important that our
representatives should have other qualifications than the opinion they
profess on this point—that they should be persons who really desire and
really understand education. (Cheers.) We have got to determine,
therefore, each for himself, by what criterion we are to judge who are
they who desire education most and Edition: current; Page: [399]
understand it best. And we have not only to consider what kind of
persons are fit to be intrusted with the control of education, but also
what kind of persons are not fit. There is one proof of unfitness so
decisive that it deprives a candidate of any claim to our support. I
would refuse my vote to any one, let him be who he may, who is afraid
lest the poor should be too much educated, who thinks they are in danger
of knowing more than is necessary for them, or more than is suitable to
their condition in life. In education there is no such thing as “too
much.” (Loud cheers.) Every kind of knowledge is useful. Of course we
ought to begin with the most useful. But the most useful is that which
most opens their minds, and accustoms them to the use of their
understandings. There are some who think that, for working people, the
only instruction needed is technical instruction—teaching them the use
of their hands. But the hands never work to the best effect unless the
brain works too. Looking at the benefits of mental cultivation on their
humblest side, the workman whose mind is trained as well as his hands is
sure to be the most capable at his work. What is more, he is most
capable of turning to other work if his accustomed occupation fails him.
When another man goes upon the poor-rate he can maintain his
independence. Intelligent Americans say that one of the reasons why
there is so little pauperism in the United States is that the American
workman, being educated, can turn his hand to anything. I would not vote
for any one who thinks that nothing should be taught but reading,
writing, and arithmetic. Of what use is it to any one to have been
taught to read if he never does read afterwards, or never anything that
can be of the smallest use to hi? Our object ought to be that the
children should leave school with their minds so informed that they will
wish to read, and be able to understand the best books or general
literature and information. This is quite practicable. We need anota go
to America or Germany for the proofs. The Scotch Parochial Schools did
as much as this for two centuries and more. During that time the Scotch
peasantry not only were taught to read but loved to read and did read;
and if they had not many books within their reach they read all the more
assiduously the best that they had, and the effect on their intelligence
was such that the sons of Scotch labourers were to be found all over
Europe in skilled employments. (Hear, hear.) My next point is this:
There will be elected doubtless by the different constituencies many
persons of strong religious convictions, whose interest in education has
its principal bsourceb in religious zeal. It would be very wrong to
exclude such persons. Were they all rejected, the opinions of the
constituencies would not be freely represented. But this I do say, that
no one is fit to take part in administering the Act1 who cares only for
religious teaching, who looks upon secular instruction as a minor
matter, for which a small portion of attention is necessary. We must
remember that the object for which the Edition: current; Page: [400] Act
was passed was the improvement and extension of elementary education,
and though some people may think, as I do not, that a certain amount of
religious teaching belongs properly to elementary education, no one can
suppose that the main object of the country and the Government in
passing this Act was religious teaching as opposed to secular. (Hear,
hear.) One word more as to the kind of candidates we should not elect.
Those are to be deeply distrusted who show themselves anxious only for
more schools and not also for better. The mere multiplication of schools
no better than most of those we have would be a very moderate advantage.
What is the character given of the present schools by Bishop Fraser, of
Manchester, who, having been an inspector of schools, knows what they
are, and who also knows by his own observation the schools of the United
States?2 He says that of our primary schools one-third may be considered
tolerable, one-third middling, and the remaining third positively bad.
(Laughter.) And in passing this terrible judgment he is not trying them
by a high standard, but by the miserably low standard they
profess—reading, writing, and the first four rules of arithmetic. Even
these the great majority of our existing schools do not teach, and few,
indeed, are there which teach to any purpose anything more. (Hear,
hear.) I have said enough, perhaps, about the disqualifications of
candidates. Now, what about their qualifications? Well, we want people
who know what ought to be done, and are zealous to do it, and the best
evidence of cboth is—c actions. We should ask of all who offer
themselves for our suffrages, what have you done for education? And we
should be very much guided by their answers. There is no lack of persons
in England, and even in London, who have done something considerable for
education; some of them have done things really great and memorable.
Unhappily, but few of them are candidates, but that, perhaps, is our own
fault in not seeking for them. Let us ask all our candidates what they
have got to show of this kind. And in estimating their claims let us,
again, remember that services rendered in improving the teaching in
schools ought to count for more than what is done merely to increase
their number. We should also ask them for some proof that they are
competent to judge of schoolmasters and schoolmistresses. Let no one
think that it is an easy thing to know good teaching from bad. It
requires practical experience of teaching and no ordinary knowledge of
the human mind. The candidates should be asked what amount of study they
have given to the art of teaching and to the reasons why one teacher
succeeds and another fails. The account they are able to give of
themselves in this particular will be a considerable guide to their
qualifications for the School Board. There are one or two more things to
be considered. It is of great importance that there should be a
proportion of working men on the Board. (Loud cheers.) And it is of the
utmost importance that there should be a proportion of women. (Cheers.)
The working classes are those Edition: current; Page: [401] for whose
children the schools are intended. They are those for whose wants and
exigencies we have to provide. No one knows the circumstances and wants
of the working classes so well as intelligent working people, and the
participation of such persons will do more than anything else to give
the working classes confidence in the School Board. Besides, there is no
class which, taken as a class, is so much in earnest about popular
education, so solicitous about its quantity and quality, and so free
from any side purposes of promoting the interests of any sect or party
by means of it. (Hear, hear.) Working men are indispensable if the
School Board is to be thoroughly efficient and popular. Women are still
more necessary. In the first place, we have girls to educate as well as
boys, and a national education for girls directed solely by men would
indeed be an absurdity on the face of it. Moreover, women as the
principal domestic teachers have more experience, and have acquired more
practical ability in the teaching, at least of children. Almost every
mother of a family is a practised teacher, and even beyond the family.
For one man not a teacher by profession, who has given much of his
attention to teaching or to the superintendence of teaching, there are
many women who have done so. Were we not to elect any women we should go
completely counter to the spirit of the Act. (Cheers.) Parliament has
shown what its opinion is by expressly making women eligible to the
School Board.3 It will be most incomplete without them, and it is much
to be regretted that so few women have yet offered themselves as
candidates. (Cheers.) One thing more. We need not think it indispensable
that all we elect should be resident in our own district. We are
electing superintendents of education not for ourselves alone, but for
all London, and our great concern should be to obtain the fittest
persons possible, whether they live in one quarter of the metropolis or
in another. If our affairs are mismanaged or less well managed than they
might be, it will be a poor consolation to reflect that this has been
done by people living at Greenwich, when, perhaps, there was some person
of ability out of Greenwich who, if sent by us to the School Board,
would have turned the scale on questions of the greatest importance. All
dlocal as well as personal considerationsd should be silent in the
presence of the great trust which the metropolis has now to discharge.
(Loud cheers.)

[The candidates present addressed the meeting, and then a resolution was
moved and seconded that no one was worthy to serve on the School Board
who would not seek to secure attendance of every child at school,
support free education, and insist that the schools should not be made
the means of instilling sectarian opinions; and further that the working
classes should be represented on the Board. After a long discussion the
motion was adopted, and a vote of thanks to the Chair concluded the
meeting.]

Edition: current; Page: [402]


150.: Women’s Suffrage [3]
 12 JANUARY, 1871

Speech of the Late John Stuart Mill at the Great Meeting in Favour of
Women’s Suffrage, Held in the Music Hall, Edinburgh, January 12, 1871
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh National Society for Women’s Suffrage, 1873). A
full report of the meeting, including the text of Mill’s speech, is also
found in Women’s Suffrage. Great Meeting in Edinburgh in the Music Hall,
on 12th January 1871, under the Auspices of the Edinburgh Branch of the
National Society for Women’s Suffrage (Edinburgh: printed Greig, 1871),
pp. 7-12, and 22 (which supplies the text for Mill’s response to the
vote of thanks); also reported fully on 13 January in The Scotsman, and
in abbreviated form in The Times. The public meeting was held in the
evening, with a large audience of both sexes. Duncan McLaren was called
to the Chair. After the reading of letters of regret and the annual
report (in which mention of Mill brought applause), McLaren indicated
that the next and leading motion would be moved by Mill, saying “the
audience owed a greater debt of gratitude” to Mill than “they were
perhaps aware of, because he had come down from London in this inclement
weather for the sole purpose of being present on this occasion, and his
engagements were such that he was obliged to be off again in the
morning. (Applause.)” (Scotsman.) Mill was received with prolonged
cheering, the audience rising and waving their hats and handkerchiefs.

if there is a truth in politics which is fundamental—which is the basis
of all free government—it is that when a part of the nation are the sole
possessors of power, the interest of that part gets all the serious
attention. This does not necessarily imply any active oppression. All
that it implies is the natural tendency of the average man to feel what
touches self of vastly greater importance than what directly touches
only other people. This is the deep-seated and ineradicable reason why
women will never be justly treated until they obtain the franchise. They
suffer, assuredly, much injustice by the operation of law. But suppose
this changed; even then—even if there were no ground of complaint
against the laws, there would be a break-down in their execution as long
as men alone have a voice in choosing and in removing the officers of
Government.

All our recent constitutional reforms, and the whole creed of reformers,
are grounded on the fact that the suffrage is needed for
self-protection. All experience proves that if one part of the community
is held in subjection by another part, it is not trusted with the
ordinary means of self-defence, but is left dependent on the good-will
and pleasure of those who are more privileged, the most vital interests
of the subject-portion are certain to be, if not recklessly trampled
upon, at least postponed to almost anything else.

The treatment of women is certainly no exception to the rule. They have
neither equal laws nor an equal administration of them. The laws treat
them as they could not long be treated if they had the suffrage; and
even if the laws were equal, the administration of the laws is not.
Police magistrates and criminal judges cannot be exceptionally bad men;
they are not chosen for their bad qualities; they must be Edition:
current; Page: [403] thought, by those who appoint them, to represent
fairly, or better than fairly, the moral feelings of average men. Yet,
what do we see? For an atrocious assault by a man upon a woman,
especially if she has the misfortune to be his wife, he is either let
off with an admonition, or he is solemnly told that he has committed a
grave offence, for which he must be severely punished, and then he gets
as many weeks or months of imprisonment as a man who has taken five
pounds’ worth of property gets years.

We are told that the good feelings of men are a sufficient protection to
women. Those who say so can never, one would suppose, look into the
police and law reports. If good feeling aof mena does not protect women
against being beaten and kicked to death’s door every day of their
lives, and at last beaten and kicked to actual death, by their special
guardians and protectors, can we expect that it will secure them against
injuries less revolting to humanity? Most men, it will be said, are
incapable of committing such horrible brutality. Perhaps so; but it
seems they are quite capable of letting it be committed. If women who
are maltreated by their husbands found a defender in every other man who
knew of it, they might have some chance of protection without the weapon
of the suffrage. But it is never so; slaves did not find it so; serfs
did not find it so; conquered nations do not find it so; and neither do
women. There are many men who would not consciously do them any wrong;
but there must be a great moral improvement in human nature before most
men will exert themselves to prevent or to redress wrongs committed by
others under the sanction of law. And of these two things—the suffrage
for women, and a grand moral improvement in human nature—the suffrage,
to my thinking, is likely to be the soonest obtained. (Cheers.) I could
afford to stop here. I have made out an ample case. There is a portion
of the population, amounting in number to somewhat more than half, to
whom the law and its administration do not fulfil their duty, do not
afford even the bodily protection due to all—this half happening to be
that which is not admitted to the suffrage. Their most important
interests are neglected—I do not say from deliberate intention, but
simply because their interest is not so near to the feelings of the
ruling half as the ruling half’s own interest. bThe remedy is plain:
putb women in the position which will make their interest the rulers’
own interest. Make it as important to politicians to redress the
grievances of women as it is to redress those of any class which is
largely represented in Parliament.

If nothing more than this could be said in support of their claim to the
suffrage, no claim could be more fully made out. (Cheers.) And if the
claim is just, so also is it strictly constitutional. One of the
recognised doctrines of the British Constitution is that representation
is co-extensive with direct taxation. The practice of the Constitution,
it is true, for a long time did not correspond with the theory; but it
has been made to conform to it at last, in cities and boroughs, provided
the tax-payer is Edition: current; Page: [404] of the male sex; but if a
woman, she may be the largest tax-payer in the place, and the person of
greatest practical ability besides; no matter, she has no vote. This is
something very like punishing her for being a woman. The conditions
which in the eye of the law and of the Constitution confer a title to a
voice in public affairs are all fulfilled by her, with the single
exception of having been born a male. This one deficiency, which I
humbly submit she cannot help—(laughter)—is visited on her by the
privation of a right as important to her as to any man, and even more
important, since those who are physically weakest require protection the
most. This is not an injury only, but an indignity. I grant that those
who uphold it are in general quite unconscious of its being so; but this
comes from the inveterate habit of having one rule and measure for all
that concerns women, and another for everything else.

Men are so much accustomed to think of women only as women, that they
forget to think of them as human. (Hear, hear.) It is not only for their
own sake that women ought to have the suffrage, but also for the sake of
the public. It is for the interest of us all, both men and women, and of
those who are to come after us. The reasons that may be given for this
are many, but I may content myself with two. One, and the strongest, is
what we sometimes hear unthinkingly urged as an argument on the other
side—because women have so much power already. (Laughter.) It is true
they have much power. They have the power which depends on personal
influence over men. They have the power of cajolery—(laughter)—and often
that of a petted favourite; power sadly inadequate to their own just and
necessary protection against wrong, but sufficient at times to produce
only too much effect upon the public conduct of the men with whom they
are connected. But as this power, instead of being open and avowed, is
indirect and unrecognised, no provision is made for its being rightly
used. As it is conventionally assumed that women possess no power
outside the domestic department, the power which they do and always will
possess is exercised without the necessary knowledge, and without the
proper responsibility.

It having been decreed that public matters are not a woman’s business,
her mind is carefully turned away from whatsoever would give her a
knowledge of them, and she is taught to care nothing about them—that is,
until some private interest or private likings or dislikings come in,
when of course these private feelings have it all their own way, there
being no public principles or convictions to control them. The power,
therefore, which women now have in public affairs is power without
knowledge. It is also power without responsibility. A man’s wife is very
often the real prompter either of what he does well and nobly, or of
what he does foolishly or selfishly; but as she gets no credit for the
one, so she is not held accountable for the other; if she is selfish, a
very little art suffices to exempt her from censure though she succeeds
in compassing her ends; if she is simple and well meaning, she does not
feel bound to inform herself, so as to have a creasonable opinion on
what is Edition: current; Page: [405] solely thec man’s business, though
all the while her ignorant prepossessions or her natural partialities
may be acting as a most pernicious bias on what is supposed to be his
better judgment. From this combination of absence of instruction and
absence of responsibility, it comes to pass that, though women are
acknowledged to have, as a rule, stronger conscientious feelings than
men, it is but a very small minority of women who have anything that
deserves the name of a public conscience. How great an evil this isd,
there needs no argument to show. What is the greatest obstacle which the
friends of political and social improvement have to struggle with—the
drag which is constantly obstructing their efforts and disappointing
their hopes? Is it not the weakness of the average citizen’s political
conscience? Is not this the special danger and failure to which epopular
institutionse are exposed—that the elector does not sufficiently feel
his obligations to the public, and either stays away from the poll, or
goes there and votes on the prompting of some private interest? And how
can we hope that he will learn to postpone private interests to public,
while he has beside him, in the person of his closest intimate, one who
has been trained to have no feeling whatever of his duties to the
public, but who has the keenest feeling of his duties to his family, and
who, even without intending it, cannot but sway his mind strongly in the
direction of the only interests which she understands and appreciates?
(Applause.) It must be remembered, too, that this is a growing evil.
Time was when the wife was very little a companion of her husband—their
lives were apart; the associates of his leisure and of his recreations
were other men. But now the home and its inhabitants are so much to a
man, that no other influence can, as a rule, compete with theirs. The
time, therefore, is come when, if we would have public virtue in our
men, we must have it in our women. (Hear, hear, and applause.) And how
can a woman have a conscience about the public good, if she is told, and
believes, that it is no business whatever of hers? Give women the same
rights as men, and the same obligations will follow. Instead of hanging
a dead weight on men’s public conscience, their greater general
susceptibility of moral feeling will make their habitual influence a
most valuable support to the honest performance of public duty. (Loud
applause.) This, then, is one of the reasons why it is for the good of
all that women should have an admitted right to take part in public
affairs. Another is the vast amount of brain power and practical
business talent which now runs to waste for want of an outlet into those
great fields of public usefulness, in which no one, I suppose, will
pretend that such qualities are not very much wanted. Few men, I
suspect, are sufficiently aware of the great amount of administrative
ability possessed by women; for want of considering that the essential
qualities which lead to practical success are the same in what are
called small things as in great.

It is my belief that, in all those parts of the business of life which
depend on the vigilant superintendence and accurate estimation of
details, women, when they Edition: current; Page: [406] have the
necessary special knowledge, are better administrators than men. And I
am now speaking, not of women as they might be—not as some improved mode
of education would make them—but of women as they now are, and of the
capacities which they have already displayed. If an example is wanted of
what women’s powers of organisation can accomplish in public life, I
appeal to one of the most striking facts of modern times, the Sanitary
Commission in the late American War. The history of that Commission
ought to be as well known all over the world as it is in America. From
the beginning, and throughout, it was women’s work. It was planned,
organised, and worked by women. The Government was jealous of them at
first, but the hopeless inferiority of its own arrangements made it soon
glad to make over the first place to them. Not only had such work never
been so well done, but nobody had ever supposed it possible that it
could be so well done. I am aware that this argument would carry us much
further than the suffrage; but I suppose it will be acknowledged that
those who are themselves eminently capable of practical business, must
be fit to take a share in the choosing of those to whom practical
business is to be entrusted. The ability which is specially required for
the exercise of the suffrage—that of selecting the persons most capable
for the work that is to be done—is one of the qualifications for
business in which women have always excelled. Great queens have in
nothing shown themselves greater than in their choice of Ministers. When
the ladies of the Sanitary Commission wanted men to help them, they knew
the right men and how to use them; and they distinguished themselves not
less by the work which they caused to be done, than by that which they
did in their own persons. (Applause.) These are some of the reasons
which make it equally just and expedient that the suffrage should be
extended to women. It must, at the same time, be borne in mind that, by
admitting them to the suffrage, no other question is in the smallest
degree prejudged.

Supposing it true, what some people are so fond of affirming, that women
have nothing to complain of, and that the vast majority of them do not
desire any change; if so, giving them the suffrage can do nobody harm,
and would afford them an opportunity of showing their perfect
contentment with their present lot, in a manner beyond the reach of
dispute. (Applause.)

If what we are told is true, that women ought to be, and always must and
will be, in a state of domestic and social subordination to men, why,
then, they require the suffrage so much the more, in order that the
sovereignty of men over them may be exercised under the fitting
responsibility. None need political protection so much as those who are
in domestic dependence, since none are so much exposed to wrong. On
every possible supposition, therefore, they have a claim to the
suffrage. And we live at a period of human development, when the just
claims of large numbers cannot be permanently resisted.

The whole movement of modern society, from the middle ages until now,
greatly accelerated in the present century, points in the direction of
the political enfranchisement of women. Their exclusion is a last
remnant of the old bad state of Edition: current; Page: [407]
society—the regimen of privileges and disabilities. All other monopolies
are going or gone. The whole spirit of the times is against
predetermining by law that one set of people shall be allowed by right
of birth to have or to do what another set shall not, by any amount of
exertion or superiority of ability, be allowed to attain. (Applause.)

If nature has established an ineradicable and insuperable difference in
the capacities and qualifications of the two sexes, nature can take care
of itself. What nature has decided may safely be left to nature. But
when we find people making themselves uneasy for fear that nature’s
purposes should be frustrated unless law comes to her assistance, we may
be pretty certain that it is not nature they are so careful about, but
law pretending to be nature. To all such pretences the growing
improvement of mankind is making them more and more adverse.

I do not know how long a time it may require to get rid of women’s
disabilities. Great changes in the habits and opinions of mankind are
always slow. But of one thing I am certain—that when once they have been
got rid of—when their true aspect is no longer disguised by the varnish
of custom and habit—they will appear in the retrospect so devoid of any
rational foundation, and so contradictory to the principles by which
society now professes to guide itself, that the difficulty which will be
felt will be to conceive how they can ever have been defended, and by
what possible arguments they can ever have been made to appear
plausible. (Loud cheers.) fThe resolution I have to propose is—“That the
ownership or occupation of lands or house being the basis of
representation in this country, it is unjust in principle to make sex a
ground of disqualification, thereby excluding a large number of
intelligent persons well qualified to exercise the electoral franchise;
and the recent school board elections in England have proved not only
that women are desirous to exercise this right, but that they can do so
without the slightest inconvenience.”f (Loud and prolonged cheering.)

[The resolution was adopted unanimously, and then Professor Masson,1 in
a long speech that obtained a mixed reception, moved that the meeting
thank Jacob Bright for his efforts in Parliament, and petition
Parliament in favour of his bill, authorizing the Chair to sign the
petition in the name of the meeting. The resolution was approved but not
unanimously. Professor Kelland2 moved the vote of thanks to Mill,
commenting that he “was known wherever the English language was spoken
as one of our greatest philosophical thinkers—a thinker who had set his
mind to knock down what was opposed to the progress of right and
liberty.” The motion Edition: current; Page: [408] was seconded by the
Rev. Dr. Wallace,3 who referred to Mill as one “to whose mind every one
who had the slightest pretension to culture and intelligence must gladly
acknowledge himself under obligations of gratitude which could not well
be expressed; a great and original philosopher, who had not speculated
for his own amusement, but who had earnestly directed all his great
gifts to questions and to enterprises bearing directly upon the highest
welfare of mankind—a man who all his lifetime had set before himself the
noblest objects, and who had striven to promote these, not by appeal to
passion or to prejudice, but by a fairness and an honesty of reasoning
that was equalled only by the transcendent ability which he had
exercised in that direction. (Applause.) Sure he was that, whatever
difference of opinion there might be—and difference of opinion might be
expected in so large an assemblage as the present—with regard to the
conclusions Mr. Mill had advocated before them, there could be but one
sentiment of admiration and of gratification at having seen Mr. Mill
amongst them, and having listened to an example of the fair, and close,
and honest reasoning which he had made popular in this country, and by
so doing, had contributed very largely to the development of an
intellectual veracity among us which was not one of the least important
virtues in these days, when there were so many temptations to sophistry
and to the sinking down of the human intellect into ways that were not
worthy of its dignity. (Applause.)” The motion was “warmly received, the
bulk of the assemblage rising to their feet and cheering heartily.”]

gMr. Stuart Mill said—I feel most strongly the kind manner in which my
name has been received by the meeting, not that I think for an instant
that I deserve a tenth part of the kind things said of me by the
proposer and seconder of the motion; but I cannot refrain from saying
that even much greater trouble than I have been put to in coming from
London here would have been much more than requited by the sight of so
grand a meeting as this. I know that the cause owes an immense debt to
Scotland, and in Scotland to Edinburgh, and I cannot close these few
words without moving the thanks of the meeting to a gentleman to whom,
more perhaps than to any one in Edinburgh, the cause owes the most—Mr.
Duncan McLaren. (Applause hand hissesh.) No one who has exerted himself
in this cause has done more to promote it than that gentleman, and I may
add, the ladies of his family.4 (Hear, hear.) To their exertions may be
ascribed the rapid success which has Edition: current; Page: [409]
attended this movement, not only in Edinburgh but throughout Scotland.
In moving a vote of thanks to Mr. McLaren for his conduct in the chair,
I may also add, for his past services in this cause.g (Applause.)

[This vote of thanks having been passed and acknowledged, another was
given to the Ladies’ Committee, who had organized the meeting, and the
proceedings ended “with loud cheers for Mr. Mill.”]


151.: The Cumulative Vote
 13 FEBRUARY, 1871

Sessional Proceedings of the National Association for the Promotion of
Social Science, IV (1870-71), 234-5 (fascicle for 16 February). The
meeting was devoted to a paper by Thomas Hare, “On the Suggestions
Afforded by the Application of the Cumulative Vote, and by the Other
Incidents of the School Board Elections, for Improvement in the
Constitution of Municipal and Local Governing Bodies” (ibid., pp.
215-26). Mill was in the Chair, and, as was customary, made the
concluding remarks.

the chairman said that a more satisfactory debate than this he had not
often had the pleasure of hearing. There was not one speaker who did not
show that he was entitled to be heard on the subject, and he thought
that there was not one who had not contributed something useful to the
debate. It was also extremely satisfactory to find that it was not
necessary to defend Mr. Hare’s system; no speaker had contested it. On
the contrary, every one had shown a strong sense of its importance. The
great principle of Mr. Hare’s system was that one member of the
community was entitled to as great a share in the representation as
another—that the representation ought not to be engrossed by one portion
of the community because it was the most numerous, but that every
portion was entitled to be represented in the ratio of its numbers. This
was the principle of Mr. Hare’s system, and such a general assent had
been given to it, such a strong sense has been manifested of its
importance, there being no contrary opinion expressed, he did not think
it at all necessary that he should use any argument, or give any summary
on this point. He should only touch on a few other points that had been
adverted to. The cumulative vote is, as everybody must see, a very
imperfect mode of obtaining—partially—or a part of the results that
would flow from Mr. Hare’s system. Other systems have been proposed by
several speakers which, in their opinion, though still imperfect, would
approximate more nearly than the cumulative vote to the results which
Mr. Hare aimed at; but he (the speaker) thought that these plans, if
more closely considered, would be found not to approach so near as the
cumulative vote. The disadvantages which they all Edition: current;
Page: [410] have—which the cumulative vote has—is that a number of votes
are thrown away. No doubt if Mr. Hare’s plan were adopted, the
cumulative vote might be cured of a certain portion of this
inconvenience. He did not know that it would be necessary to spread the
election over so long a period as contemplated. It was suggested that
there should be a periodical statement of the poll, as a way in which
the cumulative vote might be made less a failure in the way of a waste
of power. Other speakers spoke as if it were an easy matter to turn over
surplus votes to another candidate, but no one had shown how this was to
be done, nor did he see how it could be done. To whom should the
transfer votes go? If there was a means of transferring them, it was a
pity that it had not been stated. Sir William Fraser’s recommendation of
having a large constituency—the whole of London, for instance—was a very
important and desirable thing;1 but if it were adopted without Mr.
Hare’s plan of the quota that would make matters worse than they were
now, because now, opinions in the minority may be represented in some
districts; and in that awkward way people would get a representation to
which they were entitled. But if they took the whole of a very large
constituency—if they took the whole of Great Britain, in that case,
without the system of the quota, no minorities would be represented
anywhere—none but the strong party in the nation would have any
representation at all. With the quota, nothing could be more desirable
than that they should go to that extreme point of taking in the whole
nation, because they would attain by that means, not only the
representation of minorities in a more complete manner than on a limited
scale, but the most striking advantage of Mr. Hare’s plan, namely, that
the electors would have the whole country from which to choose the best
men, instead of having to choose the best out of a small portion of the
country. It had been suggested by Mr. Edwin Chadwick that the plan of
allowing one vote to every elector for one single candidate would be a
better plan than the cumulative vote,2 but he thought it would be
attended with considerable disadvantage unless the principle of the
quota were adopted with it. If one constituency could return no more
than one representative, then they would lose the representation of
minorities. This was not what Mr. Chadwick supposes; he must contemplate
that under this rule of a single vote, the constituency should return a
certain number of representatives, so as to admit of the representation
of minorities. Under this system it would, perhaps, happen that every
party would be represented, but certainly the majority were entitled to
more than an equal representation. No one wished that minorities should
have the same representation as majorities. The matter must be so
regulated that majorities shall be able to have more than an equal
Edition: current; Page: [411] representation. By the plan Mr. Chadwick
proposes, unless the quota were combined with it, it would be only
favourable to candidates of the majority. The quota was the essence of
Mr. Hare’s system. By the principle of it, they got beyond the
cumulative vote. The debate had been extremely valuable.

[The session adjourned after votes of thanks to Hare and Mill.]


152.: Discussion of the Contagious Diseases Acts
 23 FEBRUARY, 1871

Sessional Proceedings of the National Association for the Promotion of
Social Science, IV (1870-71), 269-70. Mill, a representative on the
Council from the Economy and Trade Department, spoke on a motion in
Council to postpone consideration of a resolution, passed at the
Newcastle Congress, on the Contagious Diseases Acts until the Royal
Commission had reported. He was preceded by Frederic Hill (1803-96), an
Inspector of Prisons, who, strongly opposed to the policy of the Acts,
spoke in favour of the postponement.

mr. john stuart mill also acquiesced, at the same time stating that his
conviction as to the moral aspect of the question and the general policy
of the Acts could not be influenced by any collection of facts or
inquiry made by the Commission.1


153.: The Army Bill
 10 MARCH, 1871

Daily Telegraph, 11 March, 1871, p. 5. Headed: “Our Military
Expenditure.” Also reported in slightly abbreviated from in The Times
and in the Daily News. The evening meeting was called by the Working
Men’s Peace Association to protest against the government’s proposal to
increase military expenditure. The report in The Times, which calls the
meeting “extremely noisy,” says St. James’s Hall “was not half full.”
Mill was in the Chair; the platform party included “a number of the
representative men of the working classes.” After a letter of support
from Henry Fawcett was read, Mill spoke.

ladies and gentlemen, whatever diversities aof opiniona may exist in the
country as to the proper constitution of our military force, and the
proper limits of its amount, I think we all have reason to unite in a
profound dissatisfaction with the Edition: current; Page: [412]
Government measure.1 (Hear, hear.) It is offered as a great army reform
to cure the notorious defects of our military system. But what are the
defects of our present system? At an expense greater than would be
necessary for an army, it gives us only an army corps. If an army is to
be of banyb use, it must be of use when it is wanted. But our army is
vastly too large when it is not wanted, and vastly too small when it is.
(Laughter and cheers.) If the time should come when we really require an
army for the defence of these islands, the force we can muster is
totally inadequate. We are as absolutely dependent on the Channel fleet
for the safety of the country as if we had no military force at all, and
we pay £14,000,000 a year for not having an army, when it costs the
Prussian Government only half that sum to be able, as we have seen, to
bring 500,000 trained men into the field at a fortnight’s notice. (Hear,
hear, and That’s it.) This is what we have to remedy. Now, what is the
remedy proposed? An increase which, except as regards the artillery,
adds almost imperceptibly to our power of meeting an enemy, while to
effect it £3,000,000 more a year are to be added to the present
£14,000,000 cof costc, without counting any of the other millions which
we are to pay for the abolition of purchase.2 (Hear.) Whatever our ideas
may be of the sort of changes which are requisite, this, I think, is a
kind of reform which cannot satisfy any one. (Cheers.) Efficiency is one
thing, and economy is one thing, but if we are to have neither
efficiency nor economy, it is time we took the matter into our own
hands. (Cheers.) We should try to have—both. (Loud cheers.) I should
heartily rejoice if I could conscientiously believe that we could do
without an army, and could trust only to our fleet. (Hear, hear.) But no
country is safe with only one line of defence, and we cannot be sure of
always keeping the command of the sea without a single day’s
intermission, which would be necessary if our only force were the fleet.
We must remember that our navy has a great deal to do. We have
possessions all over the world which in case of war we are bound to
protect as well as our own islands, and we may have to contend against
not one maritime Power only, but against several; and if we persist in
sanctioning dby our silenced the act of our late Foreign Minister done
without authority in 1856, and never ratified,3 we abandon one of our
most effective edefensivee weapons—the fpowerf of attacking an Edition:
current; Page: [413] enemy through his commerce. The fleet of a Power at
war with us would have nothing to do but to watch gforg the opportunity
of landing an army on our shores, and we should not know hwhich amongst
many points would be attacked, and if our fleet were drawn off for two
days by false information, the mischief might be doneh. (Hear, hear.)
Such a catastrophe is not probable i—we hope it is not even possible—but
wei had a narrow escape from it just before Trafalgar, and we must
contemplate the possibility of our having to defend ourselves against a
powerful enemy who has succeeded in effecting a landing. Now, we might
as well have no means of defence, as means not sufficient to prevent the
country being overrun. The great and important point is that this cannot
be accomplished by any possible increase of our standing army. (Cheers.)
We are living in an age when wars are made by nations in arms, and we
know now how effectually an armed nation can repel an invasion. jNow
that no nation is armed unless the nation in arms is ready to defend,
noj country can afford to keep a standing army great enough for the
purpose—and least of all we, whose military system costs us £100 ka
yeark for every soldier it gives us. Henceforth our army should be our
whole people trained and disciplined. (Hear, hear, and a voice, That
won’t do.) Not kept in barracks for three years like the Prussians, nor
even for two years which the Liberals of Prussia stood out for. What is
wanted is to take every year those who have ljustl arrived at
manhood—(No, no)—and to place them in military training for a few weeks
or months, in the way that is found sufficient in Switzerland. (Loud
cheers, and Oh!) The foundation of mthe training should be laid, as it
is in Switzerland,m at school, and if it is well done, a few weeks’
training in the field in the first year of manhood makes a good soldier,
and a fortnight’s drill annually for a few years afterwards suffices to
keep him so. (Hear.) When a system of this sort had existed for some
years, we should require no standing army except the scientific corps,
and as many as might be required for garrisons in India and for colonies
whose inhabitants were not yet competent for self-defence. (Hear, hear.)
A citizen army in time of peace would cost the Government nothing except
for the short period of its embodiment, and the loss of productive power
by withdrawing from industry for a short time young men of that age
would scarcely be felt, and would be more than compensated by the good
effects of military training in making them more steady and vigorous for
the ordinary pursuits of life. Then, if war should break out, there
would be a large army quite ready, and abundant reserves ready to
reinforce it if occasion required. But, it will be said, these are only
raw soldiers. Well, are not a standing army raw soldiers at the first
breaking-out of Edition: current; Page: [414] every war which is
preceded by many years of peace? and I hope there will always be many
years of peace between our wars. One would suppose it had been our
practice to keep our standing army always fighting. A soldier is not
like a carpenter or a sailor, whose whole life is passed in the active
exercise of his profession. When the country is at peace our soldiers
have no more experience of actual warfare than our citizens have. They
are idle, and something worse (cheers), repeating merely elementary
preparatory exercises, not the more skilled work of soldiering. Why does
a man need to be constantly practising the goose step, when once he has
learned it? Unless the country, therefore, like old Rome, is always at
war, citizen soldiers and professionals have equally to learn their real
business after the war has commenced; and the late war in America shows
how well and quickly citizen soldiers learn. (Cheers.) No doubt if we
were attacked by a Power with practised soldiers it would be some
disadvantage to us to have none of ours; but this inconvenience must be
undergone in any case, unless we are always fighting to keep our hands
in; and we must nthereforen make it up by numbers, as the Prussians have
done, ofor they, be it rememberedo, at the time of the Danish campaign,
had no soldiers who had seen service. Let us, then, make our people our
army—(cheers)—as has been done in Prussia; but let us not keep them
togetherp, in time of peace,p any longer than is sufficient for
training. There is no true military reform but this; and a bill which,
instead of pointing in this direction, points in the opposite—which
gives us a more expensive standing army than ever, and does no one thing
towards making the people themselves a defensive force—is not a reform,
but a continuation and an aggravation of evils. (Loud cheers.) I
recognise only two things in the bill as worthy of praise. One is the
increase of our artillery. Undoubtedly, this country ought to have the
very best instruments of war which ingenuity can devise, and an ample
supply of them and of men trained to use them; and no doubt artillerymen
require long training. The other point is the abolition of
purchase—(cheers)—but it is only good as part of a system, and where is
the system of which it ought to be a part? The great evil of purchase is
that it officers the army with idle men who have never done a day of
hard, dull work in their lives (laughter and cheers), and who scorn the
idea of qstudying theirq business. (Hear, hear.) But what is there in
this bill to compel officers to study and understand their work as the
Prussians do? The first commissions are to be given by competition, and
that is good; but then promotion is to go by selection, which unless
guarded by infinite precautions, means rfavouritism and all the old
evilsr. (Hear, hear.) A competition at starting may keep out actual
dunces and incorrigible idlers; but that ordeal once passed—and
experience shows that it can Edition: current; Page: [415] be passed
with a very moderate amount of exertion—what is there to hinder the army
from being officered by the same sort of persons and from the same
motives as at present—namely, gentlemanly excitement? (Hear, hear.) And
really, if this is to continue, the abolition of purchase is not worth
paying for. (Cheers.) If our armies are to be led by men who want to
amuse themselves by playing at soldiers, the only good point in the
whole matter is that they are made to pay handsomely for their
amusement. (Laughter and Hear, hear.) Rich men may be very brave and
dashing, if you will; but I sincerely hope they will never have to fight
any of the nations which before many years have passed will have
remodelled their armies after the Prussian pattern. (Hear.) The purchase
of commissions is an evil and a blot, but it may as well be left as it
is as abolished without stringent provisions that promotion shall only
be possible to those men who have made a serious study of the military
art. (Hear.) The bill, therefore, considered as a whole, is a step in
the wrong direction. It does not appreciably strengthen us for national
defence, and it contains no germs of a better system for the future. The
least that can be done in such a case is to demand that, if we are not
to have a better army, at least we shall not be required to pay for
inefficency three millions a year more than we pay already. I therefore
heartily concur in the object of the present meeting. (Loud cheers.)

[A resolution was moved, that the meeting refused to sanction an
increased expenditure on the army, which was already the most costly in
Europe, and regretted the weakness of a Liberal government in yielding
to ill-founded alarmist fears and increasing the burden on an already
over-taxed people. The proceedings were interrupted by a “knot of
persons in the gallery, who exhibited a flag bearing the word
‘republic,’ and who also loudly vociferated their objection to the
Princess Louise’s dowry”; the Chair “reminded the interrupters that the
meeting had been called for a different purpose, and that they were at
liberty to hold meetings on their own account to give ventilation to
their views on those subjects” (Daily News). The motion was supported by
Jacob Bright, who expressed disagreement with some views of Mill,
specifically that England should be a nation of soldiers; P.A. Taylor
also spoke in support, avowing agreement with Mill as to the need for a
national force. After the failure of an amendment protesting against the
Army Regulation Bill because it did not limit the tenure of the
Commander-in-Chief or prevent German Princes from retaining commands in
the Guards, the resolution was approved unanimously, and then a motion
was made (on behalf of the “men of the North”) that the meeting call on
the Members of Parliament to resist by all constitutional means the
government’s proposals to increase military expenditure; the motion was
unanimously approved, and the meeting concluded with a vote of thanks to
Mill, which was approved with cheers.]

Edition: current; Page: [416]


154.: Land Tenure Reform [1]
 15 MAY, 1871

Land Tenure Reform Association. Report of the Inaugural Public Meeting,
Held at the Freemason’s Hall, London, Monday, 15th May, 1871 (London:
Higginbottom, 1871), pp. 3-11. Reported on 16 May in The Times, the
Daily Telegraph, and more briefly in the Daily News. Reprinted in the
posthumous fourth volume of Dissertations and Discussions (London:
Longmans, 1875), pp. 251-65. Some of the audience’s responses are taken
from the newspaper reports. The evening meeting, “densely crowded,” with
“all classes of reformers” filling “the great body” of the hall, was
chaired by Mill, the President of the Association, who spoke first, and
“was received with loud and long-continued applause”

(The Times).

after the great changes that have been made in our political
constitution it is impossible that the laws relating to landed property
should not come up for revision. (Cheers.) It is a rule, to which
history as yet furnishes few exceptions, that nations are governed by
their landed proprietors. (Hear.) At all events, they have ruled this
country; not despotically, for the people, in the last five centuries,
have always had some share in the government; but the landlords, and
those who looked forward to being landlords, have had the command of
Parliament up to the last Reform Act, and still wield enormous power.
(Hear.) The making of the laws which concern themselves has been in
their own hands; and they have used the power as people generally do use
power, for the promotion chiefly of their own objects. (Laughter and
cheers.) I do not charge them with any special perversity, or with being
worse in any respect than people usually are. They shared the common
infirmity of human nature, which it requires a rare strength of
character to overcome. (Hear.) It must be said also of our landed
classes of the present and of recent times, that they did not make these
selfish laws, but inherited them. Their own minds were enslaved by
traditional notions handed down from ancestors more overbearing, more
tyrannical, less capable of understanding the rights of other people,
than any one is now. We ought to feel the greatest indulgence for the
difficulty they have in freeing themselves from these mental trammels;
and we should make our appeal, not only to the public, but to the more
high-minded and open-minded of the landowners themselves, of whom there
are a great number, to use their minds on these questions, and help us
to get rid of the effects of past injustice. (Cheers.)

For the injustice, truly, was great. I pass over the original title by
which landed property was acquired, which we know, in this country, was
for the most part foreign conquest. Nor need I expatiate on the slavery,
or serfdom, in which the rural population were kept for so many
centuries; for that has long been at an end. I confine myself to evils
which are still unremedied, and I remark that the land was formerly held
subject to the obligation of personal service in time of war, and many
Edition: current; Page: [417] burdensome dues of the Crown in time of
peace, from all of which, in the reign of Charles II, the landlords
relieved themselves; and what did they grant to the Crown instead? An
excise on beer!1 (Laughter.) Soon after this came the Revolution of
1688, which, among other characteristics, had one not sufficiently
noticed by historians; it was a revolution made by the towns against the
country gentlemen. One of the fruits of it was a tax on the land, of 4s.
in the pound,2 which at that time may have been considered an equivalent
for the burdens which had been taken off the landlords. But the lands
were rated to the tax at a fixed valuation, made by the landlords to
begin with, and which, in spite of the enormous increase in the value of
land, has never since been raised; so that the nominal 4s. does not now
exceed a real 1s., while on the vast town properties which have been
created by the extension of building it is often only a fraction of a
penny.

That is the first great wrong done to the nation by the landed interest.
The second is this:—The rights of landed proprietors were in many cases
legally limited by rights of common enjoyed by the neighbouring
inhabitants. These rights the landlords have been gradually absorbing;
formerly, often by downright usurpation; latterly, by the machinery of
private Acts of Parliament and the Enclosure Commissioners; and they are
even now pursuing the same course, dividing among themselves every year
thousands of acres which ought to be left open for the enjoyment or
cultivated for the benefit of the people. While this process of
absorption has been going on, a set of laws have been in force, made by
the landlords, and intended to make sure that no land which once got
within their grip should ever get out of it. The laws of landed tenure
have been contrived for the purpose of keeping together the largest
possible landed possessions in the families which already hold the land;
and though these laws have been considerably relaxed in the progress of
improvement, such is still their practical effect. So much are the power
and dignity of the class the first object, that to it are sacrificed the
interests and wishes of the very persons who for the time being
represent the class. When land is in settlement, as most land is, the
landowner has only a life interest in what is called his property; he
can neither sell it, nor bequeath it, nor even grant leases exceeding, I
believe, 21 years.3 The landlord himself is denied the full use of the
land, for fear that some of it should go out of the family into other
hands. (Cheers.)

It is time that this mode of dealing with landed property, as if it
existed for the power and dignity of the proprietary class and not for
the general good, should henceforth cease. This Association acknowledges
no other legitimate end of landed property than the interest we all have
in the proper application of the land to the wants of the human race.
The Association recognizes no rights to land that are not subordinate to
this: and they have inscribed in their programme a series of Edition:
current; Page: [418] measures intended to bring back landed property to
this its rightful purpose.4 (Cheers.)

Some of the articles of our programme it is sufficient just to mention,
because, though very important, they are of so moderate a character that
they hardly need any justification. For example, it is quite unnecessary
that I should say anything against the law of primogeniture, for that is
sure to go. The present Government have taken that task upon
themselves.5 (Hear.) Something must be said about the laws of settlement
and entail, by which land can be settled on a series of persons one
after another, ending with one who is perhaps unborn, and until this
unborn child comes of age the land cannot be sold, nor any change be
made in the order of descent. Now, whether any other kind of property,
in the funds for instance, should be allowed to be bequeathed in this
manner, need not now be considered; but the land is too precious to the
whole community to be detained by legal fetters in the hands of those
who cannot make the best use of it. Land tied up from alienation
stagnates in the hands of the idler, the spendthrift, the incapable;
allow it to be sold, and they are soon obliged to part with it to the
askilfula, the energetic, the enterprising. (Cheers.) If the law allows
land to be private property, it should be as marketable a commodity,
sold and bought with as little restriction, as any article of commerce.
This was an object very dear to Mr. Cobden, who thought that free trade
in land would end by bringing a great part of the land into the hands of
the people:6 and many excellent persons, of strong popular sympathies,
go thus far, who have not yet been able to reconcile themselves to going
with us any further. I will say no more on this point, as I have to
speak of others which require explanation much more.

We hold that all property in land is subject to the will of the State.
This is the broad principle on which our claims are founded, and which,
as long as it is confined to theory, few will dispute. Land—and by land
I mean the whole material of the earth, underground as well as above—not
having been made by man, but being the gift of nature to the whole human
race, could only be appropriated by the consent, either express or
tacit, of society: and society remains the interpreter of its own
permission; with power to make conditions, with power even to revoke its
consent, on giving due compensation to the interests that it has allowed
to grow up. There is an Association, known as the Land and Labour
League, which maintains Edition: current; Page: [419] that society ought
to exert this bextremeb right.7 According to them, all the land of the
country should be nationalized, and the rents paid into the Exchequer,
compensation being made to the proprietors. This opinion the Land Tenure
Reform Association does not as a body adopt. Many members of the Land
and Labour League, waiving differences of opinion, are members also of
this Association, but it contains many other members who are of a
contrary opinion. Speaking for myself individually, I should say that
the thing might rightfully be done, if it were expedient to do it, and I
do not know that it may not be reserved for us in the future; but at
present I decidedly do not think it expedient. I have so poor an opinion
of State management (cheers), or municipal management either (hear, and
laughter) that I am afraid many years would elapse before the revenue
realized for the State would be sufficient to pay the indemnity which
would be justly claimed by the dispossessed proprietors. It requires, I
fear, a greater degree of public virtue and public intelligence than has
yet been attained (laughter) to administer all the land of a country
like this on the public account. (Cheers.) The administration of the
waste lands is as much, I think, as we are at present equal to. At all
events, I think we had better make a beginning with that, and give a
thorough trial to collective before we substitute it for individual
management. And since I have been led to speak of the waste lands, I
will next explain that part of the Society’s programme which concerns
them.

The greatest stickler for the rights of property will hardly deny that
if cland, the gift of nature to us all, is allowed to be the private
property ofc some of us, it is in order that it may be cultivated. Every
defence of the institution of landed property that I have met with,
declares that to be its object. Why, then, should any land be
appropriated that is not cultivated? Observe, by cultivated, I do not
mean ploughed up. Pasturage is as necessary, in this country even more
necessary, than corn land; and woodland is necessary too. I do not make
war against parks; they are already very productive pasturage, almost
the best sheep pastures we have; and the extreme beauty of many of them,
a kind of beauty found in no country but this, and which is our chief
compensation for the paleness of our sun and sky, should make us prize
them as a national benefit. I should be sorry to see the trees cut down,
and the ground laid out as farms are laid out now, in ugly squares of
cornfield, without even hedgerows to separate them. I own, however, that
I do not think the possessors should have power to bar out the public
from the sight and enjoyment of this beauty. With reasonable reservation
for privacy, I think that parks should be open to the public, as, to the
credit of the owners, many are now. But what we are at present concerned
with is the wastes,—the really wild lands, which are still as Edition:
current; Page: [420] nature left them, producing nothing except wild
animals and spontaneous vegetation. Now, I don’t say that it was wrong
not to cultivate these lands. I don’t say that all of them ought to be
cultivated now; but I say that, cultivated or not, they ought to belong
to the nation. If a common is not to be cultivated, why should any man
be allowed to put a fence round it and exclude the rest of the world? If
it is to be cultivated, what excuse is there for dividing it among the
landowners, instead of keeping it for the people? Even if some landlord
had a legal right to cultivate it, a right not used for so many
centuries has fairly lapsed by disuse. But in general nobody has the
right, and whoever wishes to cultivate must ask permission from
Parliament. What has kept some good lands uncultivated is that a great
many persons have rights of common, entitling them to use the
spontaneous produce. When the lord of the manor and all the commoners
agree, they can divide the land among themselves and enclose it.8
Fortunately, a single public-spirited commoner, refusing his consent,
can frustrate this beautiful arrangement; and in this way, quite
recently, Berkhampstead and Plumstead and other commons have been saved.
When the commoners do not all consent, or when there are too many of
them to be bought out one by one, application is made to the Enclosure
Commissioners, who put the common into their annual Bill and divide it
among the landholders. As the 30,000 persons who share among them the
cultivated soil of this island have not yet, as it appears, got land
enough, Parliament throws in every year many thousand acres more, to
which it is not even pretended that they have a right.

And observe at whose cost this has been done. The rural labourers had
once (it was a long time ago) a very substantial benefit from the waste
lands. Most of them occupied cottages on or near some common or green,
and could feed a cow or a few geese upon it. The cottager had then
something, though it was but little, that he could call his own; he did
not absolutely depend for daily food on daily wages or parish
assistance: when the common was taken away he had to sell his cow or his
geese, and sink into the dependent, degraded condition of an English
agricultural labourer. He often got no compensation: when he did, if it
was even a little bit of the land, he was soon cheated out of it or
persuaded to sell it, the money was quickly spent, and his children were
no better for it. They would have been much better for the cow and the
geese. In modern Enclosure Bills there are sometimes, though by no means
always, a few wretched acres reserved for recreation ground and garden
allotments; by which last phrase are meant small patches of ground, not
given to the labourers, but which they are allowed to hire at enormous
rents. There is now before the House of Commons a Bill brought in by the
Government, which professes to be a reform of this system. And what does
the Bill say? It says that in future, when a common is enclosed, a tenth
part of it shall be reserved for Edition: current; Page: [421]
recreation and allotments—provided that this tenth does not exceed 50
acres9 (laughter). More than 50 acres are not to be reserved on any
account, not even if the Enclosure Commissioners should do so unheard-of
a thing as to propose it. Fifty acres, out of sometimes 1,500 or 2,000!
Fifty acres for the people; all the rest for the 30,000! What a state of
things it must be when such a proposal as this is called, and really is,
an improvement! (Loud cheers.)

The Land Tenure Reform Association invite the public to join in
uncompromising opposition to this system. We demand, not fewer
enclosures or larger reservations, but no more enclosures at all, unless
for the benefit of the people. Let lords of manors and commoners receive
a money equivalent for the profits they now derive from their rights in
the land, and let the land itself be vested in some public authority in
trust for the nation. The first thing to be done is what was proposed in
the House of Commons by Mr. Winterbotham—let us hope that, now when he
is in the Government, he will endeavour to obtain it for us—a general
survey of the waste lands.10 When it has been made known what they are,
their quantity, their quality, and their situation, then appoint a
Commission to consider and report what portion of them should be kept
open for the enjoyment of the lovers of natural freedom and beauty, and
what part should be cultivated for the benefit, not of the rich, but of
the poor. And let the first thought be for the most depressed part of
our working population, the wretchedly paid, downtrodden,
semi-pauperised, agricultural labourers. The experience of allotments
has shown how much the occupation of land, even on the most extortionate
terms, can do for these neglected creatures. The allotments are
generally the worst land in the parish, but the produce they raise from
it is prodigious, and enables them to pay exorbitant rents. Let them
have it at rents that are not exorbitant: and when they have had it long
enough to show that they are capable of managing it properly, let them
have long leases at fixed rents; and when a labourer has shown that he
knows how to make good use of a little land, give him more. (Cheers.)
When possible, make the engagements with associations of labourers,
combining their labour, that the great principle of co-operative
industry may have a fair trial on the land. By these improvements,
honestly conducted by persons who desire their success, a new life may
be breathed into our unfortunate agricultural population, while a fair
share of the value given to the lands by reclamation would go in relief
of the general taxation of the country. (Loud cheers.)

But the commons are not the only lands in the kingdom which have as yet
been Edition: current; Page: [422] kept out of private hands. There are
also the great estates of public bodies and endowed institutions.
(Cheers.) Of all the abuses and malversations in the management of
public matters in this country, the abuses of endowments are the most
flagrant. (Hear, hear.) It begins to be felt that the whole of them
ought to be taken in hand by the nation and thoroughly reformed; and a
thorough reform in most cases means that their lands should either be
managed for them by the State, or taken away altogether, such of them as
are fit to be continued receiving money endowments instead. If this were
done, a great extent of landed possessions would be at the disposal of
the nation; and with all the defects of State management, management by
endowed institutions is generally so much worse, that even after giving
them full compensation, to which many of them are by no means entitled,
a considerable surplus would probably be realised for the State. Much of
this is town property; a distinguished member of this Association, who
knows the subject officially, can tell you, that one may walk for
several miles across London without once taking his foot off the
property of some endowed institution.11 I have seen it estimated that a
fifth part of London belongs to them. It is well known how great a
hindrance the obstinate selfishness of the owners of house property
opposes to that most urgent reform, the improvement of the dwellings of
the working classes. If those lands were resumed, what facilities would
be afforded for that, as well as for open spaces, public gardens,
co-operative buildings, useful public institutions, sanitary measures,
and generally for all improvements that are beneficial to the poorer
classes. (Cheers.)

These are our purposes with regard to the lands which are not yet
swallowed up in the possessions of private individuals. It remains to
tell you what we propose respecting lands which belong to private
owners.12

The Association does not propose to resume these lands, nor to take from
the holders by a forced sale any part of the value which they have
already acquired. We leave undisturbed present possessions. But there is
an incident of landed property which goes beyond present possession, and
which we do not feel bound to respect. Land is limited in quantity,
while the demand for it, in a prosperous country, is constantly
increasing. The rent, therefore, and the price, which depends on the
rent, progressively rises, not through the exertion or expenditure of
the owners, to which we should not object, but by the mere growth of
wealth and population. The incomes of landowners are rising while they
are sleeping, through the general prosperity produced by the labour and
outlay of other people. Some people ask—But why single out the land?
Does not all property rise in value with the increase of prosperity? I
answer, no. All other property fluctuates in value, now up, now down. I
defy anyone to show any kind of property, not partaking of the Edition:
current; Page: [423] soil, and sufficiently important to be worth
considering, which tends steadily upward, without anything being done by
the owners to give it increased value. So far from it, that the other of
the two kinds of property that yield income, namely capital, instead of
increasing, actually diminishes in value as society advances; the poorer
the country, or the further back we go in history, the higher we find
the interest of money to be. Land alone—using land as a general term for
the whole material of the earth—has the privilege of steadily rising in
value from natural causes; and the reason is that land is strictly
limited in quantity: the supply does not increase to meet the constant
increase of demand. The Land Tenure Reform Association see no grounds of
justice upon which this surplus value, the creation of society itself,
should be abandoned to the landholders. We think it, for example,
consummately unreasonable that because certain families, or their
progenitors two or three generations ago, happened to own land over
which this great capital, or other large towns, have since extended
themselves, the estates of these families should now be worth millions
of money, to which they have contributed nothing either in work or
expenditure except signing leases. Well would it have been if this
diversion of the public wealth had been foreseen and guarded against
long ago: let us at least prevent any more gigantic fortunes from being
built up in a similar manner. The Association claims for the State the
right to impose special taxation upon the land, equivalent to its
special advantage. Some writers and others, who do not know the meaning
of words, call this confiscation; although we tell them that if any
landlord objects to it, we are ready to hold him harmless, by taking the
land off his hands at its present selling price. This is all he would
have been entitled to if his land had been taken for a railroad; and if
this is confiscation, every Railway Act is confiscation too. For my
part, I am well convinced that landlords will prefer to retain their
land even on the altered conditions. But if any landlord finds that the
State does him an injustice, by laying on a tax more than equivalent to
the natural increase of his rent, we leave the original offer still
open; he may at any time avail himself of it, by accepting the sum first
tendered, with the addition of compensation for any improvement made in
the meantime by himself. (Cheers.)

By this reform, if the country remains prosperous, a considerable
revenue will in time be obtained by the State from the increased value
of land. It would not begin to come in immediately, because time must be
allowed for the increased value to accrue. But I see no reason why the
State should not grant, to any landlord who desires it, a lease of its
prospective rights; allowing him to free himself for life, or for a term
of years, from the claim of the State on the increase of his rental, by
paying during that period a fixed annual sum; whereby the State would
obtain a part of the pecuniary benefit at once. Or he might commute the
claim for an extra succession duty on any vacancy that occurred within
the term.

These are the principles and the proposals of the Land Tenure Reform
Association. There are persons to whom these measures appear extremely
audacious and subversive. I expect rather that those who come after us
may think Edition: current; Page: [424] our proposals very moderate and
timid. For it is easy to foresee that this country, and all Europe, are
entering upon an era in which they will have to discuss novelties far
more alarming, and which will kindle much fiercer passions than these.
To confine myself to the subject of land, the idea of an entire
abolition of landed property is taking a strong hold on an active and
stirring portion of the working classes. Ours is an honest attempt to
find a middle ground of compromise, which, avoiding individual
injustice, and sparing past acquisitions, shall maintain the right of
the entire community to all that it has not yet parted with, and finally
close the door to any further private appropriation of what should
belong to the public. It does not seem to me that this is too much for
the landed interest to concede; and less than this there is not the
smallest chance that the working classes will long accept. Even those
who take the most unfavourable view of the changes in our social
arrangements which are demanded with increasing energy in behalf of the
working classes, would be wise to consider that when claims are made
which are partly just and partly beyond the bounds of justice, it is no
less politic than honest to concede with a good will all that is just,
and take their defensive stand on the line, if they are able to find it,
which separates justice from injustice. (Loud cheers.)

[The first resolution asserted that the laws relating to landed tenure
should be altered so as to serve the general interest rather than that
of a class; an amendment by M.J. (“Citizen”) Boon (Brook in the Daily
Telegraph), seconded by J. Johnson (“a rough-looking fellow,” who said
he was called “Johnson the Second” [The Times]), that the Land Tenure
Reform Association was not worthy of working-class support because it
did not favour land nationalization, was rejected by a large majority,
and the resolution was carried. A second motion was moved that the
meeting approved the formation of the Land Tenure Reform Association. It
was announced by Mill that Odger, who was to have supported it, though
present was too indisposed to speak; an amendment by John Cunnington, a
farmer, opposing minute subdivisions of land in cooperative ventures,
failed to find a seconder, and the motion passed. Then Weston moved
thanks to Mill, emphasizing that it was no mere formality, but came from
the heart, and saying: “Not only is the Chairman entitled to our thanks
for the able and enlightened address to which we have listened this
evening, and for the thoroughly impartial manner in which he has
performed the duties of Chairman, but . . . he is still more entitled to
our thanks for placing himself at the head of an Association, which,
though it does not go in exactly for nationalization, goes a very long
way in that direction. . . .” The resolution was carried by acclamation,
and the meeting concluded.]

Edition: current; Page: [425]


155.: Land Tenure Reform [2]
 18 MARCH, 1873

Land Tenure Reform Association. Report of the Public Meeting, held at
Exeter Hall, London, on Tuesday, March 18th, 1873 (London: Offices of
the Association, 1873), pp. 3-8. Reported on 19 March in the Daily
Telegraph and the Daily News. Reprinted in the posthumous fourth volume
of Dissertations and Discussions (London: Longmans, 1875), pp. 278-87.
Some of the audience’s responses are taken from the newspaper accounts.
The large evening meeting was chaired by Mill, the President of the
Association, who was enthusiastically received, and spoke first.

in invoking the assistance of this meeting to our efforts for Land
Tenure Reform, many explanations that would have been absolutely
necessary as lately as two years ago may now be dispensed with. It is no
longer necessary to begin at the very beginning to show how there comes
to be a land question, and what the question is. The newspapers and the
speeches of Members of Parliament and others are full of it; friends and
enemies have alike helped to bring it into notice; and we now read
everywhere of Land Tenure Reform, and the unearned increment of rent.

Most of you probably know, at least in a general way, the creed and aims
of the Land Reformers, and I need only, at present, briefly remind you
of them. We hold that land—in which term we include mines (cheers) and
the whole raw material of the globe—is a kind of property unlike any
other. The rights of private individuals to something which they did not
make, or help to make, but which came to them by bequest or inheritance
from people who also did not make it, or help to make it, are a totally
different thing from the right of everyone to the product of his own
labours and sacrifices, or to the product of the labours and sacrifices
of those who freely gave it to him. (Hear, hear.) What a man has earned
by his labour, or by the expenditure of what has been saved from
previous earnings, he has a fair claim to do what he likes with, subject
only to the general rules of morality. But he who detains the land—a
thing not made by man, a thing necessary to life, and of which there is
not enough for all—is in a privileged position. Whether it is right or
wrong that he should be in such a position, he is so. He is, in a word,
a monopolist (loud cheers); and a monopoly should be exercised, not at
the mere will and pleasure of the possessor, but in the manner most
consistent with the general good; the State has exactly the same right
to control it that it has to control, for instance, the railways.
(Cheers.)

The Land Reformers are of opinion that the time has arrived for the
State to re-assert this right, to correct the abuses of landed property,
and adapt it better to the wants and interests of the community
considered as a whole. How far the modifications should reach is a point
on which all Land Reformers are not yet agreed. I need only speak of
those which are advocated by this Association. Edition: current; Page:
[426] Without going the length of those who think that the nation should
re-possess itself of all private lands, subject to a just compensation,
we yet maintain that at least no further appropriation of lands which
are not already private property should be permitted. (Cheers.) We
protest against the conversion of public or corporate lands into private
property. (Cheers.) Still more indignantly do we protest against any
more Acts of Parliament for dividing the common lands of the country
among the neighbouring landholders. (Loud cheers.) Instead of giving the
lands to the rich, and a miserable apretencea of compensation to the
poor, we insist that the lands should be for the poor, and the
compensation for the rich (laughter and cheers)—compensation for what
their manorial and other rights now bring in to them; for the most part
a very small value. (Hear.) We further maintain that permission to own
the land does not necessarily carry with it a right to the increase of
value which the land is constantly acquiring by the mere progress of the
public prosperity. We affirm that this spontaneous increase of value may
justly be taken for the public by means of special taxation. These are
the two chief points of our programme:—First, no more land, under any
pretext, to become the private property of individuals (cheers);
secondly, taxation on the land, in order to give the benefit of its
natural increase of value to the whole community, instead of to the
proprietors, these being allowed the option of relinquishing the land at
its present money value. (Cheers.)

Let us consider these points one by one.1

Few persons are less inclined than I am to call hard names; it is
generally best, even when we are protesting against an injustice, to
protest against it under the most moderate appellation which it admits
of. But there are cases when things ought to be called by names which
throw no veil over their enormity, and I confess that I cannot speak of
the existing practice of dividing the common lands among the landlords
by any gentler name than robbery—robbery of the poor. (Cheers.) It will,
of course, be said that people cannot be robbed of what is not theirs,
and that the commons are not the legal property of the poor. Certainly
not; our masters have taken care of that. (Cheers.) They have taken care
that the poor shall not acquire property by custom, as all other
bclassesb have done. But if the commons are not the property of the
poor, they are just as little the property of those who take them. They
cannot make them their property without an Act of Parliament, and they
have had no difficulty in obtaining any number of such Acts from two
Houses of their own making as often as they pleased, whether the
Government was Liberal or Conservative. (Hear.) It is only in the last
three years that they have been forced, to their own great indignation,
to grant a temporary respite, chiefly by the Edition: current; Page:
[427] public-spirited exertions of Professor Fawcett2 (cheers) and of
that very valuable body, the Commons Preservation Society.3 The commons
are not the private property of anyone. Their history has been written
in several recent books,4 and should be known to every man, woman, and
child. There was a time when much of the land of the country was not
appropriated, but was open to all the population of the neighbourhood to
feed their cattle, and occasionally to grow corn upon it, turn and turn
about, without permanent occupancy. When, for the sake of better
agriculture, this system had to be given up, the land ought at least to
have been fairly portioned out among all who were interested in it.
Instead of this, a great part was usurped with a high hand by the
powerful landholders, at a time when few dared resist them; another
great part has since been filched away by the successors of the same
people, in the more civilized method of Enclosure Acts.5 The commons of
the present day are what is left. We are willing to condone the past, if
they will only leave us the remainder. (Loud cries of No, no.) The
private rights that exist in those lands are limited rights. The Lord of
the Manor has rights, the principal of which is the exclusive right of
killing game. The neighbours have what are called rights of common—that
is, rights of pasturage, of wood-cutting, of turf-cutting, and, in
general, rights to the spontaneous produce of the soil; and those rights
have hitherto been sufficient to prevent the land from being enclosed
and cultivated.

The question is therefore quite fresh, and open to the judgment of the
nation, whether it will suffer these lands to be enclosed and
cultivated; and, if at all, for whose benefit? Hitherto, it has been for
the benefit of the landlords. The Law Courts hold that none but
landholders have rights of common, and that no one else is entitled
either to a share of land or to compensation for its being taken caway
from thec people. It matters not though every cottager who had a cow, or
a pig, or a goose, may, from time immemorial, have turned them out to
feed on the common. Edition: current; Page: [428] The Courts are
constantly making new law; but they would not make law for that. Yet
they could have done so if they liked. They have never had any
difficulty in converting custom into law. The bulk of our law consists
of customs which have been made law by decisions of the Courts. (Hear,
hear.) They could just as easily have decided, had they so pleased, that
the whole population had common rights as that the landlords had; but
they did not so please. In spite of this, however, the commons are not
property for purposes of cultivation; and when Parliament, by a special
Act, removes the obstacles to their cultivation, Parliament by so doing
creates a new and valuable property which has not yet passed into
private hands, and which, retained by the State, would be a source of
considerable revenue. If Parliament dprofessd to give this property away
gratis, is it to the rich that it should be given? (No!) To create a
valuable property for the rich by expelling the poor from that use of
the land for pasturage which they enjoyed in practice, though not by
legal right, and along with it from the use of the land for healthful
recreation, and from the power of wandering over it at will when they
have no other place in which to enjoy Nature except dusty roads—can
anything be more like Ahab the King’s seizure of Naboth’s little
vineyard,6 or the rich man in the parable, who, with his great flocks
and herds, could not be happy without robbing his poor neighbour of his
single ewe lamb?7 (Hear, and cheers.)

I shall be accused, I suppose, of exciting your passions. (Laughter.) I
am not ashamed of the charge. I want to excite your passions. (Cheers.)
Without passion we shall never get this great iniquity put an end to.
(Hear, hear.) Our Liberal Government is as bad on this subject as the
Tories (hear, hear)—perhaps even worse. (Loud cheers.) The passion of
the many is needed to conquer the self-interest of the few. (Cheers.)
That is the proper use of political passion. Its improper use is when it
is directed against persons. Great allowance ought to be made for people
who merely go on doing what they and their predecessors have long done,
and have never until quite recently been told that it was unjust. Let
them learn that, without any hatred of them, we stand here for justice.
Once take away their power of doing this wrong, and before long their
eyes will be unsealed, and they will see the injustice as clearly as we
see it. (Cheers.)

The other of the two chief points of our programme—the claim of the
State to the unearned increase of rent8—requires rather more
explanation, as it is not yet equally familiar, though the time has
already come when it is listened to, and it is probably destined to
become an article of the creed of advanced reformers.

The land of the world—the raw material of the globe—in all prosperous
countries constantly increases in value. The landlord need only sit
still and let nature work for him; or, to speak truly, not nature, but
the labour of other men. Edition: current; Page: [429] (Cheers.) What is
it that has produced the prodigiously increased demand for building
land, which has created the colossal fortunes of the Grosvenors, the
Portmans, the Stanleys, and others of our great families?9 It is the
growth of manufactures and the increase of towns. And what has produced
that? Your labour and outlay; not that of the landlords. (Cheers.) The
same labour and outlay—namely, yours, not theirs—produces a steady
increase of demand for agricultural and mining products, causing prices
to rise and rents to increase. No other portion of the community has a
similar advantage. The labouring classes do not find their wages
steadily rising as their numbers increase; and even capital—its interest
and profit—instead of increasing, brings a less and less percentage as
wealth and population advance. The landlords alone are in possession of
a strict monopoly, becoming more and more lucrative whether they do
anything or nothing for the soil. (Hear, hear.) This is eof littlee
consequence in a country like America, where there is plenty of unused
land, waiting for any one who chooses to go and cultivate it; but in an
old country like ours, with limited land and a growing population, it is
a great and increasing grievance.

We want the people of England to say to the landlords, “You are welcome
to every increase of rent that you can show to be the effect of anything
you have done for the land; but what you get by the mere rise of the
price of your commodity compared with others—what you gain by our
loss—is not the effect of your exertions, but of ours, and not you
(cheers), but we ought to have it.” (Loud cheers.) They will say, “But
we bought our land as a property increasing in value, and the probable
increase was considered in the price.” Our answer to that is, “If you
are dissatisfied, give up the land (cheers); we will pay you back what
you gave for it, and even what you could have sold it for yesterday
morning. (No, no, and cheers.) That is all you have a right to; we give
you that, and the nation will gain the difference between the present
and future value.” It does not seem to me possible to contest the
justice of this arrangement, provided it can be made to work, but many
persons think that it would not work. They say it would be impossible to
ascertain the amount of the unearned increase of rent. It would be
impossible, if we attempted to cut too close. The amount could not be
ascertained within a few pounds.

But we do not want to attempt anything impracticable: neither do we wish
to be harsh. We are willing to leave an ample margin for mistakes; but
we demand the recognition of the principle, that a kind of property
which rises in value while other kinds remain stationary or fall, may
justly on that account, be subjected to special taxation. When it is
notorious that rents have increased, and are increasing, not Edition:
current; Page: [430] only where there has been improvement by the
landlord, but where there has been no improvement, or improvement solely
by the tenant, a tax which takes from the landlord no more than that
increase is within the just rights of the State. It might be necessary
to have a periodical valuation of the rental of the country, say once in
ten or once in twenty years. The landlords could easily keep a record of
their improvements. Let them retain all increase which they could show
to be of their own creating, make a fair allowance for any diminution of
the value of money, give them the benefit of every doubt, and lay on the
remainder as a tax to the State. If the country continues prosperous,
this tax would in time produce a considerable revenue, to the great
relief of the taxpayers; while any landlord who thought himself harshly
dealt with could avail himself of the option of resigning his land on
the terms originally offered—namely, at the price he could have obtained
for it before the introduction of the new system. (Cheers.)

This is our doctrine of the unearned increment, and you may depend on it
that the difficulties which people are afraid of would prove, when
fairly faced, to be little more than phantoms. The valuation of land for
purposes of taxation is the general practice of Europe; a re-valuation
is made occasionally everywhere, and periodically in the greater part of
British India. It would only remain to have a valuation of improvements,
fbut thisf is now acknowledged to be not only practicable, but
indispensable, as the basis of a just tenant right. There is nothing a
Government can do that does not look frightfully difficult, until we
consider how much more difficult things a Government already does. Every
attempt to apportion taxation fairly among the different members of the
community is as difficult and in its complete perfection as impossible
as what we propose. gItg is far easier than to make a just income-tax,
and would not give rise to anything like the same amount of unfairness
and fraud. (Hear, hear.)

Let us, then, with steady perseverance, continue to spread our
principles and we need have no fear that the seed will fall on barren
ground.10 (Cheers.) There are many circumstances at the present time to
encourage us, and the most encouraging of all, as it is the most
unexpected, is the awakening of the agricultural labourers. (Loud
cheers.) That most neglected, and, as it hhas hithertoh seemed, most
helpless portion of the labouring ipopulationi, has risen up, and has
found a voice, which can, and which will, make itself heard by the
makers of our laws. (Cheers.) No class has so direct an interest in the
reform of the land system as the farm labourers; it is on State lands
that they may hope to see the experiment tried, fairly and on a
sufficient scale, of the management of the farm by and for the hands
that till it. (Cheers.) For the first time, the Land Reformers have the
prospect of Edition: current; Page: [431] intelligent support from those
who would gain more than any one else by their success. The Agricultural
Labourers’ Union is a most important ally to us (hear, hear); and we, I
hope, shall be useful allies to them.11 Already they and we have worked
together at several public meetings, and we are working together
to-night. But whether there be concerted and organized co-operation or
not, whatever is gained by either is a gain to both. We may therefore
look forward with full confidence to a rapidly increasing success. (Loud
cheers.)

[The first resolution condemned the division of common lands among
landlords, and opposed the passing of Crown or public lands into private
hands, asserting that they should be administered for the general
interest and in particular for the labouring classes; it was passed
unanimously. A second, opposed to primogeniture, entail, and the system
of land transfer, was moved and an amendment in favour of
nationalization having failed to obtain a majority in the view of the
Chair (though some of its supporters disagreed) was approved. A third
resolution, favouring special taxation of any increase of rent not
resulting from labour or capital, was carried unanimously. A vote of
thanks to the Chair was carried with cheers as the meeting concluded.]

Edition: current; Page: [432]
[lf0223-29_figure_002.jpg]
“Poor Ireland”

Fun, 28 March, 1868, facing p. 28

Edition: current; Page: [433]


APPENDICES

Edition: current; Page: [434] Edition: current; Page: [435]


Appendix A


The Manuscripts

No. 40. The Westminster Election [2]. Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/12.
It consists of 4 sheets of writing paper, unwatermarked, folded and
placed sequentially to make 8 ff., 13.0 × 20.6 cm. Written recto and
verso to 7r; 7v and 8r and v blank. Untitled.

No. 50. Representation of the People [2]. Harvard University, MS ENG
1105. It consists of 5 sheets (unwatermarked blue French paper) folded
to make 10 ff.: ff. 1-4 and 9-10, 19.3 by 24.5 cm.; ff. 5-6, 20.3 by
25.1 cm.; ff. 7-8, 20.3 by 25.5 cm. Untitled, it is written recto only,
except for an insertion on 3v.

No. 67. The Disturbances in Jamaica. A fragment of the manuscript is in
Yale University Library, John Stuart Mill Papers, Box 2, MS #350. It
consists of the bottom part of a folio, torn across the top and on the
left, 20.4 by 12.2 cm., on unwatermarked blue French paper, untitled and
written recto only. “Unimp[ortant]” is written at the bottom of recto
and on verso in Helen Taylor’s hand, and someone has (correctly)
pencilled “[1866]” on the verso.

No. 178. Women’s Suffrage [1]. Mill-Taylor Collection, Vol. XLI, item 3,
ff. 38-47. It consists of 5 sheets (unwatermarked blue French paper),
folded to make 10 ff., 20.4 × 26.0 cm. Untitled, it is written recto
only, concluding on f. 10r, leaving the bottom 1/4 blank.

No. 179. The Education Bill. Houghton Library, Harvard University,
Autograph file A.MS. *49M-85, donated by Mrs. Norman Himes, 1949. It
consists of 3 sheets folded to make 6 ff., 20.3 by 25.5 cm., on
unwatermarked blue French paper, headed in Mill’s hand: “Speech at the
meeting of the Education League at St James’s Hall, March 25, 1870.”
Written recto only to 5v, except for insertion on 3v; 6r and v blank.

App. F. War and Peace. This fragment is in the Houghton Library, Harvard
University, Autograph file A.MS *49M-85, part of the Himes donation. It
consists of 2 sheets, folded to make 4 ff., 20.3 by 25.5 cm., on
unwatermarked blue French Edition: current; Page: [436] paper, untitled,
written recto only, with only one-half of 2r and two-thirds of 4r
covered. Though the fragment is in Mill’s hand, on 2r is written in
Helen Taylor’s hand, “H T. Febr 1871”; in fact the speech is hers.

Edition: current; Page: [437]


Appendix B


Questions before Committees of the House of Commons (1866, 1868)

Mill served on only two Select Committees, those on Metropolitan Local
Government (1866) and on Extradition (1868). In the following extracts
from the reports of the Committees, Mill’s questions are in roman type,
the responses in italic; the dates of sittings during which Mill asked
questions are given, with the numbers assigned to the questions. An
indication is given when Mill began the substantive questioning; in
these cases it appears the witnesses were “his.” Long responses to
Mill’s questions are summarized in italics within square brackets.
Discontinuities in Mill’s questioning are signalled by line spaces
followed where necessary by linking summaries in italics within square
brackets. In both these kinds of summary, the only footnotes are those
directly pertinent to Mill’s questions. Because answers often seem to
stray from the point, some responses will seem at least odd; the
summaries attempt to keep as close as possible to the apparent intent of
the questions.

The original numbers of the questions are retained to simplify reference
to PP. Though some questions are more properly assertions, the marks of
interrogation are retained to preserve the form.


I.: Select Committee on Metropolitan Local Government

“First Report from the Select Committee on Metropolitan Local
Government, etc.; together with the Proceedings of the Committee,
Minutes of Evidence, and Appendix” (16 Apr., 1866), PP, 1866, XIII,
171-315; “Second Report . . .” (30 July, 1866), ibid., 317-628. The
First Report covers the Committee’s meetings on 9, 12, 15, 19, and 22
March, and 12 and 16 April. (Mill was absent from the first of these, at
which no evidence was taken.) The Second Report covers the Committee’s
meetings on 23 and 26 April, 10, 14 (no quorum, Mill absent), and 28
May, 4, 7 (no quorum, Mill present), 11, 14, 18, 25, and 28 June, and 5,
9, 16, 19 (no quorum, Mill absent), 23, 26, and 29 July. Except as
indicated, Mill attended all the sessions.


FIRST REPORT

12 March, 1866

Sir John Thwaites

[The examination of Thwaites, the first witness, was begun by the
Chairman, Acton Smee Ayrton, who opened in the traditional way by
establishing the credentials of the witness and his view of the main
issues. The questioning turned Edition: current; Page: [438] to the
funding of the Board of Works generally, and then specifically to the
funding of the main drainage system, it being ascertained that the
expenditures on the main drains did not include costs of the new Thames
Embankment.]

56. The Embankment itself was constructed from a fund perfectly
independent of the 3d. rate?—Entirely.

57. What is the degree of progress which has been made in the Low Level
Sewer; is it only that part connected with the embankment which has not
yet been commenced, and is all the rest of the work in a tolerable
degree of progress?—Yes.

[Questioning continued on the Embankment, with reference to the limited
authority and resources of the Board.]

231. If I understand you aright there is a very small portion of the
land within the embankment which will be under the control of your
Board, and a very little of it upon which you can build, or of which you
can direct the disposal?—Yes.

232. How much of the ground within the embankment have you power
over?—For building purposes, I do not think that we have power over any.
Any spare land is to be planted and laid out ornamentally, for the
benefit of the public.

233. The Duke of Buccleuch,1 and any one else to whom the land has been
given up, have the power of building upon the land which has been given
up to them?—I do not think that there is any restriction. It is Crown
property. We have to give up the land, and, I suppose, build the wall
and lengthen the land in each case up to the ground to be reclaimed.

234. If the Duke of Buccleuch chooses to build upon the property given
up to him, he can do so?—It may be determined by the Crown, of which I
know nothing.

235. Then the question is whether the Crown, if they wish to lay it out
for pleasure ground for public resort, must pay to the Duke of Buccleuch
the value of it for building ground or otherwise?—The Duke of Buccleuch
is a lessee; the Crown is the ground landlord.

236. Will this land which is given up to the lessees come within the
lease; will they hold it on the same conditions as those upon which they
hold the other land, or will they hold it as absolute property?—I should
think that they will hold it upon similar conditions.

237. Then it will depend upon the provisions of their leases, whether
the Crown will require them to give it up without paying the full value
of it as building land?—I am unable to speak with certainty upon that
point; that will be governed by the agreement with the Crown.

238. The Dukes of Northumberland and Norfolk2 are not lessees; they are
proprietors, and therefore I presume that they will be proprietors of
the land which Edition: current; Page: [439] you give up to them?—We
give up no land; we are prohibited from taking any land or property
belonging to any of the proprietors named, but the land in front will
become dedicated to the public and will not belong to the adjoining
owners; it will be taken by the Board.

239. As respects your prolonging Norfolk-street and other streets, does
it extend to more than the roadway; have you power to prolong them as
streets with houses on both sides?—No.

15 March

John Thwaites, continued

[Questioning turned to the powers of the Board in relation to Crown
property.]

474. Looking at the property in the metropolis of this country, which is
in the hands of the Crown, and which it is admitted is only to be
adminstered by the Crown for the public benefit, do you think that it
should be regarded by the Crown as being held for one purpose only,
namely, to get the greatest amount of money from taxes, or for the
general purpose of public improvement?—That is rather a question for
Parliament than for our Board. I affirm with the greatest confidence
that there should be no distinction between the property of the Crown
and the property of private individuals. The tendency of this special
legislation, is that you are unable to take any of the property without
the consent of the Crown. If the effect of the improvement should be to
improve very largely the property, the Crown may interpose, and say,
“You shall take just so much as you require for the roadway, but we will
hold all the advantages and the profit,” and thus the Crown will realize
an advantage which a private individual will not; and that is the
mischief which we find in the working of the principle.

475. So that the Crown, as trustee of the nation for public purposes,
has a greater advantage than a private owner in a matter of public
improvement, whereas it ought rather to have less?—It ought not to have
more; that is quite clear.

[A number of issues having been raised, Mill started a new series of
questions on whether property taxes should fall on occupier or owner.]

661. I presume that the occupiers of rated property in the metropolis
mostly hold that property on the usual leases of 7, 14, or 21 years?—As
a rule, no doubt, some such agreement exists.

662. And, I fancy, that in most cases they hold under the covenants that
all taxation, even new taxation, and even what are considered as
landlord’s taxes, shall be borne by the occupier?—Yes.

663. So that during the currency of those leases any new local rate
falls upon the occupier?—Yes.

664. How would it be after the expiration of those leases; in your
opinion, would the burthen then be thrown upon the owners of the
houses?—Yes; unless the obligation were renewed by fresh covenants with
the fresh tenants.

Edition: current; Page: [440]
665. As regards the burthens which now fall upon the occupier during the
currency of his lease, do you not think that at the expiration of the
lease, in the grant of a new lease these burthens would be taken into
consideration in fixing the rent, so that the subsequent rent of that
property would be reduced to the extent of the increased burthens?—It is
so in theory, but it is not so in practice.

666. How do you account for that?—[After citing an example of unequal
agreements for house rentals, Thwaites concluded:] while it appears in
theory to be reasonable that the landlord would reduce the rents in
proportion to the obligation which he casts upon the tenant, it is not
so in practice, the tenant undertakes to bear those burthens, and in
point of fact pays those rates out of that which is part of his own
profit, and he does not get a proportionate reduction, in consequence of
the obligations under which he places himself by these covenants.

667. But do you not think that although particular tenants neglect the
needful care of their own interests in that respect, yet upon the whole,
when a person takes a lease of certain premises, he considers what he
can afford to pay, or what it is to his advantage to pay, and that if he
is of opinion that he is more heavily burthened than he would be in
another part of the town, he will require to pay less rent than he might
be content to pay if he lived elsewhere?—The question is not what he can
reasonably afford to pay, but what property of the same capacity, and
the same value will fetch; he may be paying out of what should be his
accumulating income.

668. If he is considering what house or premises he shall rent, and is
not taking into account the inconvenience of leaving the premises which
he already occupies, but is taking premises for the first time, will he
not calculate the whole of the annual cost devolving upon him from
taking those premises; and will he not, if the rates are heavier,
require that the rent shall be in the same proportion lower?—It is not
so much a question of individual calculation, as to whether the house
will serve the person’s purpose; that consideration may involve several
elements; first, it may be convenient for his trade and his connection,
and a variety of matters may induce him to give more than the market
value of the house; but in order to determine the question, we must
consider the fair value of the house for the purpose of ascertaining the
natural rent of the house.

669. Some persons in some businesses may be obliged to live in a
particular neighbourhood, and therefore may not have it in their power
to relieve themselves from heavy rates by taking any other house; is
that your meaning?—That frequently occurs, and as the result you have an
unnatural rent imposed upon the party, because he is unable, without
injury to his business or profession, to remove from that particular
locality, and hence occasionally landlords take advantage of tenants
under those circumstances, and charge an unnatural rent; that is to say,
a rent which the premises themselves would not command in the ordinary
market.

670. Supposing that the rates were suddenly reduced in that
neighbourhood, would not the landlord be able to take the same advantage
of the conveniences which the situation of the premises affords to a
person in that particular business, Edition: current; Page: [441] or to
persons in business in general, and thus add to the rent the amount
which would be saved by the reduction of the rates?—I am not able to
answer that question.

671. Even in those parishes which are most heavily rated, is it not the
fact that rent is constantly rising in the same manner as elsewhere; and
that after the expiration of any lease there is every chance that the
proprietor of a house in those parishes will be able to obtain a higher
rent for it than he has obtained before?—[After agreeing that the
general increase in value would benefit the owner, Thwaites argued that
an agreement by a tenant to pay the sewer rate in 1854 would entail
continuing to pay at an increased amount because that rate had come to
include the improvement, formation, and widening of streets, and
concluded by asking:] why should this large proprietor, who has entered
into a bargain with his tenant in 1854, have all those reversionary
advantages without contributing one shilling towards the improvement
which has been carried out?

672. Is it not your opinion, that notwithstanding any amount which might
be laid upon the occupiers for the purpose of defraying the expense of
any probable amount of metropolitan improvement, the rental of that
property progressively rises as it does elsewhere?—No doubt; and it
sometimes occurs that even a higher rent is demanded for a lease,
because the property is tied up, and the proprietor is deprived of the
gradual improvement of the property, supposing that he anticipates such
an improvement; but immediately the property is released from that
obligation, we assume that he realises the fair market value of that
property.

673. So that notwithstanding the great inequality of rates in regard to
parts of the metropolis, even in those parts where the rates are heavy,
the value of the property is still rising, quite independently of any
outlay of the proprietors themselves, but merely from the general
increase in the value of property in the metropolis?—It fluctuates from
time to time. I believe that just now property is increasing in value,
but there are times when the reverse is the case, and when property is
depressed.

674. Is not the general tendency of the improvements which are being
made, to increase the value of property?—No doubt the tendency in the
metropolis is in that direction, and especially in prosperous times the
result would be felt in a demand for property; and there is a greater
demand for property.

675. So that although an injury results from the amount of the rating in
particular parts of the metropolis, and although during the existence of
the leases the occupiers suffer because of the inequality of the rating,
yet the owners of the property in those heavily-rated districts gain an
advantage, not as the result of their own exertions, but from the
general circumstances of society; but it does not accrue to them quite
so fast as it does in other districts, and although the value of
property is increasing everywhere, yet it does not increase so rapidly
as in the districts which are low rated; is not that the amount of the
grievance?—No; I do not see how that affects the question which I have
raised. You have a general increased value of property arising from a
variety of causes; first, the increase of population, Edition: current;
Page: [442] and secondly the prosperous condition of trade; all these
things have a tendency to drive up the value of property, and the
reverse circumstances have a tendency to depress it; but that does not
touch the real question.

676. It is understood that this does not affect the question of the
incidence of the rate on the occupiers during the currency of leases,
and that during this time any new burthen imposed for metropolitan
improvement falls very unequally on different parts of the
metropolis—that is admitted; but after the leases have expired,
supposing that the burthen then comes upon the landlords, it of course
falls on them very unequally, but still the amount of what they really
suffer is not a loss, but merely that they do not gain quite so much
from the progress of society as landlords in other parts?—But we assume,
as a starting-point, that we have an equality of assessment.

677. I am referring to the state of things under the present system?—I
have already stated, and I repeat that statement, that I believe that
the metropolis is not properly assessed, and that great inequality
exists. I propose that that should be set right by some machinery, but
when set right, there would still be the difficulty left which I have
named.

678. To pass to another subject, namely, the manner in which the local
disbursements of Paris are regulated, is it not the fact that in the
other towns of France and in the Departments also, with the exception of
Paris, the municipalities or the departments are authorised to raise,
for municipal or departmental purposes, what are called centimes
additional; so much per cent. on the amount of the four direct
contributions which are raised for Imperial purposes in those
muncipalities or departments?—I believe so.

679. And a provision is included in the annual Budget of the State which
every year authorises the municipalities to raise, for municipal
purposes, a certain per-centage and no more, upon the amount of the
direct taxes of the municipality?—I believe so.

680. Therefore the advantage which Paris has in receiving a proportion
of the Imperial taxation for municipal purposes, is to a certain extent
shared by the whole of France?—I believe so.

19 March

John Thwaites, continued

[The questioning turned to local subventions by the central government,
and its liability to local taxation.]

927. Are you aware that by the French law, national property, and crown
property especially, of all sorts, is exempt from taxation to the
national account, but is subject to all local taxation?3—I so understand
it.

Edition: current; Page: [443]
928. Do you not think that that is a just distinction?—I think that it
is; if that property were not so exempted, it would be merely receiving
with one hand and paying with the other.

Thomas Henry Fry4

[Fry’s opinion was sought on the increased value of property bought (and
some re-sold) by the Coporation for the Holborn improvements. He
referred to the Corporation’s having based the increase in re-sale
values on a higher estimate than that in the purchase prices.]

985. It was calculated upon a continuously progressive rise in the value
of the property?—It has been so up to the present time; where it is to
stop, of course I cannot say.

William Corrie5

[Questioning centred on the right of the City of London to expend monies
raised by taxation for whatever purposes it wished.]

1124. Is it your theory that a public body can be authorised to levy a
tax, whether local or general, for their own benefit?—The Corporation of
the City of London have carried on various works from time to time, and
they have applied this money not for their own purposes, but for public
purposes.

1125. Do you think that it can be applied to any but public purposes?—As
a lawyer, I hold that the Corporation, if they are disposed so to do,
can apply it as they please. There is nothing to prevent them from doing
it, but it never has been done.

22 March, 1866

Benjamin Scott6

[The issue of expenditure by the City of its coal tax (4d. per ton),
raised during the examination of Corrie, again occupied the Committee’s
attention.]

1494. Was that duty of 4d. in the Port of London ever levied by the
Crown for its own benefit?—The Charter of James recites that the
Corporation had always possessed the right, and confirms the grant of
the 4d. duty.7 Therefore, the charter Edition: current; Page: [444]
assumes that the Crown had an ancient right from time immemorial, and
that it had been anciently granted to the City, and it confirms it in
the reign of James I, when there had been some dispute as to the rights
of the City and the Crown.

1495. But the Crown had never exercised the right for its own benefit,
had it?—Not within recent or modern times; but the grant assumes that it
was a right of the Crown in ancient times. I have the words of the
charter here, if the Committee like to see them.

1496. I presume that the Crown claimed a right to levy taxes at that
time without the consent of Parliament?—I think that at that time the
Crown did exercise its powers in a way in which they would not be
exercised now; but it is a right of property acquired in those times,
like all other property which has come down from those times.

1497. So that the Crown claimed a general right of property in a tax, of
which right of property it had never had the beneficial exercise within
the memory of man?—Not within recent times.

1498. So that it was by construction of a general prerogative of the
Crown, that it was supposed that what the Crown conceded or confirmed to
the Corporation had previously to that belonged to the Crown?—Yes; I
should state that Charles II seized the charter, and subsequently
exercised the right himself for several years; but that an Act of
Parliament was passed confirming all those charters to the City in the
reign of William and Mary, and stating that the City ought not to have
been interrupted in the enjoyment of those rights.8


SECOND REPORT

23 April

James Beal9

[After the Chairman had established Beal’s credentials, the questioning
was begun by Mill, who undoubtedly had arranged that Beal be a witness.]

1764. How long have you been a member of St. James’s vestry?—With a
brief exception, since the passing of Sir Benjamin Hall’s Act, the
Metropolis Local Management Act, in 1855.10

1765. I think the Metropolis Local Management Act transferred to the
vestries the separate powers vested in the separate local boards
previously to that time?—It did.

Edition: current; Page: [445]
1766. You have carefully watched the operation of the Act in the vestry
of which you are a member?—I have.

1767. How do you consider it has been carried out?—As a whole, very
imperfectly on the part of the elected authorities. If tested on the
question of their works, under the head of sewage, roads, and paving, I
think the sewage works entrusted to the vestries not under the control
of the Metropolitan Board of Works will be found to be in a most
defective state; and I believe their roads and paving to be equally
defective.

1779. Will you give a brief summary of the powers of local government
which are vested in the vestries under the Metropolis Local Management
Act; in short, the powers that they do actually exercise?—To them is
entrusted the lighting, paving, and cleansing of the streets, the local
sewerage, certain powers under the Diseases Prevention Act, and the
Metropolitan Gas Act of 1860, and the Adulteration of Food Act, some
powers under the Common Lodging House Act, and the general sanitary
regulations of the district committed to their care.11

1780. And the members of the vestry are selected by the ratepayers, are
they not?—Yes.

1781. Are they elected by plural voting or by single votes?—Single
votes.

1782. Of what class of persons do vestries generally, in your
experience, consist; are they different in different parishes?—As far as
our own is concerned, the majority are small tradesmen, in the back
streets of the parish. We are divided into four wards: Church Ward, Pall
Mall Ward, Marlborough-street Ward, and Golden-square Ward. In three out
of these four wards the members, as a whole, consist of small tradesmen;
Church Ward has some five or six leading men of the parish, but the rest
are men little known to the great body of the ratepayers. There are 50
vestrymen in our parish.

1783. The number is much larger in some parishes I believe?—Yes; in St.
George’s it is 120, in Marylebone 120; and their wards are of course
more numerous than ours.

1784. There is a great variety, I suppose, in the character of the
members of vestries in the different districts of the metropolis?—They
vary entirely with the character of the population of the district.

1785. How are these powers, in your experience, generally
administered?—Always with too great a regard to economy; efficiency is
always sacrificed to economy. If an Act of Parliament requires them to
do certain things, it is as a rule avoided. I refer especially to the
Sanitary Acts,12 to the Adulteration of Food Act, Edition: current;
Page: [446] and to the Metropolis Gas Act, in each of which cases the
powers entrusted to them have not been carried out.

1786. These are all permissive Acts?—In some sense permissive; but there
have been peremptory powers which have not been carried out by the
vestries, particularly in relation to the Metropolis Gas Act.

1787. Have the vestries any power in regard to the licensing of
public-houses?—They have not; that rests in the first place with the
magistrates of petty session, and by appeal to the magistrates in
quarter sessions in the county of Middlesex or other metropolitan
county.

1788. How is that power exercised?—We had reason to complain some years
since that licenses refused by our local magistrates were granted on
appeal by the Middlesex magistrates. It was fully gone into in my
evidence before the Committee in 1861, in reference to the Argyle Rooms,
and one or two other cases I then mentioned.13 Great objection exists on
our part to the Middlesex magistrates having that control. We believe it
is a matter which, if our local administration were more municipal,
should be entrusted to the local administration.

1789. In regard to the local magistracy, the magisterial powers are
divided, I believe, between the Middlesex magistrates, and the police
magistrates appointed by Government?—The criminal jurisdiction is in the
hands of the stipendiary magistrate appointed by Government; the civil
jurisdiction,—licensing slaughter-houses, cow-houses, public-houses, and
billiard-rooms, is in the hands of the magistrates in petty session, who
are appointed, I believe, by the Lord Lieutenant of the county.

1790. These powers you wish to have transferred to a municipal
administration for Westminster?—I should.

1791. Have you any remarks to make on the mode of election to the
Metropolitan Board?—I expressed my opinion in 1861,14 which subsequent
experience has confirmed, that the present mode of election is bad, and
that instead of being a filtration from the vestry, it should be direct
from the ratepayers. I think when our annual elections take place, the
inhabitants should elect their member to the Metropolitan Board at the
same time that they elect their members to the vestry.

1792. So that what you wish would be a municipal administration for the
different districts of the metropolis separately, and a general
administration elected like the others by the ratepayers, for the
administration of the affairs which concern the metropolis as a
whole?—Yes. My opinion is that the whole of the metropolis should be
divided into a series of municipalities, and that these municipalities
should be mainly co-extensive with the Parliamentary districts, as
Edition: current; Page: [447] proposed in the report of the
Commissioners reporting on the Corporation of the City of London,
1854;15 that where Parliamentary districts do not run, districts should
be assigned to them; that the local municipality should have the control
of all the works and powers now entrusted to the several vestries within
those districts; that from these there should be formed a metropolitan
council composed of members of the several local municipalities, to
whose hands should be entrusted the whole of the work now done by the
Metropolitan Board, the whole of the work now done in the metropolis by
the magistrates of Middlesex, Surrey, Kent, and Essex, much that is done
by the City of London, and (although it is perhaps idle to ask it) all
that is done by the Commissioners of Police; I think that should be
transferred to us as part of the legitimate local powers of the
municipality of the metropolis.

1793. In that case, you would transfer to the proposed metropolitan
council, some of the powers which are at present exercised by the City
Corporation within the jurisdiction?—The City is a county in itself, and
I would make the metropolis a county in itself, and all the special
powers which, as a county, the City exercises, I would transfer to the
general metropolitan council. The control of gaols, lunatic asylums, and
courts of justice, being special powers which the City exercises by
virtue of its being a county by itself, I would transfer to the general
municipality.

1794. Will you briefly recapitulate the powers that you would take from
the City and transfer to the metropolitan council?—It would preserve all
its own municipal action within its own boundary, but the control of
gaols, lunatic asylums, and bridges, wherein it acts as a county by
itself, would be transferred to the general municipality; it would be
reduced to one of a series or congeries of municipalities in the
metropolis.

1795. What would you have done with the fire brigade?—I would place it
under the general metropolitan council, as it has been already placed in
the hands of the Metropolitan Board.16

1796. And the water supply, so far as it is a municipal matter, would
devolve on the general body?—[After asserting that the gas companies
should come under the general municipal council, Beal continued:] As
regards water, I think that is a matter purely for municipal action. I
think that the Act of 1852,17 has not been carried out by a single
vestry, they are too weak to carry it out, and that the companies are
too powerful in the interests arrayed against the vestries, and that
only a large and powerful corporation can adequately represent the
public interest, and protect it in reference to the supply of water.

1797. There is another subject which has excited of late a great deal of
attention, namely, legislation with regard to the admission of railways
and railway stations Edition: current; Page: [448] into the metropolis.
That, so far as it was municipal, and not parliamentary, would, I
presume, devolve upon the central body?—Clearly. At present we are to a
certain extent represented by the Metropolitan Board, on the question of
the introduction of railways into the metropolis, but, I think, before
they are submitted to Parliament, as a rule, the local authorities
should express their opinion definitely, by a special report, like that
which the Board of Trade presents to the House, upon the advantages or
disadvantages which the lines of railway present in the district which
they represent.

1798. The Metropolitan Board of Works would be absorbed into the new
general municipality which you propose to create?—Yes, it would be
enlarged; it would be elevated; instead of being a semi-municipality,
which it is at the present moment, its character and tone would be
improved; its area would be the same, but its powers greatly increased.
Instead of being a mere Metropolitan Board for certain definite works,
it would be a metropolitan council representing the whole metropolis for
certain great ends, in which the interests of the whole people are
identical.

1799. In all probability, in the first instance, it would be composed in
a great degree of those who now compose it, in consequence of the
experience they have acquired, and the qualifications they have
shown?—Certain members of the Board would be sure to be returned, being
men of eminent qualifications, and deservedly enjoying the confidence of
their constituents.

1800. So that the plan is not at all brought forward in any spirit of
hostility either to the Metropolitan Board or to the City of London?—No,
in the interests only of the municipal principle, feeling that the whole
metropolis should have the same municipal powers as those which are
entrusted to Manchester, Liverpool, Glasgow, Dublin, and other large
towns in the kingdom, of which we are sadly deficient. I may add, that
our vestry has always been most anxious upon this question, and has
presented memorials to the Government. One of these was printed in the
Appendix to the Evidence in 1861,18 and since then, upon all occasions
where we could enforce our views, we have expressed them to Government,
that it was desirable that municipal powers should be extended to the
whole of the metropolis.

1801. Latterly, several other vestries have joined with you in this
movement?—Latterly, we had a meeting in consequence of a letter from Sir
George Grey to the Metropolitan Board, and we had delegates present from
St. James’s, Chelsea, Shoreditch, Clerkenwell, Camberwell, St. Pancras,
Lambeth, and other parishes in the metropolis; and they agree on a
report expressing their views in favour of the idea to which I have
directed your attention. That report I propose to hand in.*

Edition: current; Page: [449]
1802. Do you propose to interfere with any of the powers now exercised
by the boards of guardians?—We have not proposed that; but I think that
recent experience will support the opinion, that it would be desirable
to consolidate the management of the poor as well as the ordinary
municipal work under the same organization; that it should be entrusted
to the municipality; and that boards of guardians, like vestries, should
be consolidated; in fact, removed. They do not, as a general rule,
represent the intelligence or property of the constituents, and they are
nominated again by vestries; it is a filtration of power, and does not
come direct from the ratepayers.

1803. I presume that you would generally adopt the municipal districts
as poor law unions?—I would.

1804. The boards of guardians have had various powers entrusted to them,
chiefly because there were no other authorities to whom they could be
entrusted, by virtue of special Acts of Parliament; as in regard to
vaccination?19—[The authority lies in the wrong hands; it should be
given to the Registrar General. Then it would be possible to have
registration and subsequent following-up of every case, until
vaccination was completed.]

1805. You think that vestries are indifferent to making any use of the
powers entrusted to them by Act of Parliament, if they find that
increased expenditure would be necessary for the purpose?—I do, and I
will give you an instance. Ten years ago, I moved in our vestry for a
return of the bore, size, and state of repair of the sewers of the
parish. This was duly completed by the surveyor. He has occasionally
made urgent reports as to the disgraceful state of the sewage,
particularly in reference to Regent-street, a thoroughfare, of course,
in which every care should be taken that there should be perfection in
all our details; but it now appears that in consequence of past neglect,
we must lay out some £20,000 in the repair of our sewers, totally
independent of the sewers of the Metropolitan Board of Works, in that
street.

1806. The vestry is the only existing authority which has any power over
those sewers?—In our district, the only existing authority.

1807. So that, properly speaking, that very important part of the police
of the districts is entrusted to these numerous and small local
bodies?—Yes.

1808. Do you consider that there are any considerable disadvantages
attaching to the multitude of these authorities and the great
sub-division of jurisdiction?—In Westminster, the disadvantage is
greater than in any other portions of the metropolis. We have, with the
same population as the parish of Marylebone (not the borough),
collecting the same amount of rates, nine separate jurisdictions, while
Marylebone has only one; and it is a special defect in Westminster that
such is the case.

1809. There has been a good deal of mention made of the division of St.
Edition: current; Page: [450] James’s-street between two parishes, right
down the middle?—[There has been no resolution; as a result there are
such anomalies as that] in Piccadilly, from Burlington Arcade to the
corner of St. James’s-street, one side is macadamised, while the other
side is pitch-paved.

1815. I understand that the parish of Marylebone has a population equal
to that of Westminster?—All Westminster.

1816. And that parish has only one vestry. The whole local
administration of it, therefore, is in the hands of one body?—It is so.

1817. Have you any personal knowledge of the way in which the parish of
Marylebone is administered?—I only refer to it, presuming that it is
much the same as the rest of the metropolis, but I allude to it
especially as to the cost of government. With our nine jurisdictions we
pay £17,462 in salaries, whilst Marylebone pays £7,711 only, each of us
collecting in our own rates precisely the same amount of money.

1818. Is it within your knowledge that the local administration in
Marylebone is better than that of the separate districts of Westminster;
that the Acts of Parliament, for instance, are administered more
efficiently, and there is not the same reluctance shown to incur expense
for the purpose of carrying them into effect?—No; I presume the same
characteristics will be found generally throughout the metropolis.

1819. So that, in your opinion, the extent of a parish, of even the
largest parish in the metropolis, is not sufficient to remove the
circumstances which cause the imperfect working of the present local
administration?—I do not think size has anything to do with it. I think
there is no dignity conferred upon any individual by electing him as a
vestryman; consequently, the more respectable or propertied class
decline to share its burdens or its honours, if there be any; and, if a
total change was made and municipal institutions were introduced, we
should have a totally different class of persons seeking the suffrage of
the constituencies.

1820. You think that an enlargement of the district from the parish of
Marylebone to the Parliamentary district of Marylebone would be
sufficient to have that effect?—I do.

1825. Do the vestries of these separate parishes exercise any municipal
administration at all, or do they abdicate entirely in favour of the
board they elect?—They simply meet to elect the members of the municipal
board.

1826. What are the duties of their vestry clerks?—They are difficult to
define; they merely summon the vestry twice or three times a year, but
still a vestry clerk exists.

1827. They have powers, I believe, in connection with the parish
church?—No; that is a totally different thing. The meeting in the parish
church is summoned at Easter to elect churchwardens. It has no other
authority. It expires immediately.

Edition: current; Page: [451]
1828. Have they no powers in connection with the Poor Law
Administration?—No, that is entrusted to the board of guardians.

1829. So that they exist chiefly as electoral bodies?—Yes; electoral
colleges.

1830. It is a kind of second stage of election?—Yes; that only refers to
the small vestries, to which you have drawn my attention.

1831. Since there is so much reluctance to incur expense for enforcing
Acts of Parliament where there is any option, and even sometimes where
there is not; that would naturally make itself most of all felt, or in
no case more than in the case of the Sanitary Acts?—Clearly.

1832. What is your opinion as to that?—[In spite of his efforts, no
money is voted for measures pertaining to public health, just as none
was voted for the equipment necessary under the Metropolis Gas Act.
While the Adulteration of Food Act] has been nominally complied with
inasmuch as a person has been appointed, [he has not the means to carry
out his duties.] Both the Adulteration of Food Act and the Metropolitan
Gas Act are dead letters in our parish.

1833. Naturally if local officers of health find that their
recommendations are not attended to, they are not so much disposed to
make recommendations as they would otherwise be?—No. They checked the
zeal of our medical officer, Dr. Lankester,20 whose salary was £200.
a-year, by reducing it to £150. after a year or two when they found he
was very earnest in his work, since which time he has contented himself
with making a fortnightly report, and being less active in the discharge
of his duties.

1834. Will you give a general idea of the way in which you would compose
the municipal bodies for separate districts of the metropolis?—Do you
mean as to the qualifications of the council?

1835. All particulars that would be embodied in a Bill for the purpose,
so far as relates to the composition of those bodies?—A Bill has been
drafted based entirely upon the Municipal Reform Act general throughout
England. It was felt that the first step in the matter was simply to
confer upon the metropolis, if Parliament should think fit, municipal
powers; that no innovation should be attempted, but that the existing
powers should simply be applied to the metropolis.

[In reply to a question from the Chair, Beal indicated some of the
provisions of the Bill, including the suggestion of boroughs not based
on the parliamentary boroughs, such as the merging of Hammersmith,
Kensington, Fulham, and Chelsea, and forming a Borough of Bloomsbury out
of a portion of Marylebone, the Parish of St. Pancras, a part of
Finsbury, and all that district running through Holborn up to St.
Pancras.]21

Edition: current; Page: [452]
1837. What is the particular reason for interfering with existing
boundaries in that case?—Mr. Horton, who will be called, can thoroughly
explain it, and the chief of the Statistical Department of the
Registrar-General has also offered to give evidence. It was a suggestion
in reference to the performance of the duties of his office for the
purpose of obtaining accurate statistical details of each and every
district of the metropolis. Another suggestion was that the Borough of
Tower Hamlets should be divided into two for municipal purposes, called
the Borough of Hackney and the Borough of Tower Hamlets, the northern
portion of the borough and the southern.

1838. Has it occurred to you to include the West Ham district in the
Tower Hamlets previous to the sub-division, so as to make two boroughs
out of the Tower Hamlets and the West Ham district combined?—West Ham I
think is not within the metropolitan municipal district.

1839. But it is understood that that district wishes to be
included?—Powers should be conferred, I think, upon the outlying
parishes of the metropolis, enabling them by the vote of their own
parish and the adjoining district to form extended municipal districts,
as the growth and wealth of the district entitle them to those
advantages.

1840. Have you anything further to state about the contents of the
proposed Bill?—No, I think not; we propose to adhere exactly to the old
idea of a Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council; of course it would be
very easy to have suggested alterations or amendments, but we felt that
those would come better afterwards, so that we might not be charged with
any particular innovation in introducing the matter at present. We felt
it was desirable to be conservative in the matter, simply adhering to
existing Acts of Parliament, and clothing ourselves with existing
powers.

1841. You mean that there would be a mayor and aldermen for each
borough?—Yes; just as at Manchester and Salford, and Liverpool and
Birkenhead.

1842. Do you think that the existence of mayors and aldermen for the
separate districts would have a tendency to induce persons of a higher
class than the present vestrymen to accept office?—I do; I believe it
would clothe a man in the district with social distinction, and would be
an honourable object of ambition to fill the office of mayor of a large
wealthy district like Westminster, Southwark and Marylebone; equally so
that he should be an alderman of some district. I think that we should
get a class of men to take part in the municipal administration of
affairs who at present stand aloof.

1843. Is there not some difference of opinion whether the office of
alderman, for instance, in the metropolitan district, would be
attractive to a higher class of persons than those who at present
serve?—There is some difference of opinion about it, but I have taken
every precaution to make inquiries, and to ascertain the views of
others. I find that whilst it is looked upon as a sort of fifth wheel of
a coach, Edition: current; Page: [453] yet it is very desirable to have
it as a social distinction, conferring a mark of position to a certain
extent upon the man who is elected to the post.

1844. You will perhaps hand the Bill to the Committee?—Yes.†

1845. This I believe comprises only one-half of the plan, inasmuch as it
relates only to the separate municipalities, and says nothing about the
proposed general local government of the metropolis, and does not
interfere with the existing powers of the Board of Works, but leaves
them as they are?—The Metropolitan Board of Works and the City are
excluded from the first Bill, the object being simply to clothe the
metropolis with municipal powers.

1846. Therefore the remainder of your plan will be embodied in another
Bill?—In a second Bill, by which I propose to form a Metropolitan
Council. That is to say, extending and enlarging the Metropolitan Board,
and giving to it the whole powers of the Middlesex magistrates exercised
in the metropolis, and all powers of some 700 or 800 magistrates for the
several counties of Kent and Surrey.

1847. Do you expect that it will be ready in time to hand in to the
Committee?—Yes, I should think it would be ready within a fortnight.22

1848. Will you give us some idea, as complete as you can, of what would
be the contents of the other Bill?—[In addition to perpetuating all the
powers of the Metropolitan Board, it would extend them by adding all
those not given to minor municipalities, and all those of the Middlesex
magistrates over roads, bridges, gaols, and lunatic asylums. In addition
it would include courts of justice for the whole metropolis, with a
central court trying every case affecting inhabitants of the
municipality, and jury selection would be improved.]

1849. Licensing powers you mention that you do not include; I presume
you would leave them to the separate municipalities?—To the local
municipalities.

1850. The fire brigade, the water supply, and the arrangements as to
gas?—I should leave them all to the general municipality.

1851. Have you consulted with many persons with reference to those
plans, do they represent the opinions of any considerable body of
persons in the metropolis?—A very large, a very growing mass of persons
have expressed their perfect accord in the principles of the scheme,
whilst objecting to certain details. For instance, some of the electors
of Finsbury very strongly expressed a difference of opinion as to the
propriety of taking out any portion of that borough and creating a new
borough for municipal purposes, while we have no such intention as
regards parliamentary purposes. It is open to that objection, but we
felt that the Edition: current; Page: [454] scheme suggested had been so
thoroughly considered that it was worth while to ventilate it as we have
done.

1852. It is no essential part of your plan, even if it should not be
proceeded with?—It will not affect the general principle; it is simply a
detail.

1853. You were honorary secretary of the Gas Enquiry Committee in
1860?23—I was.

1854. That would give you considerable means of judging as to the action
of vestries other than you own?—[That position gave him experience of
the vestries’ failure to comply with the requirements of the resulting
Act, and persuaded him that a major change was needed in governance of
the metropolis.]

1855. Do you think that the failure of the vestries is most to be
ascribed to inattention, or to a false economy, or to the inferior
calibre of the persons composing the vestries?—To the inferior calibre
of the persons composing the vestries; they agree to resolutions but do
not carry them out. I could present you with a series of resolutions,
that I proposed to put in force in 1860, which were carried, but from
that hour to this nothing whatever has been done in reference to them.
It was after the Act had passed, and feeling that we should meet the
Companies at once upon the best possible terms, that I endeavoured to
secure all the benefits which the Act proposed, and the resolutions were
carried, but nothing has been done.

1856. In such numerous bodies as vestries I presume the attendance is
not very constant on the part of most members?—No. A little patronage to
be given away would secure very large attendances of the vestry, but the
discussion of a very important question, unless affecting some local
interest, would make no difference whatever. The ordinary attendance
would be limited to perhaps 18 or 16, or 15 out of the 60.

1857. Are those 15 or 18 usually the same persons, or do they
vary?—Nearly the same persons. There may be slight varieties, so that in
the course of the year one man has his name down three or four times,
and another five times, but substantially the same persons attend.

1858. So that the powers of the vestry, although nominally exercised by
a considerable number, really reside in a comparatively small number,
who are not specially responsible for the power which they thus
exercise?—That is true. The men who have the most leisure are the men
who attend. The busy men, like the tradesmen in Regent-street and
Piccadilly, cannot give the time, or they object to the interminable
discussions which take place. They go away and take no part in the
business.

1859. Probably, then, those members of the vestry in whom the ratepayers
would have the most confidence are those who really interfere least in
the administration?—That is a fact.

Edition: current; Page: [455]
1860. You gave evidence before the Committee on Metropolitan Taxation
some years ago?—In 1861.24

1861. To the same effect as the present?—Yes.

1862. The main principles of your scheme you started then?—I did.

1863. Has any change taken place in your views since?—I have seen no
reason to change my opinions.

1864. Naturally your scheme is more matured?—Yes; my opinion has grown,
and it has become matured in my mind as a thing I think essential to the
government of London.

1865. Turning to the subject of the Railway Bills, how do you consider
that the vestries on the one hand, and the Metropolitan Board on the
other, carry out that part of their duties which relate to Railway
Bills?—[The moot question as to their right to use rates for the
employment of counsel to represent municipal interests concerning
railways should be resolved, so that London could do what Liverpool and
Manchester already can do.]

1866. In most questions vestries could not be expected to take an
enlarged view of the subject. For instance, with regard to Metropolitan
Railways where the interest of the metropolis has to be considered, or
at any rate a large portion of it. But if there were a general
metropolitan Board and municipality for the whole metropolis, you would
say that all railway schemes affecting the metropolis should be
regularly reported on by that Board before they could be introduced into
Parliament?—[The Metropolitan Board or Council should have the authority
necessary to care for the general interests of the populace.]

1867. What are the advantages, in a financial point of view, that you
think would arise from the consolidation of the present small division
into a large one?—Take the illustration which I have given of the
salaries in Marylebone with one local action, and those in Westminster,
with several, and the enormous extra expense in Westminster compared
with Marylebone, my belief is, a large saving in expenditure would
result from the consolidation of the several vestries in the metropolis.
A great reduction in salaries; and, I believe, an improved system of
collection of rates could be inaugurated if greater power were exercised
in the matter.

1868. Is there not a large portion of the business of local
administration anywhere, especially in so great a body as a metropolis,
which requires individual responsibility and which can only be done
effectually by paid officers, who, therefore, can only be expected to do
it over a considerable district, because it is impossible to pay
properly qualified officers for small districts?—That is one of the
important points on which I think large advantages would accrue to the
whole metropolis by the proposed scheme. For instance, we pay our
surveyor £200 a year for a small district, and give him the right to
practice on his own account. But Edition: current; Page: [456] if he had
a large district we could afford to elect a much more eminent man; I do
not say one who is more qualified to the performance of his duties, but
one having a larger reputation, and in whom greater public confidence
would be placed.

1869. Do you not think that the function of municipal bodies, whether
called vestries or on a larger scale, is similar rather to that of
Parliament in the general administration, than that of the Ministers of
the Crown, and that the local administration should consist of a popular
body, which is elected, and paid officers, who should be nominated, but
for whom the money should be supplied and the salaries voted entirely by
the representative body? Is not that your opinion?—I believe that is the
perfection of municipal government.

1870. And, in the nature of the case, that can only be obtained when the
body that nominates and the constituency that pays those officers are on
rather a large scale?—Yes.

1871. Extending over a wide area?—The bill which has been drawn up
refers to a considerable number of other Acts which give separate powers
to local bodies, all of which are proposed to be exercised by the new
municipalities.

1872. I presume you have already given in substance all the knowledge we
need have of the contents of those Acts?—I think we give in a marginal
schedule every Act proposed to be incorporated, commencing with the
Municipal Reform Act of 1835, the 5 & 6 William IV, including all the
amendments of that Act. In reference to granting licenses to innkeepers
and so on, we recite the other licensing Acts and incorporate them where
requisite. As regards the powers of the vestries, the Act simply recites
the 18 & 19 Victoria, the Metropolis Local Management Act, and all the
amendments of that Act. We merely take the powers which we have; only
plus that we give to the municipality the common law powers which a
municipality exercises for the good of a large district.

[The questioning turned to the proper and present qualifications of
municipal representatives.]

2006. Does it often happen that a person whose qualification is derived
from a house which is let out in lodgings is elected as a vestryman?—Not
often; I believe, as a rule, they occupy the houses for which they are
rated.

[The Chair raised the question of changing the arrangements for
commissions of the peace.]

2050. The powers of the justice of the peace are of two kinds, judicial
and administrative. Is there any reason, when the proposed
municipalities are constituted, why the administrative powers which now
fall on the justices of the peace should not entirely devolve on the
corporation; is there any reason why the two functions should not be
separated?—The suggestion is that they should be separated, giving the
administrative powers to the Metropolitan General Council, Edition:
current; Page: [457] and the judicial to the stipendiary magistrates or
the magistrates for the peace nominated to the district.

2051. So that everything relating to licensing and other administrative
business now done by magistrates, also voting for the county rates,
would devolve on the bodies that would represent the metropolis?—The
county rate would go, I presume, to the metropolitan council, and the
question of licenses would go to the borough justices.

2052. So that there would only remain judicial powers to be exercised by
the magistrates?—Only judicial powers.

2053. Would it be at all necessary to have any other power for that
purpose than that which is already exercised, with some extension, if
necessary, by the Central Criminal Court; or does the Central Criminal
Court not descend low enough?—In the second bill we should suggest
modifications, but that would be the main court, the court virtually for
the metropolis.

2054. I believe the court now comprehends, besides two of Her Majesty’s
judges, a recorder and magistrates in the commission of the peace?—Yes.

2055. That function would be reserved for the justices of the peace in
the new local bodies?—Yes.

2056. To exercise judicial powers, as now, in conjunction with the two
judges and the recorder?—Clearly.

2057. And the duties at present exercised, for instance, by the sessions
at Clerkenwell would cease?—They would cease.

2058. So far as regards the metropolis?—Yes; that is a part of the
function of the Middlesex magistrates within the metropolis with which
we are finding fault.

[The Chair began a series of questions about the savings in costs of
collecting rates expected in the City of Westminster through the
centralization that Beal was advocating; the exchange then turned to the
probability of more lavish expenditures if those elected in Westminster
began to behave like the mayor and aldermen of the City of London, which
had great resources not deriving from rates.]

2076. If anybody would make a present of great Irish estates to the
Corporation of Westminster, I suppose there would be no objection to
their giving grand dinners on the 9th of November25 or some other
day?—Just so; or if we had the estates of the Corporation of London
handed over to us.26

[The questioning settled on the disproportionate number of vestrymen of
a Edition: current; Page: [458] superior class willing to serve in St.
George’s, Hanover Square, as compared to St. James’s. Beal affirmed that
the difference reflected the social composition of the areas.]

2099. Do we understand that in Marylebone also there are a greater
number than the average of persons of superior position willing to serve
in the vestry?—Not to the same extent as in St. George’s; St. George’s
is a great exception to the metropolis, the superior class forming a
good proportion of the whole vestry.

[Beal affirmed strongly that party politics had no bearing on the local
elections, and would not have if they were, as he wished, held
annually.]

2111. Is it not understood that a number of the old Corporation have a
considerable amount of patronage vested in them, and the administration
of a good many charities, by means of which it is understood that the
circumstance of Liberals or Conservatives being in the Corporation may
give them influence which may be exercised in the election of Members of
Parliament?—I have no actual knowledge of it, but I am perfectly aware
that it is so, as a matter of general report and information; that large
funds are at the disposal of members of a corporation, and that that
circumstance does materially influence the result of an election.

2112. Is it understood that that is the reason why the elections of
municipal councils in the provinces often assume a political
character?—I do not know that it so largely influences them as to be the
main element; there are errors, no doubt, which crop up out of that
system of doling out relief to partisans. I think it is very
objectionable, but I do not think it mainly influences the contest.

2113. In any case, the municipalities would not have patronage or powers
of that description, and therefore to that extent there would not be the
same motive to introduce political feelings into the municipal
elections?—It would exist only to a minor extent; in most parishes in
the metropolis we have charities administered by the vestrymen, and
these would be assigned to the municipality. We have in our parish, for
instance, a fund which we distribute yearly at Christmas to 20 decayed
tradespeople, £15 each, and matters of that sort, but certainly not to
the extent I have heard of in some provincial towns.

2114. If necessary, that patronage could be left with the vestries,
could it not?—I do not think it would be desirable; I think we should
hand it over to the municipalities; possibly they could suggest some
better mode of administration.

2115. Or the Charity Commissioners?27—Yes.

[The Chair raised the issue of competing “dignity” between the local and
central authorities under Beal’s scheme. Beal having affirmed that the
metropolitan would have more dignity, the Chair asked how that could be
so if, say, the Edition: current; Page: [459] Duke of Buccleuch were
Mayor of Westminster. Beal replied that his being a duke would not add
to his greatness as mayor.]

2126. Would not the Duke of Buccleuch, or any other person of his
position, rather seek to be a member of the central than the local
board?—I think so.

[After looking at the analogy of the City of London and its wards with
the proposed arrangements, the Chair asked (Q 2142) whether the central
council “should have a very large and predominant influence and power
over the districts.” Beal replied that it “would necessarily have a
predominant influence, but not legislative; each of the municipalities
would preserve its local power intact. . . .”]

2143. Do you not think that very considerable, or perhaps the greater
part of the duties of local municipalities would consist in managing
details in matters of which the principles would be laid down by the
central body?—No; I think the principle would be that the local bodies
would be simply attached to and interested in local details; and that
the general body would have, upon larger lines, as it were, the same
duties to perform. I think the greater body would be an example to the
lesser. I think if we found that they had higher administrative ability,
and gave greater attention to details, we should be constantly learning
from them.

2144. To explain what I mean; assume that the general drainage of the
metropolis, the arterial drainage, would be under the management of the
central body, do you think that the local sewers like those which the
vestries manage now, and which would necessarily be in connection with
the general system, ought to be managed exclusively by the local bodies
without any authority exercised by the central body over them?—No, I
think that upon all occasions, in order to have a unity of system as to
drainage, any detail about to be carried out by the local administration
should be submitted to the administration in chief.

2145. Would not that apply also in a great degree to such questions as
gas and water supply?—That I would leave to the chief municipality only,
not to the district.

26 April

William Farr28

2163. You assisted the Registrar General in taking the census of great
Britain in 1851, and the census of England and Wales in 1861?29—I did.

2164. You had occasion to observe the multiplicity of territorial
sub-divisions in the metropolis, made without any reference to one
another?—I did.

2165. What is your opinion on the consequences of that; is it attended
with inconveniences?—[The massive difficulties were commented on in
their Census Edition: current; Page: [460] Report to the Secretary of
State, in which they called attention to the great benefits to be
anticipated from a uniform system of divisions.]

2166. In regard to the metropolis especially?—That holds especially with
regard to the metropolis; the sub-divisions of the metropolis are shown
clearly in Mr. Horton’s interesting pamphlet;30 they are as inconvenient
as any that we met with in any part of the country; I believe their
inconveniences are felt more perhaps in these large cities than they are
in the country.

2167. The divisions being so numerous, of course very few of them
coincide with any historical boundary?—Very few; they are based chiefly
on the parishes, if we except the City of London and the City of
Westminster; the parishes round the City of London and the City of
Westminster grew up and became populous, and no notice seems to have
been taken of that great fact, which has raised the population from
100,000 to 3,000,000; so that London is left, as regards its local
government, almost in the state in which it was when all the parishes
round the City consisted of a few scattered houses.

2168. When anything new has to be done, a new division is made for that
separate purpose only, instead of one division that would serve for all
purposes?—That appears to be the case; in every new Act of Parliament
the thing to be done is looked at without any reference to the other
things done or to the convenience of the general administration of the
metropolis.

2169. What do you consider to be the conveniences and inconveniences of
the present variety of boundaries in London?—[The only convenience is
that the different bodies who make divisions for special purposes
presumably have those purposes served. The many inconveniences deriving
from not being able to base statistical analysis on comparable bases may
be seen in the frustrated attempts to study the relations of morality
and poverty, and disease and crime.]

2170. Do any of these inconveniences relate particularly to the
municipal administration of the metropolis; would it be possible to
divide the metropolis in a convenient manner for statistical purposes
without dividing it in the same manner for municipal?—It appears to me
that for administrative purposes it would be very desirable to arrange
the metropolis in a certain number of divisions, which would be
convenient for administration, so that you might be able to employ
competent persons to discharge the various offices that the municipality
might wish to see filled.

2171. So that the facts wanted for statistical purposes would be
accessible to officers within the same boundaries within which they were
wanted for administrative purposes?—Certainly.

2172. It would be convenient that the municipal divisions should be such
as Edition: current; Page: [461] would be most convenient for
statistical purposes also?—It is very desirable for administrative
purposes that you should thoroughly understand the constitution, wants,
and condition of the district; and unless you make the divisions
coincide, that appears to me to be impossible.

2173. Do you think that the Parliamentary and municipal boundaries
should be co-extensive?—I do. It appears to me to be an old part of our
constitution, that the different bodies associated for common purposes
should also be associated for the purpose of sending Members to
represent them in Parliament.

2174. Do you think that the boundaries of the present Parliamentary
districts would be those most convenient for municipal and statistical
purposes, or that they would require modification?—They would require
extensive modification all through the country. Since the Reform Bill
great changes have taken place in the population of the country. Nearly
all our large towns, and that is especially true of London, have had
great accessions of population, which have been deposited irregularly
around their Parliamentary area.

2175. And that is no less true of the metropolis than of other towns?—It
is especially true of the metropolis.

2176. That is, supposing Parliament were to adopt boundaries for
municipal and statistical purposes that did not exactly coincide with
the present Parliamentary boundaries, you think that the Parliamentary
districts should be modified so as to correspond with them?—It strikes
me that would be convenient and proper, and quite in conformity with the
general principles of the constitution of the country.

2177. In the Act for the local management of the metropolis, called
“Lord Llanover’s Act,” these different considerations were not regarded
at all?—Lord Llanover, I think, proceeded on the principle of
maintaining the existing organisation and boundaries of the metropolis.
That was essentially a parochial organisation. It originated as a
parochial organisation, and it is not, in my opinion, fit for all the
great purposes of municipal government. Lord Llanover, I suppose,
adopted that basis because it existed at that time, and it would have
been probably rather difficult to alter it.

2178. In what respects do you think that the practical administration of
the metropolis is unfavourably affected by this want of organisation as
to the boundaries of the different authorities?—That is a question which
I have not fully considered; so that my opinion, I fear, would be of
little importance; but, looking at it on general principles, and with
the knowledge I have of the general divisions of this country and of
other countries, I should say if you divide London, as Mr. Horton has
proposed in his pamphlet, into 10 or 11 great divisions, and make those
divisions municipalities, and endow them with all the powers which a
municipal organisation possesses in the large boroughs of the country,
you would get a much better administrative organisation than exists now.

2179. In what respect do you think it would be better; that the
municipal authority would be more conveniently exercised, or that the
municipal bodies Edition: current; Page: [462] would be better
composed?—It appears to me that the municipal bodies would be better
composed, and have a better organisation for the execution of municipal
duties; they would be able to appoint and pay competent persons to
discharge the several duties required, such as surveyors, health
officers, and the various officers that are required in municipal
boroughs. The present multiplicity of the districts of the metropolis,
many of them obscure and never heard of, withdraws them almost entirely
from public observation. What a man does in the vestry in Bermondsey, or
Stepney, or some of the other districts of the metropolis, is never
heard of; so that there is really no responsibility to the great body of
the metropolis; and in consequence our streets, and other things that
fall within our observation, are in a very disgraceful state.

2180. Are you able to speak of the different departments of the
administration of the metropolis at present, as to the imperfections of
any of them?—I would rather not pretend to do that. I think I should not
be able to give the Committee any information on that subject so
valuable as many other gentlemen could give, who will no doubt appear
before it. I merely speak to the general facts.

2181. You have a favourable opinion of Mr. Horton’s plan, contained in
his pamphlet, for the redivision and re-organisation of the
administration of the metropolis?31—I might mention that when Mr. Horton
first placed his pamphlet in my hands I read it carefully through, and
was very much struck with it. It preserves the old historical traditions
of the metropolis contained in the City of London and the City of
Westminster as they stood in the history of the country; and it suggests
one way, at any rate, in which the rest of the metropolis might be
organised and brought into conformity with these old existing portions.

2182. Do you think that there should be one municipality for the whole
metropolis, or that there should be separate municipalities for the
different parts?—[One, as in Paris, no matter what it is called, is
needed for such necessarily coordinated measures as drainage.]

2183. Then you would propose, as Mr. Horton does, that there should be
municipalities for the different districts of the metropolis, which
should take charge of those duties which are peculiar to the districts,
and also of that part of the general duties which cannot conveniently be
discharged by the Central Board, as in the case of these subordinate
sewers which, as you have observed, are necessary to the utility of the
greater sewers?—That appears to me to be a convenient arrangement. These
organisations would naturally take the place of the present district
boards, and I think would discharge the duties which devolve on those
boards much more effectively.

2184. Do you think that the present imperfect organisation is injurious
in its effects on the administration of the sanitary Acts?—[Much more
should be done to Edition: current; Page: [463] improve the health of
the population. While the impetus must come from the workingmen of
London, the municipal authorities alone can deal with the water supply
and sewage.]

[The companies responsible for supplying contaminated Thames water were
identified as those of Southwark, Chelsea, and Lambeth.]

2186. That has been remedied?—That has been remedied under an Act of
Parliament,32 after an inquiry before a Committee of the House of
Commons, and in consequence the health of those districts has been
improved. I merely cite it to show that although much depends on the
householders of London, much also depends on the municipal organisation
of London.

2187. Do you think that the water supply of London is a matter for which
some public body ought to be responsible?—I am of that opinion.

2188. Do you think that the powers in regard to water supply should rest
with the general municipal body for all London, or with the separate
municipalities of the districts?—I think they should rest with the
central body in which all the municipalities would be represented.

2189. You would probably have the same opinion about the gas supply?—I
am not so sure about gas, I have not thought of that.

2190. With regard to such subjects as the admission of railways into the
metropolis?—I think that should be dealt with by the central body,
clearly.

2191. That central body would be the adviser of Parliament in the
matter; or would you have it disposed of by the central body relieving
Parliament from the duty?—I think you could not forcibly take the
property of individuals without coming to Parliament.

2192. Then, you would have all such schemes considered and reported on
by the general municipality of London before they were submitted to
Parliament?—It would be exceedingly desirable, and I think Parliament
would find great assistance in such reports from the engineers and
surveyors of the central body.

2193. Have you any remarks to make on the Poor-Law administration as
connected with this subject?—[The ratio of rich to poor is very
different in parts of the metropolis, and the regulations are such that
the rating is very unequal, with the higher burden falling on those less
able to pay.]

2194. Should you think it desirable to give to the new municipalities
any powers in regard to the administration of the Poor Law?—I think it
would be convenient and very desirable, that the relief of the poor of
the metropolis should be placed in the hands of municipal bodies.

2195. The municipalities would become the boards of guardians under the
Poor Law?—They might appoint committees, as some of the present vestries
do, for the special management of the poor, but I am decidedly of
opinion that it would be desirable to consolidate the Poor-Law
administration of the metropolis.

Edition: current; Page: [464]
2196. It has been suggested that each of the municipal districts should
be a Poor Law union; is that your opinion?—My opinion is perhaps not
worth much, but I should say, on general principles, that it would be
very desirable.

2197. Supposing that to be done, having reference to the Act lately
passed for union rating, whereby the rating would become equal over each
union,33 would that materially affect the inequality of rating that you
have been pointing out, as regards the different parts of the metropolis
generally?—I have well considered that part of the subject, and am quite
persuaded that the rating for the relief of the poor should be equally
distributed over the whole property of the metropolis.

2198. But supposing that were not done, should you think that the mere
equalising the rate over each of the municipal districts, which in the
present state of the law would necessarily follow if it were constituted
a union, would make a material difference in the present
inequality?—That would be easily determined. I am afraid it would not
make so much difference as would be desirable. The poorest districts
would be generally grouped together, but, so far as it went, it would no
doubt be a move in the right direction.

[In Marylebone the vestry, under a Local Act, appoints guardians for the
Poor Law.]

2204. There is one committee for the whole of their Poor Law duty?—Yes;
I could easily get the exact information for the Committee if they
desire.

2205. I should like to hear what your idea would be of an administration
of the Poor Law by the municipal bodies. Would you make them collect the
rates?—They would collect the poor rates as they would the others, by
some general arrangement. It would not be convenient to collect
different rates for different purposes; one general rate should be
raised for all purposes.

2206. You would make them responsible to a general municipal council, if
I may so call it, in the nature of the Metropolitan Board of Works; a
superior tribunal or body of that kind?—That would be a detail which it
would be necessary to consider carefully, that is, to determine exactly
how far the central body should go and where it should stop.

2207. But as there are strong reasons for having a general rate, and a
uniform system of relief for the whole metropolis, it is very important
to have every suggestion for carrying that out?—Certainly.

2208. You think it might be done by the municipal bodies collecting the
rate, and then delegating to the committees the administration of the
relief?—The administration I should apprehend would be done by paid
officers. It is quite clear that such a great work as that could only be
done effectively by employing the best men you could get, and paying
them. The committee would simply superintend and see that those officers
did their duty.

Edition: current; Page: [465]
2209. They would be in the nature of relieving officers of a superior
class?—Certainly.

2210. You mentioned that you thought that the want of health and the
high rate of mortality arose in a great measure in different districts
from the poverty of the inhabitants?—Partly from the poverty.

2211. But does it not also in a great measure arise from the crowded
state of those districts?—That is, I think, also a consequence partly of
the poverty.

2212. You are well aware that the poorer districts are the most
crowded?—Yes, I show exactly the effect of the density of population in
increasing the mortality.34

2213. And you think that relief would be afforded by a general rate over
the whole metropolis for the relief of the poor?—Yes.

2214. They would pay less, and the richer districts would pay more?—At
present your rate is necessarily limited by the means of the people who
pay the rate; and if your rate was equally distributed over the rich
districts and the poor, it would lighten the pressure on the poor
districts, while it would not oppress the rich.

2215. Has it ever occurred to you whether there might be a sort of
financial body for the purpose of administering relief?—It would be very
desirable to have a finance committee, I should think, as part of the
business arrangements.

2216. And for that committee to distribute certain contributions to the
committees under them for the purposes of relief; did it ever occur to
you that that might be carried out?—That had not occurred to me; I
should not say it was not desirable on that account; I have not thought
of it.

2217. You are aware that these committees in their different districts
are better acquainted with the poor than any concentrated municipal body
could be?—I should think they would probably be better acquainted with
the peculiar circumstances of the poor of their own district than a
central body would be.

[After more discussion of equal rating, the questioning returned to
pollution of the Thames, instances being cited of problems connected
with sewage being emptied into the Thames above London. Farr asserted
that the same protection as was adopted in the metropolis should be
provided for the length of the Thames.]

2240. That, however, could hardly be done by the metropolitan
authorities; it would require some authority that could be exercised
over the whole of the Thames?—Certainly.

[The witness mentioned houses unfit for habitation, because of
structural Edition: current; Page: [466] defects and insufficient
conveniences, in St. Giles’s, the Strand Union, Marylebone, Lambeth, and
Southwark.]

2381. Are they not sometimes built back to back, so that there is no
proper ventilation?—Yes, they are built back to back in some instances.

[The questioning on ventilation continued.]

2396. Does not Dr. Arnott’s ventilator, on a principle similar to that
of Jeffreys’ respirator,35 enable you to get rid of the foul air,
without losing the heat?—That is a good arrangement. I have adopted it
myself, carrying the gas through the central tube, and admitting cold
air through the tube that surrounds the other.

2397. The hot air going out warms the cold air coming in?—Yes.

2423. To return to the subject of a subdivision of the metropolis, would
you prefer having one and the same division for all purposes rather than
a separate division, as at present, for each of the separate
purposes?—[There should be one system of division, with five levels of
sub-division; the French model, with departments, arrondissements,
cantons, and communes is good, but in England a further level at the
top, into provinces, is desirable.]

2424. I think I understood you to say that one of the strongest reasons
for having only one division for all purposes, is that in that case the
same set of officers could take charge of all or many of the different
duties, whereas if you had different districts for each kind of duty you
would need a different set of local officers for each?—Yes; that would
be a question of economy.

2425. That is a consideration not likely to occur to the officers at the
head of these special duties. They, only thinking of their special
duties, if they find a division that is convenient for that purpose,
would not be likely to consider any convenience that would require them
to have before their minds other duties as well as their own?—Certainly.
If all the heads of the departments to which the Honourable Chairman
referred were brought together in a room like this, and if they said,
“Let us consider whether we can arrange that the same district shall
serve for all purposes:” I have no doubt they would make some general
arrangement which would suit nearly all purposes of administration.

2426. And the convenience arising from having only one set of officers
for all the various duties, would be only likely to occur to them if
they were brought together, and would not be likely to operate as a
motive on each of them separately?—In that way the evil has arisen: each
officer sits in his own room and considers the case before him. If all
the heads of departments were brought together and asked by this
Committee to consider whether they could not make Edition: current;
Page: [467] several subdivisions of the metropolis serve for nearly all
purposes, I have no doubt that those eminent men would be able to agree
on a general subdivision of the metropolis.

2427. Then, for statistical purposes, I understand you to say that you
consider it of importance that the different kinds of statistical facts
should be obtained for the same circumscription, in order that they may
be of use for the purpose of comparison?—It is indispensable for the
purpose of reasoning, and for the purpose of direction in
administration.

2428. Therefore, that is an additional reason for having the same
district for all the different classes of facts?—Certainly.

2429. Then, with regard to the desirability of obtaining a superior
class of persons as members of municipal councils, I think the reason
why you are of opinion that this would be obtained better under the
proposed municipal system than under the present is twofold; you think
that the motive which would induce a superior class of persons to come
forward would be, first, the greater importance of the office, the
greater importance that they would attach to the duty itself, owing to
the concentration of a number of different districts into one; and, in
the second place, the greater publicity to which they would be subject,
being more in the public eye, so that they would get more credit for
doing their work well, and greater discredit for doing it
ill?—Certainly; there would then be real responsibility. The public eye
would be directed to all these scenes of action; and would control them.

George Horton

[After the Chair’s identifying question, Mill began the interrogation.]

2443. You last year published a pamphlet on the municipal government of
the metropolis, which attracted a great deal of attention?—Yes.

2444. What did you propose in that pamphlet?—I proposed to divide the
metropolis into 11 boroughs and 99 wards, taking the metropolis as
defined in the bills of mortality.

2445. Does that include everything that you think it desirable to
include?—No; I think it should include the hamlet of Penge, as that is
included in the Metropolis Local Management Act.

2446. Are you acquainted with the provisions of the Bill that has been
handed in to the Committee; do the divisions in the Bill coincide with
those proposed in your pamphlet?—Almost exactly; it proposes to leave
the City of London as it is; I merely proposed a few alterations to
round off the boundaries.

2447. Neither in your plan nor in the Bill are the boundaries or
districts adopted exactly coincident with the Parliamentary districts;
what is the reason of that?—The existing Parliamentary boroughs do not
seem to offer a suitable basis for a permanent arrangement, because, in
the first place, there is a great inequality in the population in these
various boroughs; the population of the Tower Edition: current; Page:
[468] Hamlets, for instance, is 647,000, according to the census of
1861, while that of Greenwich is only 139,000; secondly, the
Parliamentary boroughs do not include the whole metropolis; there are
certain parishes in Middlesex, Kent, and Surrey which are excluded, and
they contain altogether a population of about 338,000; I thought it
advisable that they should be all included.

2448. Besides including those districts which are not at present
Parliamentary districts, you also take away certain parishes from some
of the existing Parliamentary districts, and form new districts by an
aggregation of those?—That is with a view of equalising, as far as
possible, the population and the area of the various boroughs.

2449. Do you effect a tolerable approach to equalisation by that
arrangement?—I think so. According to the scheme in my pamphlet, the
highest population is in the borough of Southwark, which contains a
population of about 347,000, whereas the Tower Hamlets at present
contain a population of nearly twice that number.

2450. You would propose to divide the Tower Hamlets into two parts, for
municipal purposes?—Yes.

2451. That is the only alteration you make in the Tower Hamlets?—Yes.

2452. Should you not think it desirable to include the West Ham district
along with the Tower Hamlets?—There are besides this various other
outlying districts in the north and west upon which a great difference
of opinion is likely to prevail as to whether they should be included or
not; for instance, Brentford and Chiswick, in the west; Edmonton and
Highgate, in the north.

2453. These, however, can hardly be considered at present to be
continuous with the metropolis?—I think Turnham Green and Chiswick,
Brentford, and Kew, may be considered to be so.

2454. Perhaps in this sense, that there is one continuous line along the
road that leads to them, or pretty nearly so, but there are not cross
streets so as to make it, as it were, a town quarter?—I think each is as
much a town quarter or more so than some of the districts already
included; for instance, Eltham, Lee, and Kidbrook. Consequently, in the
Bill I think power is taken to include such districts as may be from
time to time thought advisable.

2455. You think, then, that the area of the present Parliamentary
districts is too great for the convenience of municipal government, and
that it is desirable to have a smaller area, with a smaller population,
than that of Marylebone or Finsbury as at present
constituted?—Certainly, and I am of opinion that one system of districts
should be adopted for all purposes. Some may think the present system
more convenient perhaps; I think it seems a more sensible arrangement to
have but one system for the whole; and if it is to be so, I think it
should be such a system as may serve for police court districts, county
court districts, poor law unions, registration districts, and other
local purposes. I do not say that this is absolutely necessary, but I
think it is desirable.

2456. You think in that way there would be a tolerable approach to an
equality in Edition: current; Page: [469] the amount of duty thrown on
the municipal bodies?—That was one of my principal ideas. They would be
tolerably equal in area and population, with the exception of two
boroughs on the south side of the Thames, Greenwich and Lambeth. There
it would be impossible to equalize the areas and the population, because
they are much more thinly populated than the boroughs on the north side.

2457. When you speak of Greenwich, you understand the whole
Parliamentary district, including Woolwich?—I am speaking of the borough
of Greenwich, as arranged by myself, which would include the whole of
the union of Greenwich and the union of Lewisham, and is much more
extensive than the present Borough of Greenwich.

2458. You do not propose that the whole Parliamentary district of
Greenwich should be included in the metropolis. You do not consider
Woolwich as a part of the metropolis?—Part of Woolwich is included in
the Parliamentary district, and the whole is included in the metropolis
according to the Metropolis Local Management Act.

2459. Do you say that it is?—Yes, Woolwich is.

2460. There is a considerable district which has grown up adjoining the
Lewisham district. There is an entirely new quarter consisting, of Lee,
and part of the Blackheath district?—That is all included in the new
borough of Greenwich which I propose. The present Parliamentary borough
of Greenwich comprises St. Paul’s and St. Nicholas, Deptford; part of
Greenwich, Woolwich, Plumstead, and Charlton; only portions of the last
four parishes. I propose that the whole of those parishes should be
included in the borough.

[In response to the Chair, Horton said he would add the parishes of Lee,
Kidbrook, Lewisham (including Sydenham), and Eltham.]

2462. Your pamphlet contains a list of the parishes that would compose
each of the districts that you propose. Have your views on that subject
been at all modified, or do you still adhere to the lists given in your
pamphlet?—I still adhere to that list. I think it would be advisable
that the Parliamentary boroughs and the municipal boroughs should be
co-extensive, but it would depend upon how many additional members might
be allotted to the metropolis under the new Reform Bill,36 whether we
might be able to adopt an entirely similar system for Parliamentary and
municipal boroughs.

2463. The division you propose, being grounded on area and population,
is one which you think would be convenient for Parliamentary purposes as
well, in case it should be decided to give additional members to the
metropolis?—I think so; but perhaps I may say that, as a temporary
measure, I proposed that the existing members might, if this system
should be thought advisable, be distributed amongst the new boroughs.

Edition: current; Page: [470]
2464. Are you able to give a list of the places that might be considered
as central in the different municipalities that you propose to create,
and suitable situations for municipal buildings?—Charing Cross might be
considered the centre of the City of Westminster. I consider that
High-street, Kensington, would be about the centre of the new borough of
Kensington; and Marylebone-road would be the centre of the new borough
of Marylebone; Euston-square would form nearly the centre of the new
borough of Bloomsbury; “The Angel,” Islington, would be about the centre
of Finsbury; Hackney-road, of Hackney; Whitechapel-road, or
Commercial-road, of the Tower Hamlets, Kennington Park, of Lambeth; and
New or Old Kent-road, of Southwark.

2465. Supposing these districts formed the basis of Parliamentary
representation, I think the additional representation they would get, if
each had two members, would only amount to six?—Six, including
Kensington.

[The Chair intervened on the question of inconvenience from the size of
proposed boroughs, citing Finsbury, including Lincoln’s Inn.]

2470. It is in Bloomsbury?—Yes; the centre of that would be
Euston-square, not so very far off.

[The questioning turned to the tension between practicability and
Horton’s theoretical scheme.]

2482. For statistical purposes there would always be a convenience in
having the same districts for different descriptions of facts, because
facts of one kind often bear an important relation to facts of another
kind, of which relation no use can be made unless the facts relate to
the same districts?—That is the case.

2483. There is also this consideration; that duties of different kinds
may often be conveniently entrusted to the same set of executive
officers: as, at present, many duties created by Acts of Parliament of a
general and national character are habitually performed by officers who
were originally appointed for merely local purposes; and in fact, if
they were not, there would seldom be any other officers to do them,
unless you created others for the purpose, which would occasion great
additional expense?—Certainly; many duties of different kinds might be
entrusted to one officer, just as in the case of the relief of the poor,
the registration of births, deaths, and marriages, and the inspecting of
nuisances. In many cases, these offices might be combined in one person;
the man who goes to a house to register births or deaths in a poor
district, would naturally have his attention drawn to the state of the
house, and to any nuisances that might exist.

[The utility of giving many duties to one officer with resultant
problems of responsibility and effectiveness was canvassed.]

2525. Do you not think that if an officer had not enough to do, it would
often be a better arrangement to give him additional duties within the
same limited district, Edition: current; Page: [471] than the same
duties over a larger district?—I think it would certainly be more
convenient and that all his duties should be confined within similar
boundaries.

2526. The present Board of Works or boards of guardians would not have
the power of adding to his duties by adding other duties within the same
district; the only power they would have would be that of giving him a
larger district for his limited duties, and that might not be
convenient, but it might be convenient to give him within the same
limited district other duties than those he now performs?—If I gather
the meaning of the Honourable Chairman, he would suggest that although
there is a small district for registration purposes, there might be a
large district for other purposes.

[The Chair clarified by saying registration or other purposes as the
existing municipality chose; Horton thought the proposed arrangement
would be inconvenient.]

2528. If all the duties were concentrated in one municipal body, they
could concentrate all or many of the local duties within the same
district in the same hands, while the present authorities have only the
power of giving a larger district for duties limited in kind, and that
might often not be convenient, while the other system might?—Exactly.

Thomas Beggs37

[Again Mill began after the Chair’s identifying questions.]

2531. You have had some experience as a member of a vestry in
Westminster?—I have. I became a vestryman of St. Paul’s, Covent Garden,
one of the six parishes forming the Strand District Union, in 1851, and
was appointed by the vestry to represent it as one of the nine
representatives to the Strand District Board, when Sir Benjamin Hall’s
Act came into operation.

2532. You have had a seat at the Board about nine years?—Yes; I resigned
in 1864.

2533. And during that time did you pay particular attention to the
working of the Metropolis Local Management Act, so far as your own
district was concerned?—[Yes, through membership in the important
surveyors’ committee; and earlier through an official connection with
the Health of Towns Association. His conclusion was that London was the
most expensively and probably the worst governed city in the empire. Sir
Benjamin Hall’s Act helped improve the system.]

2534. But you still think it leaves the local administration of London
very imperfect?—[To show how, Beggs called the Committee’s attention to
anomalies by means of a map and a schedule of rates related to
jurisdictions.38]

Edition: current; Page: [472]
2535. Are there any other disadvantages, besides those of which you have
given an account, which you consider to attend the present
subdivision?—[Beggs referred, again handing in evidence, to many
disadvantages arising from the real or apparent lack of identity of
interest among the parishes. The confusion over officers’ duties and
their reliance on private business contributed to the inefficiency.]

[In answer to the Chair, Beggs indicated that the system, by making
multiple occupations necessary, was at fault, not the officers
themselves.]

2537. Do you believe that such disadvantages as those which you have
pointed out are inseparable from the present system, or would it be
practicable to effect any arrangement between adjoining districts, so as
materially to lessen, and perhaps remove, the inconvenience you have
referred to?—[Some makeshift arrangements seem to work, but difficulties
will arise when local Boards disagree about their interests.]

2538. Are there any other disadvantages which, in your judgment, are
traceable to the great subdivision of jurisdictions?—There is one thing
in relation to medical officers that I should like to point out, but
that, perhaps, does not refer so much to a matter of jurisdiction as to
the way in which the officers are appointed; there is imminent danger; I
do not know that such a case has occurred with us, but I know it may
occur, of medical officers being obliged to summon members of their own
Boards for infractions of the Acts; I know it has occurred in several
districts of the metropolis. I am not at present acquainted with any
such case in our own district, but I think the danger of such cases is
imminent.

2539. That, you think, would not be liable to happen if the districts
were larger?—If the districts were larger, in a city like London, which
is rather a conglomeration of cities united together, there must be a
federal head to govern that work which is common to the whole
metropolis, the management of the great thoroughfares, the main
drainage, and matters of that sort. My judgment is that the appointment
of a medical officer ought to be in the hands of the federal government,
in order to render him independent of the local Boards.

2540. What is your opinion of the present mode of election to the
Metropolitan Board by the vestries?—When Sir Benjamin Hall’s Act came
into operation, I looked with considerable favour upon the plan of
double election; that is, the ratepayers electing members of the vestry,
and the vestry themselves electing representatives to the district
Board. I have seen great evils in the system and in my opinion the
system of direct election would be a great deal better than the present.

2541. On what ground do you think it would be better?—I think it would
create a greater responsibility; that it would bring into closer
connection the represented with the representative, and would therefore
secure better representation.

2542. Are you acquainted with the plan for the municipal administration
of London, which has been embodied in the draft of the Bill that has
been laid before the Committee?—Yes, I have seen that Bill.

Edition: current; Page: [473]
2543. What is your opinion of that plan?—As to the general principles of
the Bill, without pledging myself to its details, I should support it.

2544. Have you formed any opinion about the local taxation of the
metropolis, and the improvement that might be made in it?—I have seen,
during the time I have been a vestryman, and also a member of the Board,
very great inequalities, but they are slowly adjusting themselves. There
is an improvement going on, but I think the one essential thing would be
the supervision of the whole. I know it is the opinion of many practical
men, who have given much attention to it, that it ought to begin with
the land tax. They point out great differences in the various districts,
great inequalities, and they think that an equalisation of the land-tax
ought to begin all reform as to rating.

2545. That, however, is not a local tax?—It is not a local tax. They
take that as the basis. At present our local taxation is based upon the
property tax. They merely urge the land tax as the basis. Without
supporting that opinion (because I have not considered it sufficiently
to be able to do so), I may say that I believe that the rating of the
metropolis is very imperfect, and that the revision of it is very
necessary.

2546. What do you consider are its special defects?—Its inequality
generally. I know instances where rating has gone on for a great number
of years upon the old system, upon a valuation made long before property
had acquired its present value. The plan usually adopted, by some
sluggish vestries in the centre of London, is this, that as leases fall
in, and improvements are made, they re-survey the property, and
re-assess it. In my own neighbourhood, within the last three or four
years, I am told these discrepancies are disappearing very fast, but I
know that there have been serious anomalies, so that the property on one
side of a street has been assessed at a much lower rate than that on the
other, from the mere fact that no revision had taken place for a series
of years.

[With reference to the difficulty, apparently increasing, of getting
good local representatives, Beggs offered his opinion that they did not
have the motive provided by service to a broad community.]

2560. You think that the approbation or disapprobation of Westminster
would be a stronger motive of action than the approbation or
disapprobation of St. Paul’s Covent Garden?—Certainly.

[Beggs agreed that extensive coverage of municipal deliberations by the
newspapers would encourage better participation.]

2566. There are, I believe, local papers in different parts of London
which would no doubt report the proceedings?—No doubt, it must be
obvious that the two things are essentially different. I think there are
five different managements in Westminster. If they were all concentrated
in one, the whole business would become of a much more important
character. The public press is deterred probably from the comparatively
insignificant nature of the transactions of five or six different
Boards.

Edition: current; Page: [474]
2567. In fact they do not think that there would be sufficient public
interest to induce them to give space in the papers?—Exactly so, if the
whole of Westminster were under one management, it would be of
considerable importance.

2568. The more important matters that came before it, even such papers
as The Times might think it worth while to report?—No doubt, as they
report now the proceedings of the Metropolitan Board, and of the City
Corporation.

10 May

Thomas Beggs, continued

[Mill was the first questioner.]

2625. In your evidence the other day you stated that the management of
your district was very costly, and at the same time very inefficient;
will you explain in what the inefficiency consists?—[With reference to
paving, the excessive amount spent on management, if applied to the cost
of repairing the streets, would be sufficient to improve their present
bad condition.]

2626. On the subject of rating, you stated that the rating is very
unequal; are there any objections, in your judgment, to the way in which
the rates are levied?—[Using his own rates as an example, Beggs asserted
that the system resulted in extra costs in collection, increased trouble
in supervision, and some jobbery and discontent.]

2627. Would not that be inconsistent with the principle that money voted
by local bodies should be for special purposes; do you not think that
municipal bodies ought to have the power of raising money only for
specified purposes authorised by Act of Parliament, and not for general
purposes at their discretion; or how would you adjust that matter?—The
adjustment seems to me to be very easy. Here is an example: a committee
appointed by the Board itself gives an estimate of what is wanted for
the purposes of the district; then a rate is made by the Board for as
much as may cover it; and when the whole of the estimates are before
them, I do not see why they should not levy a general rate, rather than
do it by piecemeal, partly for one purpose and partly for another, and
this might embrace any sums wanted for special purposes.

2628. It might be thought by many that local bodies ought not to have
the power of levying rates at their discretion for general purposes, for
the benefit of the community; that Parliament ought always to decide
beforehand what are the purposes for which the local bodies should be
allowed to levy money?—I apprehend that under the Municipal Act that is
so; a power is given for paving, lighting, cleansing and improving the
district, and for levying rates for such purposes; but then the
peculiarity of London is this, that a certain portion of the drainage
(that is the arterial drainage, the main drainage) falls under the
control of the Metropolitan Board, while the minor or auxiliary drainage
is in the hands of the vestries and local Boards. Probably, if municipal
authorities were found to be the best thing for London, with one federal
head, it might be an expedient course to Edition: current; Page: [475]
grant to the general body, who would have the control of all that which
belonged to the metropolis generally the power of levying a general
rate, leaving the local authorities to do as they now do, levying a rate
for local purposes.

2629. I merely wish to elicit your opinion on the subject?—My opinion is
that one general rate is perfectly practicable for all these purposes;
for all the purposes indicated by the Act of Parliament; that is the
general and subsidiary drainage, paving, lighting, cleansing, and
improving the district; and that that would be certainly the most
convenient course. It is the one that the best municipalities in the
country adopt.

2630. Have you any objection to make to the present qualification of
vestrymen?39—[The requirement that those elected should occupy £40
premises is evaded, and undesirable landlords consequently obtain seats
on the Board.]

2631. Those probably belong to the class that are most interested in
thwarting the purposes of Parliament, particularly sanitary
arrangements, and the improvement of the houses of the labouring
classes?—They are the class most interested in keeping in check proper
and legitimate improvements. We find the most difficulty from them; they
are generally very loud in the protests against extravagance, while we
generally find them practically the most extravagant.

[Beggs agreed with the Chair that actual rather than rated occupation to
the value of £40 should be required.]

2633. You said, if the division of London into municipalities was
effected, that there should be a central Board, a kind of federal head,
for the management of the joint concerns of the whole metropolis; what
is your opinion as to the constitution of that body?—[On balance, but
without offering a decided opinion, Beggs said that it should be elected
not directly by the ratepayers, but by the separate municipalities, so
that it would represent them. However, direct election would be better
than the present confused arrangements, under which the ratepayers
elected the vestrymen, who elected the members of the district Board,
who then elected a member of the Metropolitan Board.]

2634. As you have not formed any decided opinion as to which is
preferable in the election to the central Board, direct election by
ratepayers or election by vestries, probably it would be desirable not
to go into the minutiae of that question at present?—I would rather not
do so, because I have not sufficiently considered it. I only wish to
state that my opinion at present leans to the view, that the central
body ought to be elected of the Boards.

2635. You believe that the complaint you have made as to the cost and
inefficiency of the management under the present system is applicable to
all the Metropolitan district Boards and vestries, more or less?—I have
heard expressions of dissatisfaction, I believe, from every Board in
London, that is from Edition: current; Page: [476] respectable and
influential members of the Boards, that the present system is a costly
one. I wish to hand in an amended return of one year’s expenses of our
district.40

[He handed in the return, and the discussion turned to several related
issues, and then to his view of wards.]

2660. Do you not think that the average size of a ward in the City of
London is very much too small to form the unit of municipal government;
to form a separate municipal government in itself, as it were?—I think
so.

2661. They are smaller than the present vestry districts?—Many of them
are very much smaller.

[The question of modes of election was again mooted in connection with
the attraction of good representatives.]

2675. Might not the mayor be elected by a separate vote, in which case a
person might be candidate for the office of mayor as distinct from that
of a member of the municipality?—I think there would be objections to
that. I think the office ought to be considered, and it is so considered
in the country, as a reward for long continued or eminent public
services. I think it is better the body over whom the mayor presides
should elect him.

[The Chair asked about the election of the Lord Mayor of London; his
election was by the Aldermen and then by the Livery.]

2677. Is the mayor in the provinces usually changed from year to
year?—The cases are exceptional in which the mayor is reappointed; the
office is generally kept open as a reward for men who have served the
public. Instances do occur, but they are exceptional, where the mayor is
elected a second time. I knew it to occur once during my residence in
Nottingham, but it was a special case; it has been once, to my
knowledge, the case in Birmingham, and once in Leeds.

[Beggs did not agree with the Chair that in Birmingham a tavern keeper
was elected twice, and added that re-election was more common in some of
the old cities.]

2679. Perhaps it would be more necessary in the case of a general body
than in that of a local municipality to have a permanent chairman, as in
the case of the Board of Works?—Unquestionably, but the presence of a
man in the chair, who is supposed to take an interest in its business,
and whose duty it is to preside over the meetings, is very important in
all bodies. I do not at all like the notion of men meeting together, and
probably expending large sums of money, without one or two gentlemen
being looked upon as permanently present, and with a chairman elected
only for the evening.

Edition: current; Page: [477]
Thomas Hare

[After the Chair’s identifying questions, Mill began.]

2682. You are an inspector of charities?—I am an inspector under the
Charity Commission.

2683. And in that capacity you have had considerable opportunity of
observing the working of local bodies?—I have in many of the provincial
cities, and also in London; I have held inquiries connected with the
Charity Commission, I think, in every parish in the City of London.

2684. Is there any statement you wish to make, or any opinion you can
give about the quality and character of the local government, as it has
come within your notice?—It has been only a very special part of the
organisation of local government that I have had the opportunity of
observing officially; that portion of it which has been administered by
the City Companies and by the vestries of the London parish.

2685. What is your opinion generally as far as you have observed, of the
working of that form of government, and of the qualifications of those
who exercise rule under it?—In the long course of years the changes
which have taken place in the condition of London and its inhabitants
have created great difficulty in following anything like the original
directions. The parishes of London have come into possession of vast
funds which they have little opportunity of applying except in a very
limited and narrow manner, when confined to their present areas of
operation.

[That answer pertained particularly to the City of London rather than
the metropolis generally.]

2687. You have paid a great deal of attention to the subject of
representation generally, both for national and local purposes?—I have.

2688. You have written several articles or essays on the different
branches of the subject?—I may say with regard to the government of
London, that in the year 1862, I first published a small work on the
Local Government of London.41 In 1863 I was the author of an article
published in Macmillan’s Magazine on the “Ideal of a Local Government
for the Metropolis.”42 In 1864 I drew a Bill for the organisation of
bodies to apply some of the great funds, which are applicable to public
and charitable purposes; a voluntary method of organisation amongst
charity trustees and others which would in some measure be a substitute
for local government. This year at the Social Science Association, I
took an opportunity of reading a paper on the subject of the present
condition of local government in Edition: current; Page: [478] London,
and preparing the rough draft of a bill, which, it appeared to me, would
be the basis to a suitable measure for the amendment of that
government.43

2689. Will you be good enough to state to the Committee an outline of
your scheme for the local government of London?—The main features of it
are these: the direct election of the principal governing body, to be
composed, say of 150 members, of whom 50 members should be directly
chosen by the owners of property, and 100 members by the occupiers; the
council so to be formed, including all the property and inhabitants of
the great metropolitan area, being entitled, “The Lord Mayor and Council
of London.” The Lord Mayor of the City of London, for the time being,
should be the president during his year of office, and there should be a
permanent vice-president; say the present chairman of the Board of
Works. Eight aldermen of the City of London, at least if not elected, as
they probably would be, should be added to the body. Twelve members of
the Board of Works should be added for three years, to keep up a
continuity between the present board and the future body.44

2690. In what manner would you propose that the members should be
elected?—[Hare replied that the proposal, which formed part of a general
scheme of representation, was under active consideration in Geneva,
Frankfort, and Sydney.]

2691. Will you be so good as to state the mode of voting which you
recommend?—[The first requirements are proper alphabetical lists of
voters, both occupiers and owners, prepared by the collectors of taxes.
The votes of the owners would be weighted by the value of the property,
and proportional representation would apply.]

2692. In fact, you would allow any 1,000 voters, supposing 1,000 to be
the number entitled to a member on a comparison of the number of members
with the number of voters; supposing 1,000 to be the quotient, you would
give to any 1,000 voters who could agree the power of returning any
member?—Yes.

2693. So that no portion of the electors equal to or above 1,000, would
be unrepresented?—No person would be unrepresented. It appears to me
that you would bring all the desire for public improvement, all the
energy, all the philanthropy that existed in a city, or in the
metropolis, and give to it the power of organisation, so that each
should have its exponent in the consultative body.

[Questions were asked about the possible loss of local loyalty. Hare
replied that the local government of the City of London was left
untouched in his scheme.]

2699. Whatever local feeling existed in the minds of the local people
would be fully represented?—Yes.

Edition: current; Page: [479]
[The Chair remained sceptical on this issue, saying that an Exeter Hall
society might elect a candidate while a district might fail to do so,
and Hare further elaborated.]

2704. As every locality has strong reasons for wishing to be locally
represented, the majorities would usually elect local candidates, while
minorities who could not carry the local candidate whom they preferred
would probably vote for some candidate on general grounds?—I cannot
doubt that that would be so. I cannot doubt that each locality would
elect those who were thought most desirable for the locality. It is not,
however, the houses that are to be taken care of, but the people, and it
may be left to their discretion. I do not suppose that the people would
be indifferent about the matter. That appears to me to be a visionary
apprehension.

2705. If the people preferred to elect an eminent man for general
reasons, at the sacrifice of local interest, you think they ought to be
allowed to do so?—Surely that ought not to be prevented.

[Giving further details of his plan, Hare explained that a successful
candidate would have to draw support from neighbouring districts.]

2719. That is, if a district were too small to be entitled to a Member
for itself?—Necessarily.

[Hare averred that in his scheme the groupings were voluntary, not
arbitrarily determined.]

2721. Anyone might declare himself a candidate for all the groups, if he
liked?—Yes.

2722. And he would be the Member for those which chose to elect
him?—Yes, if there was a quota of votes; he may be a candidate for Ayr
and also for Glasgow.

[A candidate who received 50 votes as against 30 for an opponent, in a
ward with only 100 inhabitants, would be elected even if the quota were
1000.]

2724. That is, if he got a quota by means of other votes?—Yes. It is
perfectly simple; the person having the greatest number of votes in each
district, having the quota made up elsewhere, would be the
representative of that district.

[Hare continued to maintain that local representation would not be
destroyed under his scheme.]

2726. The question is, what is there to induce or to enable the electors
to elect a person to look after their local interest especially; I
apprehend there can be no other resource than the wish in the minds of
the electors to do so; and you probably place your reliance upon
that?—Yes; if the inhabitants of any locality wish to be represented by
any individual of special character or qualifications, if that person
has more votes than any other, he becomes their representative, because
they have shown a greater appreciation of him than of any other person.

Edition: current; Page: [480]
2727. Is not that rather a question of how you would apportion the
representatives to the different districts; the Chairman seemed to think
it possible or probable, under your system, that there might be no
representatives, or very few, of the local interests, inasmuch as
everybody might elect on grounds of a general nature, having to do with
the localities; no doubt you might even then apportion them to
localities, but that would not make them representatives of the local
interest?—No; if at present there were in any locality a population so
utterly indifferent to the business of the locality that they would
elect anybody to govern them, it seems to me that the difficulty would
arise now; you are supposing a state of things which would equally apply
to our existing system.

2728. Only that they are obliged now to elect somebody, by however few
votes, and this somebody will naturally be a local person; whereas under
your system there would be an opening by which inhabitants of the
locality might elect a total stranger if they liked; they can do it now,
but it would be extremely unlikely; under your system it would be much
more likely?—It seems to me that with adequate notices of what was going
on during the process of the elections you are supposing a degree of
public stagnation that one could hardly expect when it is remembered
that the voters in any place can elect their own local candidate, every
vote being almost certain to have its result.

[The Chair continued questioning the effect on local representation,
finally saying, with Hare’s agreement, that a defeated minority would
have its votes transferred, and so could, in combination with other
minorities, elect a representative.]

2741. And the majority, if it do not amount to a quota, might hope to be
reinforced by voters from elsewhere, and so get its members?—Yes; the
sole object is this: to give to each individual the power of using his
best and most conscientious judgment in the act of exercising his
suffrage.

[In face of the Chair’s scepticism, Hare maintained that transferred
votes would go to worthy candidates at least as often as votes did under
present arrangements.]

2744. Do you not think that the majority would have an inducement to
bring forward as good a candidate as they could, in order that they
might have a chance of being reinforced by votes from other
districts?—That would be one object. In all cases those who put forward
a candidate would desire that he should be a man having the greatest
personal recommendations, in order that he might attract the votes of
others.

[Hare admitted that his scheme had never had a practical trial,
majorities not being willing to limit their powers, and went on to say
that his plan would allow him to vote for worthy people, an option that
he had seldom had under the present arrangements.]

Edition: current; Page: [481]
2751. The voter is now restricted in his choice to two or three, no one
of whom may suit him, but under your system he could choose from the
whole community?—He is now at the mercy of a few individuals, whose
nominees he must vote for or have his vote thrown away.

[Among other issues, the question of the scheme’s arithmetic arose.]

2768. You would divide, after the election, the total number of votes
given by the number of members?—Yes.

28 May

Thomas Hare, continued

[Mill opened the questioning.]

2793. You said that your system had been taken into consideration at
Frankfort and Geneva, but had not been adopted there; I believe it has
been adopted in one country?—[Hare indicated that he had forgotten to
mention its adoption in Denmark.]

2794. Are you aware whether this law is still in operation; a change of
circumstances has possibly put an end to the Rigsraad altogether?45—I
have not had the opportunity of learning what has been the fact; I think
the Rigsraad was an assembly which met once in two years.

2795. I believe it was for Denmark and Schleswig combined; the
constitution of the Rigsdag, which is the Representative Assembly of
Denmark only, of course remains as it was, and the system had not been
adopted there; it was in framing the constitution for the United
Principality that it was adopted?—It was adopted for the United
Principality, and under great disadvantages, inasmuch as throughout the
whole of that time the struggle between Denmark and the Duchies was
going on, and the system was repudiated in the Duchies, as any
connection with Denmark was in a great measure repudiated.

2796. You proposed the other day that the election of members of the
governing bodies should be extended to two or three days. I am not aware
that this is suggested in any of your printed writings?—I had adopted
that from an amendment proposed by the Reform Association of Geneva. It
appeared to them that if there were any danger of public attention not
being sufficiently attracted to the election, so that it might fall into
a few hands, that would be corrected by extending it over two or three
days, and reporting at the end of the first day the result, when public
attention would be called to it, so that any absence of attention on the
first day would be corrected on the second.

Edition: current; Page: [482]
2797. Any intrigue might be frustrated?—Any intrigue might be frustrated
if notice were given of it in that form; and the system does not seem
open to the objection of Parliamentary elections extending over several
days.

2798. You propose that the whole of the municipal voters for the
metropolis, to whatever place they belonged, should be able to vote for
any candidate who had started for any part of the metropolis;46 is that
an essential part of your plan, or might votes be confined to separate
boroughs?—It is by no means essential. I preferred to introduce it in
that form, because it seemed to me that the widest scope you could give
to individual thought the better it would be for the result of the
election. If the Committee thought proper to recommend that the
metropolis should be divided into boroughs, the vote of each inhabitant
of each borough might be confined to that borough; or whatever division
might be adopted, it might, in like manner, be confined to that
division.

2799. You said that on your plan candidates would propose themselves,
instead of being proposed by others, as they are now; is that an
essential part of your plan?—I was asked whether members would not
propose themselves. That is by no means essential. Indeed, I suppose it
would not be so. The proposal would be made in writing, instead of being
made, as now, at the vestry; it may be made in writing, signed by two
electors. There is no reason why the individual should propose himself
any more than candidates for Parliament.

2800. It has been made a criticism on your system that it would require
active steps to be taken in many cases, in which a passive operation
suffices under the present system. What is really the difference between
the present system and yours in that respect?—[At present notice is
given only on the doors of places of worship; the time of election is
fixed, and only those few who know of it, and have special interest in
electing someone, actually vote. Hare’s scheme provides for a voting
paper and list of candidates being left at the house of each voter, or
otherwise made accessible.]

2801. Voting papers and lists of candidates might be circulated among
the voters, independently of your system?—It might.

2802. These things are not peculiar to your system?—No.

2803. But what you rely upon, I apprehend, is the greater interest that
would be excited in the election, by the greater latitude of choice
given to the electors, when not confined to the small number that might
be put up by parties or sections?—[Indeed the essence of self-government
is the thought produced by individual action.]

2804. You think it a great recommendation of a system of election that
it calls out the active faculties, and excites a keen interest among the
electors?—That is exactly what I thought; it seemed to me that the
question with regard to local government before the Committee was, by
what means the best thought of the Edition: current; Page: [483]
community could be brought to bear for the purpose of effectuating that
local government.

2805. Would your plan be calculated to diminish the objection which it
is supposed might be entertained to having a municipality for the whole
of the metropolis, on the ground of the great power such a body would
possess?—[The fear of such a powerful body near the national seat of
government would be much lessened by the election of representatives not
of numbers only, but of all varieties of thought, property, influence,
and social force. Then a metropolitan government would be a source of
real strength rather than of danger to the national government.]

2806. I believe you consider one of the recommendations of your plan to
be, that persons of great eminence, both socially and mentally, would be
disposed to seek municipal distinctions?—It seems to me to be so. The
mode of obtaining municipal position being so entirely altered, and made
to depend so much on the character and position of the individual, and
there being a provision by which great proprietors and persons having a
material interest in the metropolis could act together in bringing
persons in, it seems to me that you would have a body of some
distinction, to which some of the best members of the community might
well be proud to belong.

2807. Persons who are well known to a considerable number of voters
would not be in danger of being excluded because they were not known to
the majority?—Exactly.

2808. That is your idea?—That is the idea which has animated me in
bringing these proposals before the Committee.

2809. Would there not be a difficulty in inducing persons of social
importance to take municipal offices, in consequence of their not being
usually resident in London during the whole year?—It seems to me that
the business of a great city like London need not require more constant
attention than the business of the nation at large, and that the same
suspension of its sittings, leaving the business to proper officers,
might take place as takes place with regard to Parliament. All great
measures of importance, except purely administrative matters, might be
confined to that period during which the great portion of the intellect
of the country is in London. I can see no reason why there should be
constant sittings.

2810. You think that the executive functionaries of this body might be
permanent, and that the deliberative and controlling body might hold
intermittent sittings?—It has occurred to me that that would be a very
convenient system, and a perfectly feasible one.

2811. In regard to the votes which in your system for the metropolis
would be allotted to property, what would be, in your plan, the
qualification of the voter?—[In addition to great proprietors such as
the Marquis of Westminster and the Duke of Bedford, corporate voters
would include the City Companies, the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, the
Charity Commissioners or the Poor Law Edition: current; Page: [484]
Commissioners (for charity property, including educational, which may
amount to one-fourth of the whole metropolis—“I can go through miles of
the crowded parts of London composed entirely of charity property”), and
the Presidents of the College of Physicians and Surgeons (for the great
hospitals).]

2812. And you would give that class of votes in proportion to the amount
of property?—Exactly, in proportion to the property; so that a quotient
of £100,000 a year might be made up, say of £50,000, £5,000, £1,000, and
so on, until the amount was completed.

2813. The return would state, that so many thousand pounds a year voted
in favour of each candidate?—Exactly, avoiding all that arbitrary
distribution which is adopted in the election of guardians, where a man
who is rated under £50 a year has one vote, under £100 two votes, and so
on, up to six votes. On this plan the weight of the vote will be exactly
according to the value of the property, not interfering in any respect
with the occupying votes which are given on other grounds.47

2814. What is the proportion of the municipal body which you would wish
to have elected on this plan?—I suggested in my former examination that,
if there were 150 members, 50 might be elected by property and 100 as
occupiers; one-third by property and two-thirds by occupiers.48

2815. In the case of occupiers, would you propose a qualification, or
allow all occupiers to vote?—I think the Parliamentary qualification
might be adopted. I see no reason why the Parliamentary qualification
should not be the municipal qualification.

2816. It has sometimes been thought that a lower qualification may be
admitted for municipal government than for national government?—I should
like to have the municipal suffrage of the occupiers as low as possible;
preserving in all cases the rule that the voter shall be registered.

2817. Would you give plurality of votes in the case of occupiers?—No,
only single votes.

2818. You only take the amount of property into consideration in the
votes allotted to property?—Exactly.

2819. Have you formed any opinion what the qualification should be, or
if any qualification should be fixed by law, for the persons
elected?—[The law ought not to impose qualifications; the matter should
be left entirely to the electors.]

2820. When you have a proper constituency, or the best constituency
possible, you would trust it?—Yes; it seems to me, that to impose a
qualification is only an obstructive proceeding. We might find merchants
in London who have ceased to possess a qualification in London, but are
very much interested in the City from old associations, who live quite
beyond its boundaries, and yet may have much Edition: current; Page:
[485] leisure, and be very desirous of attending to public business, who
would be entirely disqualified by some artificial rating clause, which
you might impose. I would earnestly impress that as a very important
thing, that the qualification of the elected person should be entirely
abolished, and left altogether to the electors.

2821. Supposing that better municipal bodies were obtained in this way
than hitherto, you would probably consider that one of the advantages of
that would be that the municipal bodies would be fit to undertake
classes of duties that have not hitherto been entrusted to them?—[The
result would be that municipal governments could deal with matters that
now obstruct Parliament’s proper business.]

2822. You are of that opinion with reference to the whole country, not
merely as regards the metropolis?—[In support of this view, Hare cited a
Bill concerning a savings’ bank in Bradford that would be far better
treated as a local matter. Other instances would be charities, local
improvements, and railway sites.]

2823. Would there not be great advantage in having bodies all over the
country to whom Parliament could entrust the execution of Acts that it
might make for the public benefit, which it now does not make at all, or
which are unexecuted or imperfectly executed, because there are no
persons that Parliament can trust to execute them in the
localities?—Undoubtedly.

[Lord John Manners objected to Hare’s having suggested that the vote for
educational property be given to the head of the Council on Education, a
temporary political official who would represent Governmental rather
than institutional views.]

2828. Would you object to have that property represented, not by the
head of the educational department, but by some one of its permanent
officers?—None; I selected the Vice-President as the officer who stands
most in the public view, but it might be by a permanent officer. I have
no special attachment to the Vice-President.

[After a variety of questions, the Chair suggested, and Hare agreed,
that frequently householders in London had no knowledge of local
affairs, including elections.]

2849. Is it not also the fact that a large proportion of the voters for
the metropolitan districts, amongst the higher classes especially, do
not vote at all, even for Members of Parliament?—I believe that is so in
a very large number of cases.

[The questioning turned again to the likelihood of stirring interest in
local elections.]

2855. You rely on the voting papers for that?—Yes; the action would be
effectual without attracting the attention of the public to the
individual who exercised it.

Edition: current; Page: [486]
John Dangerfield49

[After extensive questioning by other members of the Committee, Mill
opened a new avenue.]

2927. Your experience of the working of metropolitan vestries, I
understand you to say, is derived mainly from the working of your own
vestry?—Quite so.

2928. Your vestry appears to comprise several persons of very
considerable importance; some of very high social positions, others of
the highest class of tradesmen?—I mentioned some of the superior class
of tradesmen. There are no men in the vestry now belonging to the
highest class of society. Lord Overstone was a member for a time; Mr.
Hoare was a member, and continued to be a member up to the time of his
death; we supplied his place the other day.50 The most active and the
best men are the superior class of tradesmen in the parish: then there
are others of considerable intelligence, not occupying quite so high a
position in business.

2929. Do you think there are many metropolitan vestries that have the
advantage of such men?—I do not know; to some extent, I should say, not
to a considerable extent; I doubt if it is to the same extent.

2930. Lord Overstone is not only a man of high social position, but also
of great ability and power of speaking, and probably while he was a
member, he exercised very great influence in the vestry?—He did not very
often attend; there were few occasions on which he attended; he was
willing to attend on certain occasions, when there were matters of great
interest brought forward. Our hour of meeting (seven in the evening) was
against the attendance of the class of persons to which he belonged.

2931. Do you not think that in those vestries, which have not such
persons belonging to them, it might easily happen, and does happen, that
they are much under the control of persons who are very often the owners
of those properties which are in the state you describe, and which it is
so extremely desirable to have remedied?—I do not know that to be the
fact; I should doubt it very much, because I think the general feeling
and sympathy of the vestry would be very much against such persons. They
would be pointed out by the vestry as persons who should not be listened
to.

2932. Do you think that there is in all vestries that degree of interest
in the subject, and that degree of care about the persons appointed,
which appears to exist in yours?—[While a few inappropriate people have
been elected elsewhere, on the whole the quality is impressive.]

2933. Your experience is of a vestry in which that influence, if it
exists, must be much counteracted by persons of a superior class?—I have
no doubt that in a body Edition: current; Page: [487] of that kind the
better class of persons have a degree of influence, almost insensibly,
over those of a lower class, who perhaps have opinions of their own
which they may be desirous to oppose to those of persons who are higher
than themselves in society; but the able men of business generally lead
the others.

2934. Do you not think that such men as you have mentioned, the higher
description of tradesmen and persons of a higher social position than
tradesmen, since they are willing to be members of your vestry, if there
were a municipal corporation for the whole of Westminster would be still
more willing to be members of that body?—[Probably the reverse would be
the case, as men such as Lord Overstone are interested in parish
affairs.]

2935. You say there are many persons of that class who have paid special
attention to the local wants of their own immediate neighbourhood; that
is no doubt very much the case in rural districts, but do you think it
is the case in a great town like the metropolis?—[Indeed it would be,
for the great merit of vestries is that they attend to local business; a
wider jurisdiction would lessen the feeling of authority.]

2936. You think that the Corporation of Westminster would not have taken
the measures which your vestry did to keep Leicester-square open;51 do
you believe, from anything that you have heard, or any means of
observation you possess, that the corporations of towns in general
neglect the local interests of particular parts of those towns?—No, I
cannot see that there is any comparison there. A corporation in a town
has no regard to parochial interests; it is a corporation for the whole
of the town. Take the case of Manchester, Liverpool, or any other large
towns. There they all have an equal interest with regard to the whole
borough; but if there were ten or eleven corporations in the metropolis,
each corporation would attend to its own local interests. Take the case
of a corporation composed of nine parishes; it is obvious that each
parish would only have the ninth part of the power. Instead of having
exclusive power to remedy evils existing in his own parish, a vestryman
would only be able, in a municipal body, to give one vote in nine in
favour of a resolution which he could carry in his own vestry if he were
sitting there.

2937. Suppose this system existed, and that when anything was proposed
for the benefit of one parish, all the others voted against it, would
not the result be that none of the nine parishes would get what they
wanted, whereas, if they followed a different plan, and the eight
parishes voted in favour of the ninth parish, all the nine in their turn
would get what they wanted?—If they acted wisely; but I am afraid one
cannot calculate upon that. I am supposing the case of a great expense
being required to be incurred in one parish in which the other parishes
were not interested. They would then say, “Why should we burden the
borough rate for such a purpose? With regard to any improvement that may
be required in our own Edition: current; Page: [488] locality, that is a
thing which we must provide for when the time arrives; but at present it
is an evil to us to have the borough rate burdened with a great expense
in regard to a matter by which the borough is not benefited except as to
a ninth part.”

2938. Might not that happen in Manchester or Birmingham, or anywhere
else, when something was proposed that would only benefit a particular
quarter of the town?—I think the comparison would not hold in the large
towns, because the corporation there represents the whole of the body,
and they would feel bound to attend to every portion. I have no doubt,
in every body where influential persons take a lead, they would either
obstruct or encourage something in which there were antagonistic
interests of other parties.

2939. If, in addition to local corporations, there was a general
administrative body like the Boards of Works, and if there were the
power of appeal which you have advocated, so that your parish could
appeal to the general body against the adverse decision of the other
eight parishes, would not that correct the evil of which you are
apprehensive?—No doubt; any appellate jurisdiction, if it was wisely
executed, would be of great service, whether as regards vestries or
corporations.

2940. Who has the appointment of the officer of health to the
vestry?—The vestry appoint him.

2941. They are bound to appoint an officer of health?—They do appoint
him.

2942. Are they not obliged by law to do it?52—I think they are; I am not
quite sure without looking into the Act of Parliament. The law gives
them the power to appoint the necessary officers; I think it does not
define them particularly. The vestries of district Boards appoint such
officers as they deem necessary, either in regard to character or
number, and they assign to them such duties as they think fit.

2943. They are not necessarily obliged to appoint an officer of
health?—I think they are not necessarily obliged to do so.

2944. But they generally do?—An officer of health is appointed under the
sanitary powers given by the Nuisances Removal Act, which are vested in
the vestries.

[Dangerfield affirmed his general impression that the appointments,
while normally made, were not mandatory.]

2946. The salary is not fixed by law?—The salary is fixed by the vestry.

2947. From what you said I presume, that in your parish the vestry have
a perfectly good understanding with the medical officer, and that so far
as their legal powers reach, which you consider to be insufficient, they
do carry out his sanitary recommendations; at all events, his reasonable
ones?—That is so.

2948. Do you think that is the case generally in the metropolis; the
contrary is Edition: current; Page: [489] often asserted?—I am aware
that it is so stated, and it may be so in some instances; but I doubt
very much indeed whether as a rule the vestries do not attend to the
advice of their sanitary officers, so far as they have the means of
doing so; I should be disposed to think that they did.

2949. Did you ever hear of the case of an officer of health of
considerable eminence having bestirred himself very much for sanitary
improvements, and having had his salary lowered in consequence?53—I am
not aware of that; I never heard of such a case.

4 June

Robert Gladding54

[Again Mill opened a new line of questioning.]

3245. Your district comprises a large number of parishes besides
Whitechapel?—Nine altogether.

3246. What is about the extent of the district?—Four hundred acres.

3247. What proportion does that form of the parliamentary district of
the Tower Hamlets?—The Tower Hamlets measures, from the Isle of Dogs to
Tottenham, seven miles. I do not know the acreage. Our district forms
but a very small proportion of it.

3248. What is the proportion of the population of the Tower Hamlets to
that of your district?—The population of the Tower Hamlets is betwen
500,000 and 700,000, and the population of Whitechapel district is
79,000.

3249. You are aware that by the new Reform Bill the Tower Hamlets would
be divided into two districts?55—I am aware of that.

3250. Consequently if the municipal district were to correspond with the
parliamentary district, which is the idea, the present dimensions of the
Tower Hamlets would be considerably reduced; should you still think that
one-half of the Tower Hamlets was too large a district for a municipal
corporation which represented it to be able to attend to the local
interests of all parts of it?—I am not particularly acquainted with the
plans that are before the public. I do not know precisely what the
proposition might be. Suppose that the proposition were that half of the
Tower Hamlets should be formed into a municipality or corporation, which
corporation should have the control of its police, the division of the
district into parishes for parochial purposes, and into wards for ward
motes, then it is fair to conceive that local self-government would
still exist; otherwise it would not exist; it would be superseded, and
the idea itself completely destroyed.

3251. What condition should you think necessary to render a municipal
corporation elected by the ratepayers of one-half of the Tower Hamlets
consistent with local government?—Nothing less than I have said.

Edition: current; Page: [490]
3252. In what way would those different provisions that you have
mentioned operate as conducive to local government; I do not clearly
understand why it is you think that the division, for instance, into
parishes and wards, would make the difference between local
self-government and centralization?—In this way: you may have persons
administering the affairs of others, or persons administering their own
affairs, as in the case of the late vestry, and as in the case of some
towns, I believe, in America, in New York, for instance, where persons
administer their own affairs, and local self-government is perfect. If
you ascend a step above that, where persons have their affairs
administered by those who represent them, and those representatives are
sufficiently numerous in every part of the district to be known to all
those whose affairs they conduct, those persons bear the responsibility
of freemen in local self-government, and they are taught continually in
a school of freedom; those who are about them are also influenced by
them to the same excellent results.

3253. You think, then, that supposing half the Tower Hamlets were to be
formed into a municipal corporation, and into a Parliamentary district
also, and that in whatever division took place of the local duties of
the metropolis, that municipal corporation were made one of the units of
the division for all purposes, and supposing the numbers of the body
were sufficient, and were elected locally so that every portion of the
district might be represented in it; you think that such a constitution
would be consistent with local government?—Yes; you are now supposing
something very like the City of London, which forms in its area
something like what half the Tower Hamlets would be.

3254. I mean something like the City of London?—If you were to carry out
the idea of the City of London, which has the management of its police,
its parochial divisions and ward divisions, then, of course, I should be
obliged to concede that local government would still exist.

[After other subjects, the question of the administration of public
health arose.]

3310. Do you not think that Parliament would be more easily induced to
grant such powers to a larger district than to a smaller one?—I do not
know why it should.

William Henry Black56

[Mill intervened in questioning about the affairs of Whitechapel.]

3355. Is any portion of the local administration of your district
conducted by paid officers?—By surveyors, inspectors, and clerks.

3356. A considerable portion, I apprehend, is directly conducted by the
committees into which your body is divided?—It is so.

Edition: current; Page: [491]
3357. And the surveyors and other officers are appointed by the General
Board of Trustees?—By the several Boards.

Henry Sadler Mitchell57

[The questioning began on the effectiveness and efficiency of the
trustees in Whitechapel, of whom Mitchell expressed a highly favourable
opinion.]

3387. You say that there is a great attachment in your district to local
government on its present scale, in preference to the larger scale of a
municipality, and that great dissatisfaction would be felt if the
smaller scale were exchanged for the larger?—Within the last four or
five years I have especially devoted my attention to the subject, and
endeavoured to obtain the opinion of all classes of men, and I believe
that any attempt to interfere with the present system would be
productive of the very greatest discontent.

3388. But I do not understand that the parochial system, properly
speaking, exists in your district, because it is a combination of a
considerable number of parishes?—To some extent the parochial system has
been interfered with, and I think to that extent it has caused
dissatisfaction.

3389. You think it would be more popular in your district if the parish
of Whitechapel and the other parishes comprising the district were each
of them to administer separately the affairs which are now administered
by the joint body?—I know that in Whitechapel it would be more popular
if we were left entirely by ourselves.

3390. Some of the parishes are exceedingly small?—Yes.

3391. There are many very small parishes in the metropolis, especially
in the City of London?—Yes; Sir William Fraser, in his book, says that
the paving, and so on, has not improved during the last 10 years.58 He
was evidently of opinion that since the introduction of the Boards the
work had not been done so well; I can hardly say that, because I think
there has been an improvement in all things; but I am certain with
regard to the parish of Whitechapel, from the present information we
have upon the subject, that we should have been better off if we had
kept entirely to ourselves.

3392. Do you think that this is owing to the greater smallness of the
district; that the smaller the district the better the pavement is
attended to?—I do; but of course there is a limit to that.

3393. The parishes, however, are extremely unequal; and you can hardly
say that sizes so very different can be equally adapted to be the unit
of local government?—I think that parishes may be too large; I think the
parish of St. Pancras is too large, and the parish of Marylebone.

3394. You think, with regard to such a thing as paving, that it had
better be Edition: current; Page: [492] conducted on a scale much
smaller than the parish of Marylebone, or the parish of St.
Pancras?—Yes.

3395. Do you think so with regard to all the duties performed by your
Board, or only with regard to some of them?—I think that all the duties
would be done better by a more moderate-sized parish; I am well
acquainted with St. Pancras, and I think it is too large; a considerable
portion of it, however, consists of fields.

3396. Do you think it is as easy to find competent persons to perform
those duties in a small district as in a large one?—Quite so.

3397. Do you think that they are equally under the public eye in a small
district; do you think that public attention is not more likely to be
concentrated on the operations carried on, when the district is larger
than an ordinary parish?—No; I think it is better when they are carried
on on a small scale, provided it is not too small. There is always a
local press which exercises great control, as you have pointed out in
your book.59 If we had no local Board we should have no local press,
because there would not be sufficient information to be given; but
having a local press, the eye of the ratepayers is continually directed
to the public affairs of the parish.

3398. You have a local press for the parish of Whitechapel?—It takes in
two or three districts; it is published in Whitechapel, and it reports
all proceedings of the Boards.60

3399. Do you not think it desirable that there should be a considerable
admixture of different classes of society in the local government
bodies?—On the last occasion of choosing an overseer we elected the
magistrate; but he said, “I cannot attend to the duties.” If you choose
merchants, and men with four or five thousand a-year, to go on to the
Boards, they would not attend to them.

3400. If they do not attend in a parish, do you not think they would
attend in a larger body?—I do not think they would.

3401. Do you not think that a more important class of persons take part
in the local business of the City of London than in the vestries?—Not in
the Common Council; I do not think that the Common Council is composed
of a better class of men than the trustees of the parish of Whitechapel,
having regard to the fact that the City of London is a more important
place than Whitechapel. I have not seen any business conducted at any
Boards better than it is conducted by the trustees of Whitechapel; I
have read the reports in the debates of the House of Commons, and
without claiming for the trustees as much learning, I do claim for them
quite as much orderly proceeding.

3402. From your knowledge of other vestries and local Boards generally,
do you think you can give the same degree of praise to all or most of
them?—I Edition: current; Page: [493] frequently read the reports of the
St. Pancras Board, and I think it is quite as orderly as any assembly in
the kingdom.

3403. Do you think that there is as much variety of intelligence, and
that large views are as much brought to bear on local affairs, as would
be the case if those who take part in those affairs were of a more mixed
character than they are now?—It would not do to have all philosophers;
but I believe, for the work that is to be done, the men who compose
those Boards are the best that can be found.

3404. There are no other class of men, I apprehend, that could be found
to discharge the bulk of the duties; but would it not be desirable that
there should be a certain proportion of persons not so purely local in
their ideas?—I think that the Boards are always composed of a mixed
class; I have looked through the lists of Marylebone and St. Pancras,
and I find that those Boards are composed of a class of men who, from my
knowledge of them, would conduct the business of the parish in the best
possible way.

3405. But Marylebone and St. Pancras are large parishes, approaching in
magnitude the proposed municipalities, and certainly in Marylebone there
is a much greater mixture of classes in the vestry than there commonly
is in the vestries in London; do you think that the same character could
be given to the other vestries generally?—Speaking with regard to my own
parish, I think you could not have a better class of men to do the
business.

3406. You do not think that it could be improved by persons of a
different class being combined with them?—I do not think they would take
the trouble, because a great deal of the business of the parish is
managed by Committees; and my experience of men possessing large incomes
is, that they would not take the trouble to attend.

3407. They do take the trouble to attend in Marylebone?—I cannot say in
Marylebone; they are a highly respectable class of men as a rule. You
heard Mr. Gladding’s evidence in that respect.61 I entirely concur in
what he said, and I believe the work is done as well as it can be done.

Robert Freeman62

[General questioning led to discussion of the membership of the vestry,
Freeman being of opinion that the proposed centralization would make
such service less attractive.]

3466. I understand, from your description of the composition of your
vestry, that it contains a very considerable number of persons of a
superior class?—Yes; Edition: current; Page: [494] that is naturally
owing to the circumstance that there are an unusual number of persons of
leisure and cultivation who inhabit the district of Kensington.

3467. I think you said that it would not be possible in poor districts
to obtain the same class of persons?—No, I think not.

3468. If that be the case, do you not think that if geographical
circumstances admitted of Kensington being combined with other parishes
which have not this advantage in the same degree, these poorer parishes,
as well as Kensington, would get the advantage of that selection of
persons of a more cultivated class, who now give their services to
Kensington vestry?—[There would not be mutual benefit; Kensington would
pay the penalty, while such areas as Fulham and Hammersmith would gain
the reward. Furthermore, those now serving would not be willing to go
farther afield, and they would be frightened out of service by the term
“alderman.”]

3469. The dignity of alderman is not very popular in your parish?—It
would be if the Corporation of London governed the whole of the
metropolis, and you had a real alderman; but if you multiplied
municipalities, and had aldermen as thick as blackberries, it would be a
mockery and a delusion rather than a compliment.

[Only if the dignities were real would they be respected.]

3472. You would reserve those dignities, perhaps, for the general body
that would administer the concerns of the whole metropolis?—If the City
of London had been wise enough to open its arms and take in the whole
metropolis, so that there should be one Lord Mayor, and an efficient
number of aldermen, one to each district, then there would be something
in it; but as to having 11 municipalities, with a multitude of aldermen,
I feel sure it would not induce the better class of our population to
join the vestry or the municipality.

11 June

Jonathan Salter63

[Mill opened a new line of questioning, the preceding evidence having
covered a variety of matters local to St. Pancras.]

3826. Yours being a very large parish, and having so much local business
of various kinds, probably your attention has been drawn to the subject
of the municipal government of London, and you have, perhaps, formed
some opinion as to how far it is defective or admits of improvement, if
so, will you state what are your opinions on that subject?—I think, as
far as St. Pancras is concerned, we have, to a certain extent, a
municipal government; that is to say, we have a very large area, and
have a large number of representatives, and, I think, we do our work in
such a manner that we are, to a certain extent, a municipality. I know
it is Edition: current; Page: [495] the opinion of some gentlemen that
it would be much to their advantage if there were aldermen and so on,
but I question if a man who is really anxious for the welfare of his
neighbours cares whether he is called a vestryman or an alderman.

3827. You are acquainted, no doubt, with the plan of municipal
government for London, which has been drawn up chiefly by some vestrymen
of Westminster?—I have seen it.

3828. Have you any remarks to make on that plan?—I have nothing
particular to say in favour of it.

3829. Have you anything to say against it?—I do not wish to say anything
against it.

3830. If your experience suggests any objections to it, I have no doubt
the Committee would like to hear them?—As far as regards the area that
we have under our control, I do not think it would be any advantage;
doubtless there are localities, that are not managed as we profess to
manage our affairs, where it would be an advantage; what I feel is this:
that I should object to our having a larger jurisdiction saddled upon us
with a body who would not understand our business as thoroughly as we
do.

3831. Your body, I conceive, is a kind of specimen of what the municipal
governments of the districts of London would be under the proposed plan,
because its district is very large and populous, and is on a scale, not
indeed quite so great, but approaching the size proposed?—Yes.

3832. I think the only district of importance which would be added to
yours under the proposed plan, would be the parish of Bloomsbury?—Yes.

3833. Do you see any disadvantage in the junction of the parish of
Bloomsbury in the same municipal body with yourselves?—Some portions of
Bloomsbury very closely abut on us, but if Bloomsbury were attached to
St. Pancras, speaking in a parochial sense, it would naturally be
anxious to return a large number of members, and they would not be so
well acquainted with the wants and requirements of St. Pancras as the
St. Pancras authorities at present are.

3834. But, no doubt, in any municipal body, the members who represent
particular wards or districts, would be those chiefly consulted in
regard to the wants of their own districts, except when the subject was
one to be decided on general principles common to all, so that it is not
probable that the unacquaintance of the people of Bloomsbury with the
wants of St. Pancras would be any damage to St. Pancras; in fact, that
objection, if it applies at all, would apply even to so large a district
as St. Pancras, because it is impossible that the inhabitants of every
part of St. Pancras can be well acquainted with the wants of every other
part; is not that so?—There is an interchange of communication among the
representatives of the vestry; for instance, the outer section is
represented by its members who meet the representatives of the others,
and so they become acquainted with each other’s wants.

Edition: current; Page: [496]
3835. Would not the same thing take place between the representatives of
Bloomsbury and St. Pancras if they were united in one body?—I do not see
why it should not.

3836. As I understand, the vestry of St. Pancras is composed of a
considerable mixture of various classes of society?—Yes.

3837. In that respect, it is more a specimen of what would exist under
the municipal government proposed, than a specimen of the municipal
government which exists throughout the metropolis at present; do you not
think that if the municipalities were usually on a scale equal to, or
somewhat greater than St. Pancras, instead of being as they are, in most
cases, much smaller, there would probably be a considerably greater
mixture of classes, and that persons would be obtained of a better
position in society, and better general instruction?—I quite agree with
that; I think the area should be sufficiently large to entitle it to
members who would represent all bodies; I think it might be an advantage
that small areas should be increased to larger ones.

3838. You think that the area of St. Pancras is sufficiently large?—Yes.

3839. Although you do not think that some moderate extension of it would
be decidedly objectionable?—I confess I cannot see the general advantage
that would be derived from it.

3840. Would there not be an advantage in the junction of a district such
as yours, where persons are willing to serve in the municipal body, who
have more than an average education and position; do you not think that
by the junction of such districts with other districts that have not the
advantage of generally obtaining so good a class of men, those other
districts would also obtain the same advantage as St. Pancras, to a
certain extent, now possesses?—Unfortunately, men of scientific
attainments seldom trouble themselves much with these affairs, even in
municipalities.

3841. But do you not think that they are more likely to do so where the
districts are large?—I think that the vestry of St. Pancras stands on a
par with the Common Council of the City of London, which is the greatest
municipality, I suppose, in the world, consisting of men of all shades
and degrees.

3842. Do you not think that that is the sort of municipal council which
it is desirable to endeavour to obtain in every part of the
metropolis?—I must say that, as far as St. Pancras is concerned, I do
not think it would be an advantage.

3843. Because you consider that, owing to its extent, it possesses, in a
great degree, the advantage which it is desired to confer on other
parts?—Yes. No doubt, smaller areas would be improved by having other
areas added to them; but I think we have as large a machine as can be
properly worked. I think the inhabitants generally would suffer, if the
area was made larger. I think they would not have that ready means of
communicating with each other, which is so necessary in all local
matters.

Edition: current; Page: [497]
3844. You think that the extent of the Parliamentary boroughs would be
too great?—I think so.

3845. You are aware that in the proposed plan the districts would not be
so large as the present Parliamentary boroughs?—No.

3846. Your parish would be included along with Bloomsbury, in a district
subtracted from two Parliamentary boroughs, and Tower Hamlets would be
divided?—Yes. If you extended our area we should require two medical
men. I question whether there is not sufficient employment at present
for one with a staff under him; whether it is not better to have one
head, with subordinates under him, than two; one for one division, and
another for the other. I think there would be clashing.

3847. Do you think your district so large that one medical man, even
with the necessary number of subordinates, could not superintend it?—I
think not. I am speaking in a sanitary point of view, as regards
drainage. I am referring to the medical officer of health now, not to
the persons who attend to the sick poor.

3848. Still smaller districts would be required for that?—Yes; we have
medical officers for that purpose in each district.

3849. Has your Board generally a good understanding with the sanitary
officers; do you go on smoothly with them?—Pretty amicably. I have known
occasions when a little ill feeling has arisen when the sanitary
department has called for something to be done on the spur of the
moment; but, as a rule, they generally agree.

3850. You have sometimes thought that the recommendations went beyond
the necessity of the case?—I have had no occasion to think so; some
members have; but as a rule the sanitary measures are carried out.

3851. As a rule the recommendations of the sanitary officers are carried
into effect by the vestry?—Yes; with perhaps some trifling exceptions
now and then.

3852. Is there any improvement that you would suggest, in the way of
increase of power to the local Boards, or any new functions that you
would entrust to them; would you give them, for instance, any power with
regard to water or gas?—That is a difficult question. I think the House
of Commons should step in and settle that question. Where money is
invested by various companies, it is rather difficult to step in and
tamper with the subject.

3853. The House of Commons alone could give such power, and could alone
determine what course should be taken with regard to existing companies;
but have you not formed any decided opinion on that subject?—No.

John Richard Collins64

[Collins admitted that the title of “alderman” was attractive to him,
and that if the office of mayor were provided locally it would be
actively sought.]

Edition: current; Page: [498]
3995. Do you not think that that would be still more the case if the
area of jurisdiction were increased to a certain extent?—That, as a
general principle, would be the case, but St. Pancras is a large city;
as it is, there are 200,000 inhabitants in it, and probably in 20 years
there will be 300,000.

3996. Do you not think that if the metropolis were divided into
municipal districts about the size of St. Pancras, containing 200,000 or
300,000 inhabitants, it would be an improvement?—Yes; and I think the
governing bodies would have great importance in the public eye.

[The questioning turned to the matter of annual elections, which Collins
opposed.]

4043. Do you not think that, even if the elections were annual, the same
persons would generally be re-elected, unless they had shown themselves
incapable?—Very likely. I have been elected for the fourth time. Unless
there is any special objection, I think the members who are at all
useful would be retained.

[Collins averred that the costs of election in wider constituencies,
such as that of mailing circulars, would deter people from standing.]

4051. Would it not be necessary, if there were various candidates, to
send circulars to the ratepayers?—I think they would do so. When we
fought by parties we did so; we spent a great deal of money. A contested
election used to cost, I daresay, £700 or £800 on the two sides; we were
obliged to spend a great deal of money; we had to bring up the ladies in
carriages.

[The suggestion was made by the Chair that voting papers would reduce
trouble and expense; Collins disclaimed experience of them.]

4057. The vestry is not elected by voting papers?—Yes, when there is a
contest; but there must be personal attendance.

[The voting paper is folded, so in effect it is a secret ballot.]

4059. If the papers were collected from house to house, it would not be
necessary to bring up the ladies in carriages?—There would be no
necessity for it.

14 June

William Clark65

[Mill returned to one of the many topics covered in Clark’s evidence.]

4243. I understood you to say, that there was great difficulty in
inducing persons to accept the office of vestryman?—There is a
difficulty in getting what is called the more wealthy classes to serve;
they come into town in the morning and leave it in the afternoon, and
even if they were elected, I do not think that they are so Edition:
current; Page: [499] conversant with the wants and necessities of the
parish as the persons who now form the bulk of the vestrymen.

4244. Do you not think that it is an advantage to a body of that sort to
have a mixture of various classes of persons; some of the class you have
mentioned, and perhaps a greater number of the classes who are now
willing to be vestrymen?—I should be glad to see it so, but I see no
hope, make the qualification what you will, of inducing them to serve; I
have tried it over and over again; we have had one or two large sugar
refiners members of the Board, but they did not stay long; they very
rarely attend even when they become members.

4245. Do you not think that if that district was larger, and if the
vestrymen were more in the public eye, and more commented upon by the
press, if more distinction could be obtained by serving the public in
that way, there would be less difficulty experienced in inducing persons
of a superior class to serve with others in the vestry?—I have great
doubt about it. The same complaint is made with regard to the
corporation of the City of London, that the great merchants will not
come forward; and certainly if honour and dignity would induce them to
come forward, the office of Lord Mayor of the City of London might be
expected to do so; but the same complaint is made even there.

[Amongst other issues, the reasons for occasionally not accepting the
lowest bids for public works were discussed.]

4363. If any person’s offer was rejected while the tender of some one
else, though higher, was accepted, would the person who made the lower
tender have a right to challenge the decision, and demand that the
committee which rejected the offer should give its reasons?—If he chose
to do so the committee would not hesitate to give their reasons.

William Francis Jebb66

[The interrogation settled on the inconveniences of the irregular
boundaries of the parishes of St. Margaret’s and St. John’s,
Westminster.]

4475. Does not St. Margaret’s reach into the middle of Kensington
Gardens?—We have no jurisdiction there; but I think the boundary of the
parishes runs along by the Serpentine.

4476. I believe there is a stone with the initials of your parish on it
in the midst of Kensington Gardens, not far from the Round Pond?—I
believe there is.

18 June

Dr. William Tiffin Iliff67

[The witness described the filthy habitations of the coster-mongers and
even lower classes in Newington.]

Edition: current; Page: [500]
4821. What is the condition of the common lodging houses in your parish,
to which the recent Act applies?68—They are in a very good condition; we
have only one set in Kent-street; I was over them all about a month ago,
when they had received their cleansing, and were in a very good
condition; I only wish the poor as a rule had places to live in like
them.

4822. Have you ever taken into consideration the expediency of extending
to other houses, the houses of the respectable poor, any of the powers
which already exist in regard to the very lowest class of lodging
houses?69—Yes; the Association of the Officers of Health have embodied
that in a memorandum submitted to the Home Secretary, suggesting that
they should have some power over the rooms.70

25 June

Daniel Birt71

[In discussing the actual practice and qualifications for election to
the Metropolitan Board of Works, Birt distinguished between the
requirement for Parliament in the Reform Act of 1832, “a male person of
full age,” and for the Board, merely “a person.” He then said he thought
he knew who would have been first elected to the Board had there been an
open election.]

5190. Do you think it would have been “a male person of full age”?—I
think it would.

[After having dwelt on the quality of the vestrymen, the questioning
turned to expenses of local administration.]

5211. You said that some years ago there was considerable agitation in
the parish owing to the dissatisfaction with regard to local management
as it existed at that time, but that this dissatisfaction having ceased,
the agitation subsided; is the reason of that, that the dissatisfaction
not having been originally well grounded has died away of itself, or has
the local management improved since that time?—I think the local
management has been very much improved since that time.

5212. In what respect does the local management differ from what it was
at that time?—It is much more systematic. The officers have a
differently constituted body to supervise them; the vestry which sits
fortnightly, but which formerly was only called together as the
church-wardens and overseers chose to call them. As an illustration of
my statement, I can only say that a gentleman who used to agitate
Edition: current; Page: [501] the parish a good deal, and was a member
of the vestry, has retired from it; and he told me a few days ago that
his vocation had gone; that he had nothing to find fault with now, and
therefore he preferred quietly to retire.

5213. Was the agitation that previously existed all antecedent to the
Metropolis Local Management Act, or did it go on under that Act during
the first year?—It went on after the Act came into operation with regard
to the appointment of vestrymen; but, as I said, from that time it has
gradually subsided and become less and less.

5214. The improvement that you consider to have taken place, the more
systematic management, dates from the Local Management Act, I suppose?—I
think so.

5215. Or has it been introduced by degrees?—[The Act greatly increased
the functions of the vestry, and the consequent agitation arose over the
patronage connected with the position of overseer. With the present low
turnover in the office, there has been less agitation; perhaps also
there are fewer subjects to agitate about.]

5216. Now that there is no agitation there appears to be some difficulty
in inducing people to offer themselves as candidates even for the
vestry?—[There is no shortage of persons to serve as vestrymen; there
is, however, little need for candidature. People are not anxious to be
in office, but they perform well when elected.]

5217. They are elected more by a spontaneous choice of the parishioners
than by their offering themselves?—Yes; to a very large extent it is so.

5218. Have you ever considered whether an enlargement of the area of
local management would be desirable; whether a larger district than a
single parish—not a very large one, which I believe yours is not—might
not be advantageously managed by the same body, and whether in that case
it would not be likely that you would more easily obtain persons of
education and position to fill the office of vestrymen, or whatever
office corresponded to it?—I think, perhaps, it would have been
advantageous had the Legislature made the districts somewhat larger than
they are at present; but the vestry that I happen to be connected with
does not view with any sympathy the project for consolidating the whole
metropolis; say into three large municipal bodies.

5219. No one has proposed so small a number as you mention. The
proposition which involves the fewest, is that of making the municipal
bodies correspond with the Parliamentary boroughs;72 in that case yours
would be extended to the whole of Southwark. What would be the
particular nature of the objections the vestry would feel to such an
extension as that?—I am not prepared to say that the vestry has any
feeling of objection to it.

Edition: current; Page: [502]
5220. You only think that they are well satisfied with the system as it
is, and that they do not think it requires much amendment?—They appear
to be perfectly well satisfied with the system as it is working at
present.

5221. Do you not yourself think that the acting on a large scale on the
one hand, would produce a greater disposition on the part of persons of
position to become members of the body; and on the other, that it would
give greater publicity, that the management would take place more in the
eyes of the public, and that being conducted on a larger scale it would
be possible to subdivide business and confine each part to persons of
higher qualifications than are obtained, or can be obtained at present
on a small scale?—I doubt if persons of higher qualifications would be
obtained for the position by making the area in our locality
co-extensive with the Parliamentary borough.

5222. You think that the greater importance of the duties, and their
being more in the public eye would not be an additional inducement to
persons to offer themselves and take the trouble?—They would have the
same duties considerably extended; I do not think they would be rightly
described as more important.

5223. They would be the same duties, but the amount of duty,
responsibility, and power which the persons so elected would exercise
would be greater, owing to the greater extent of the district?—I do not
think that a better class of persons would be induced to come forward by
an enlargement of the area. I ground that upon my knowledge with regard
to the Metropolitan Board itself. I think that that which is a larger
body than these bodies to which you have been referring, would not, if
there were a general election by the ratepayers elicit the candidature
of persons better qualified than the present vestrymen.

[Birt reaffirmed this judgment in response to other questions.]

5231. You would not see any inconvenience in persons of the same class
as now form your vestry, serving along with persons of another class in
a larger body?—At present the persons who are elected by our parish to
be vestrymen arrange their own time of meeting. They meet at six o’clock
in the evening for their own convenience, not for the convenience of
their officers. I should be glad (I know they cannot do it, and
therefore I do not ask it nor expect it) if they could meet in the
ordinary business hours, that we might get through the business as other
professional persons do; but with regard to our own parish if we were
merged into a municipality that met in the middle of the day, I doubt
whether we should not, to some extent, be virtually unrepresented,
because those who would be elected would probably not be in a position
to give the attendance which they now give at six o’clock in the
evening.

5232. Do you think that any such body as that would establish hours of
meeting that would necessarily exclude a considerable number of those
who would probably be, and certainly ought to be, elected to form part
of the body; do you not Edition: current; Page: [503] think that such a
course would be very unpopular, and that the members would not be
elected again if they established such unreasonable rules?—I find that
some metropolitan vestries which are in a very different position from
St. George-the-Martyr, Southwark, are able to meet in the middle of the
day. Inasmuch as I do not know exactly what would be the limits of any
one of the new bodies to be formed, I cannot say what hour would be
reasonable for them to meet. I merely say that if they were to adopt
greatly different hours from those which obtain among ourselves, the
present members of the vestry would be unable to attend in consequence
of their own avocations.

Henry Bidgood73

[The questioning dwelt on matters pertaining to election.]

5323. Have you turned your attention to whether it would be desirable
that the area of management should be extended beyond the parish: do you
not think that even with those functions which you propose for giving
additional publicity to the election there will still be less interest
taken in becoming a member of the board of management for the parish
only than there would be in becoming a member of a smaller body for the
whole City of Westminster?—I do not think that the difference would be
very great, but I think certainly that Westminster is not too large for
one municipal election. It has been a favourite notion of mine for the
last 20 years.

5324. The whole of Westminster?—Yes; after all I think it is not larger
than Marylebone.

5325. If there were a greater unwillingness to become a candidate for
the larger district than for the smaller, still the fact that you would
not need so many persons to offer themselves for Westminster as you
would need for all the parishes into which Westminster is divided, would
in itself be an advantage, and would give a greater choice of
members?—Yes; I think that 48 men for our parish is too large a number,
and the thing ceases to have that honour attached to it which it would
have if the vestry was composed of half a score or a dozen persons.

[The greater office would be more sought after.]

5327. You think that if 48 or double that number were elected for the
whole of Westminster it might be felt to be a considerable honour to be
one of them?—I think that 48 men could manage Westminster very well.

[Bidgood expressed himself in favour of voting papers.]

5346. The board of guardians are elected by voting papers, are they
not?—Not with us.

Edition: current; Page: [504]
28 June

George Henry Drew74

[Mill started a new subject for this witness.]

5598. Do you think that your district is as large a one as can be
advantageously managed by the same body, or have you turned your
attention to any of the proposals that have been made for forming larger
districts, in one of which your district would be included, and having a
municipal administration for that larger district elected in the same
way as at present, by the ratepayers?—I do not think the present body
could with advantage administer a larger district than it does now.

5599. It would require a more numerous body?—Rather a body of better
capacity.

5600. Do you think it would be likely if a larger district were embraced
in its sphere of operations, that persons of superior capacity would be
more disposed than at present to act upon the Board?—I think there is no
doubt of it.

5601. So that on the whole you think there would be probably a more
capable administration for the larger district, although the present one
may be adequate to carry on its operations in a tolerable manner?—I
think probably that would be so; whether it would be desirable or not I
do not say.

5602. Have you formed any opinion whether it would be desirable?—I think
so far as the parish is concerned that it is very well administered by
the men who now administer its affairs. It is much to their advantage to
have to administer the affairs of the parish in the way they do.

5603. In what respect to their advantage?—It is an advantage to them to
have to administer their own affairs.

5604. Do you mean that their affairs are better attended to in
consequence, or that it is an exercise to them?—It is an exercise to
them; whether any larger body with a larger area might administer the
affairs of the larger area better, I have not formed any opinion.

5605. The exercise of mind would be still more valuable in that
case?—But in that case you would not have the same class of men to
administer the affairs of the district.

5606. You would have some of the same class and others of a superior
class, would you not?—Not knowing what the mode of election would be, I
cannot say.

5607. Supposing the election was by the ratepayers, as at present, in
different wards it would naturally happen that the Board would have a
more mixed composition, and do you not think that the acting in concert
with persons possessing still higher qualifications than those who now
act, would be a great advantage, and that the exercise of those
functions would be a greater means of improvement to their own minds
than they have at present?—Without doubt. I think that is what we want
in the vestry of Bermondsey; an addition of persons of a superior class.
They are now apt to be led by one or two men who have rather more
Edition: current; Page: [505] knowledge of public affairs than the rest,
and not always, perhaps, in the right direction.

5 July

Dugald Edward Cameron75

[Mill was the first questioner after the Chair’s identifying queries.]

5619. Have you been a candidate to represent St. Pancras at the
Metropolitan Board?—Yes, at the last election in June.

5620. Are there any circumstances connected with that election which you
wish to state?—The peculiarity of the election, if it can be so called,
is this: the last member retired by rotation; and 12 months previously
to his retirement, promises from individual members of the vestry were
extracted before it could possibly be ascertained who were the
candidates, in order that the members of the vestry might make a
selection.

5621. This was at the election previous to that at which you were a
candidate?—[Josiah Wilkinson, an eminently valuable member from 1856 to
1864, found to his surprise when seeking re-election that successful
solicitations had been made to individual members of the vestry to
support another candidate.]

[Wilkinson had served on the Metropolitan Board.]

5623. Were any public grounds of opposition to Mr. Josiah Wilkinson
stated?—Not any public grounds. The most public ground that I can
recollect was very frivolous, namely, that all the honours should not be
centred in any one individual for any lengthened period; that, however
eminent and desirable his services were, a change, whether for the
better or worse, should take place.

5624. Do you think that, on that occasion at any rate, the election was
carried against him rather by a private intrigue than by a fair public
opposition?—Completely so, because several members of the vestry who had
signed that paper, told me afterwards that they had little idea that
they had pledged themselves to give their votes, that they only intended
to solicit Mr. Taylor to come forward, not that they had pledged
themselves to vote for him in opposition to Mr. Wilkinson. In fact,
great misapprehension prevailed on the subject. It was supposed that
because the term of office of Mr. Wilkinson was about to expire, he
would not be a candidate for the next election.

5625. Do you suppose that any undue influence was used, or that any
undue influence was used to induce these vestrymen to give their
promises?—I am not prepared to say that.

5626. You were a candidate last June for the purpose of counteracting
this system?—[Knowing he would be defeated, Cameron wished to expose the
practice.]

5627. You think that the sitting representative of your vestry in the
Board of Edition: current; Page: [506] Works made use of his position as
a means of canvassing for re-election?—The member of the Board of Works
is not necessarily a member of the vestry, but he is generally so, and
by means of contact with other members he has, in that way, the
opportunity of pursuing that system.

5628. Should you propose, with a view of obviating occurrences of this
kind, any change in the mode of electing members of the Board of
Works?—I think that the election is very unsatisfactory in one sense,
and the ratepayers from whom such large sums are paid for the metropolis
should have vested in them the right of election. It has been said that
the expense would be so great as to prevent any gentleman seeking
election, but I cannot see that that is a sufficient objection; because
the expense for the election of vestryman is nothing, and the election
of a member to the Metropolitan Board of Works might take place at the
same time, and the expense come out of the same parochial funds; the
members of the vestry have no expense whatever to incur, and if the
election to the Metropolitan Board was under the same management, the
objection as to expense would not apply.

5629. You think that the ratepayers might vote for the vestrymen and for
the member to the Metropolitan Board of Works at the same time?—I think
that might be effected.

5630. In what way should you recommend the votes to be given; by voting
papers or by a poll?—I think voting papers would be preferable to the
present system of electing vestrymen; very few persons take the
slightest interest in the election at present and it is limited to a
very few persons; any names that 10 or 12 gentlemen may select are sent
to the electors, and when the election takes place, perhaps 20 or 30
persons decide who shall represent the different wards of the parish.

5631. Do you think that if the ratepayers were called upon to nominate a
member of the Board of Works at the same time as the vestry, a greater
and more general interest would be felt by them in the elections?—I
think so, for this reason, an election for one-third of the vestrymen
takes place annually, but the election for a member to the Metropolitan
Board of Works would only take place triennially. I think it would bring
the ratepayers, in some measure, to look to the importance of the
representation in both Boards, the vestry and the Metropolitan Board.

5632. You find that the interest taken by the ratepayers in the election
of vestrymen at present is not great?—[After considerable activity in
1856 there has been a great decline in interest, though at the last
election there was a general desire for improvement.]

5633. If I understand you, a kind of reaction has set in now, and a
greater interest is taken in the elections?—Not among the ratepayers,
but amongst the members of the vestry themselves; they would like to
elevate their position by getting a superior class of men among them.

5634. Do you ascribe that want of interest, on the part of the
ratepayers, merely to the fact that the novelty has worn off, or to mere
general apathy and Edition: current; Page: [507] indifference, or is it
because they are satisfied with the way in which the parish is
managed?—I think it arises from apathy and indifference, and the trouble
that it takes to record their votes, by going to the polling booth, or
any other place appointed for the reception of votes.

5635. Do you think if the district were enlarged, if, instead of a
parish, it were a municipality, embracing, for instance, the whole of a
Parliamentary district, that there would be a greater interest in the
election felt by the ratepayers?—It is difficult to answer that question
by anticipation; if there were a popular out-of-doors election, or
anything of that description, I think the same class would occupy
positions in the municipality that they do now in almost all the
vestries.

5636. What means would you suggest by which a greater interest could be
excited, or a superior class of persons could be induced to become
candidates?—By mean of papers left from house to house, as in the case
of the guardians.

5637. Would you propose that as a means of inducing a greater number of
ratepayers to vote?—Yes, I think it would have that effect.

5638. Do you not think that there would be some danger that those who
did not sufficiently care about the subject to vote at all unless the
voting paper was sent to them at their houses, would be willing, if it
were sent to them, and they could vote without trouble, to vote almost
for anybody who asked them?—No, I do not know that would be the case; I
think they would be more likely to communicate with their immediate
friends, and ask them what they proposed doing with reference to the
election, so that the subject would be more ventilated.

5639. You think that leaving voting papers at the house with lists of
candidates would excite conversation, and so create a greater interest
in the subject, and that people would be better able to concert
together?—I think that would take place.

5640. You think, perhaps, that under the present system the generality
of the ratepayers never have their attention called to the fact that
there is an election at all?—That is the case in our parish; there is a
ratepayers’ association in every ward; they call public meetings of the
ratepayers, but the apathy is so great that not more than 100 persons
ever attend any gathering of that description, and, perhaps, two-thirds
of those are not ratepayers.

5641. Do you think that leaving a mere notice of election, with a list
of candidates, at the house of every ratepayer, would have the same
effect in drawing attention to the subject as leaving a voting
paper?—You must send a list of candidates with the voting paper.

5642. Suppose that the voting were to take place in the way in which it
takes place now, but that lists of candidates were left at the houses of
all the ratepayers, so as to make them aware more certainly than they
are now that an election is coming on, or that the election is to be
contested, do you think that this would produce the same effect on their
minds in exciting an interest in the subject, and inducing them to ask
questions about it, as if voting papers were left at their houses to be
filled up?—I think not nearly so much interest, because it is even a
trouble to Edition: current; Page: [508] them on their way to the City
to go and give their vote, and perhaps if they all did so in the
morning, there would be such a rush that the poll could not be taken
sufficiently quickly, and they would object to spend a quarter or
half-an-hour of their time; the poll concludes at four o’clock, so that
on the return of those persons, even if they desired to vote, they would
not be able to do so.

5643. Many persons are prevented now by the inconvenience of voting,
which would be removed by means of voting papers?—That is my opinion.

5644. Suppose that instead of a single parish there were a municipality,
co-extensive with one of the Parliamentary districts, should you think
that this would be an inducement to a superior class of persons in
education or social position to become candidates beyond what can be
expected at present?—I am hardly sufficiently acquainted with
municipalities generally, but I think in such a parish as St. Pancras,
where most of the gentlemen are mere residents in the squares and places
of that description, having their business elsewhere, they would not
care much about forming part of a municipality, any more than they do
about becoming vestrymen; yet I think it would be desirable that
something of a character should be given to the office beyond that of a
mere vestryman; it would perhaps have a beneficial effect. There is an
idea about a vestry that is not very palatable to the minds of people in
the metropolis; and I think something might be done to raise its
character.

5645. You think greater dignity might be given to the office?—I think
so. The term “vestryman” conveys an imperfect idea of the duties under
the Metropolis Local Management Act.

5646. Possibly also more extensive duties might be confided to a
municipality than would be entrusted to a vestry, although the duties of
the vestry are now considerable?—They are quite beyond the original
intention; the sewers, lighting, and other sanitary matters, are quite
beyond anything that was intended for vestry purposes.

5647. If municipal bodies were created for districts equal to, or nearly
equal to, Parliamentary districts, are there any additional powers which
you think might be advantageously entrusted to those municipalities?—I
think if they could have the control of gas and water it would be an
advantage; and I think also that they ought to have the rates arising
from carriage duties; in fact, if it be a municipality in reality it
ought to be so, I venture to think, as regards taxation and the means of
support.

5648. Supposing there were, in addition to these municipalities, a
general body for the whole metropolis, either constituted on the basis
of the City of London, with its jurisdiction extended and its
constitution enlarged, or on the basis of the Board of Works, should you
think that these duties, with regard to gas and water supply, would be
better entrusted to the separate municipalities, or to the general
one?—I think to the general one.

5649. Are there any other changes that you would suggest, from your
Edition: current; Page: [509] experience of the local management of the
metropolis?—I have not considered any.

5650. Is there any other statement you wish to make?—No.

John Layton76

[The witness complained of the legal delays preventing rapid enforcement
of the Nuisances Removal Act.]

5761. What would you recommend?—That the first order should be final;
that it should not be necessary to summon a man to show cause why he has
not complied with the order, since its tendency can only be delay.

5762. Would you empower the vestry itself to give the order?—No, the
magistrate; but one order should be sufficient.

5763. You would have the order of the magistrates to abate the nuisance
made compulsory)?77—Peremptory in all cases.

5764. If the person to whom the order was given did not remove the
nuisance, the order should at once be enforced?—Yes, and we have ample
powers.

5765. You have powers sufficient to enforce the order of the
magistrates, if you were allowed to do so, without summoning the man to
show cause?—Yes; I think, however, that it would be found necessary to
increase the staff of magistrates. Recently, under all these Acts of
Parliament, the magistrates have been almost overwhelmed. Many
compensation cases under Railway Acts come before them, and so with
small tenancies under £10, and many other things; their jurisdiction has
become so extended that physically it is utterly impossible for them to
carry it out. I am sure that no gentlemen can assist us more readily
than the magistrates at Clerkenwell and their clerks, but I am compelled
to make out all my own summonses, and take them there cut and dried, and
to draw out my own orders.

5766. Do you consider these duties to be properly imposed upon the
magistrates?—I should like to see a court for the whole of the
metropolis to take these matters into consideration; there is work, I
think, for a magistrate sitting every day in such large parishes as
Islington and St. Pancras.

5767. The matters you are speaking of are of a judicial kind, such as
determining the amount of compensation?—There is a great deal of that,
and no doubt a judicial mind is required.

[It would be convenient to go before a county rather than a police
magistrate.]

5769. Have you a body of local justices sitting regularly?—No; they sit
in the Sessions House at Clerkenwell, but they favour us by coming to
the vestry hall to hear summons upon the rating, and also with reference
to weights and measures.

[They would provide a good and fair tribunal, and a readier one.]

Edition: current; Page: [510]
5773. Is there any improvement that you would suggest in the
constitution of the vestries, or of the other bodies which at present
carry on the municipal administration of the metropolis?—I do not know
that I can suggest any.

[Layton commented on the recent history of the governing bodies.]

5775. Are you satisfied generally with the kind of persons who are
candidates for the vestry in your parish? Are they of as good a status
as you would desire?—I think we have cause to be pretty well satisfied;
we have a very good mixture; it depends, however, upon the wards; in
some of the wards we have almost a difficulty to get the £40
qualification; the number of our assessments in the parish is 23,000;
there is, no doubt, a good deal of apathy on the part of the ratepayers,
but I do not know why we should legislate for those who are apathetic.
We generally send out something over 10,000 notices with regard to the
day of election.

5776. Do you think there would be more interest excited in the elections
on the part of the ratepayers if they were to vote by voting papers?—I
do not think they would be at all useful; I think that it would only
extend the system of canvassing, and the result would be the same.

5777. Does much canvassing take place in your parish?—There is a great
deal in particular wards; we have eight wards. I may mention that the
ratepayers are limited to the ward in which they reside, but a vestryman
may be taken from any part of the parish; some persons think that the
intention of the Act of Parliament was that the vestrymen should be
limited to the ward in which they reside.78

5778. Is that your own opinion?—I think it would be more uniform; there
is another singular thing in the Act of Parliament, a ratepayer who
votes must have been actually rated 12 months,79 but not so with regard
to the vestryman; he may have only just had his name put upon the rating
books.

5779. Do you think it desirable that no one should be eligible as a
vestryman for any ward unless he is an inhabitant of the ward?—I think
he should be rated in that ward, or if there are two wards they might be
brought together.

5780. Would not that rule limit still more than at present the range of
choice, and diminish the chance of obtaining the most eligible
persons?—It is subject to that construction being put upon it; I am
speaking of a very large parish, each ward having a large population,
and being almost a parish in itself.

5781. Some of your wards, I believe, are inhabited by a very poor
population, are they not?—Comparatively, so that the £40 qualification
for a vestryman is felt to be too high, limiting the selection.

5782. You would prefer to have a lower qualification for vestrymen?—In
the lower rated wards, because at present you are liable to be driven to
one class of Edition: current; Page: [511] persons, namely, tavern
keepers and so on, of whom, however, I do not wish to speak with any
disrespect.

5783. You say that there are wards in which there are very few persons
rated at £40 except tavern keepers?—I do not put it so strongly as that,
they would preponderate.

5784. You think it would be better to take persons rated in the ward,
although at a lower qualification, than persons from other wards in the
same parish?—Yes, I think the qualification which is mentioned, and the
restriction which is given in one of the sections as to the amount of
rating might as well be made applicable to the wards. There is one
section which says that if the number of persons rated at £40 shall
amount to one-sixth in a parish, the qualification shall be £40, but if
they are below one-sixth then the qualification shall be £25. Now if
that was confined to the different wards instead of the different
parishes, I think it would be an advantage. The qualification would then
be £25 in some of the wards, and £40 in others, so that the thing would
be equalised.

5785. You think that even in that way there would be a sufficient
mixture of classes in the vestry?—I think so; I think I may speak very
favourably of the vestry of Islington; complaints will arise and do
arise, and indeed we should have nothing but stagnation if they did not;
on the whole, I think the work is well done.

[Layton dwelt on the failure of the Metropolitan Board of Works to live
up to its promise to devote 250 acres to a park in Islington and
Hornsey, to be known as Finsbury park.80]

5791. Has your vestry made any remonstrance in any public manner?—Yes,
we have been before the Board of Works by deputation; Mr. Torrens, Mr.
Alderman Lusk, and the vicar attended, by the unanimous desire of the
meeting in the parish. A deputation also attended from St. Luke’s,
Old-street.

5792. In the present state of the law, I suppose you have no appeal from
the Board of Works except to Parliament?—No, the question I have
mentioned is a legal one, and very peculiar; one of the clauses in the
Finsbury Park Act is to this effect; that when the park is completed
they shall dispose of 20 acres. That is like taking surplus land upon a
railway for the purposes of deviation. Here they have decided that the
20 acres shall go for building purposes, but I think they are premature.
That is one of the questions that ought to be decided.

[Mill opened a new topic with this witness.]

5817. Has your attention been called to the proposals that have been
made for establishing municipalities in different portions of the
metropolis?—I have not given much attention to the subject, but I think
that Islington is quite large enough to be a district of itself. We are
a municipality nearly, with the exception of having a mayor and
aldermen.

Edition: current; Page: [512]
5818. What is the population?—At the last census it was 155,000; we take
it now to be over 180,000.

5819. Do you know what proportion that bears to the population of the
Parliamentary borough of Finsbury?—I do not know. The Islington list of
voters is something more than half the list of voters for the whole
borough. I do not know the population of the borough.

[The issue was raised of dividing the expenses of paving among the
houses on a street. Payment was in the main proportioned to frontage,
but there was no general agreement as to streets along flank walls, some
magistrates holding that expenses attributable to such walls where there
was no entrance should fall on the whole block.]

5821. That it should not be paid for by the occupier of the house to
which the wall is attached, but by the whole street?—[Yes, except that
when there is an entrance, the owner should pay for the portion up to
it. Because questions of this sort occupy too much of the magistrates’
time, there should be uniform rules. Another complaint is that a
magistrate has jurisdiction for only six months.]

5822. You mean that if the owner succeeds in resisting the demand for
six months, he gets rid of it?—Yes; I should not have any hesitation in
sueing a man in the county court, or one of the superior courts.

[If occupiers were made liable in the first instance, it would be
possible to proceed summarily against offenders.]

5824. Are there any other local rates which are levied directly from the
owner and not from the occupier?—No.

5825. The only case in which the objection arises is that of paving new
streets?—And making the roads.

5826. The pavement is kept up at the expense of the parish
afterwards?—Yes; the Act of Parliament works beneficially in this way,
stopping all question as to whether there has been a legal dedication,
because it provides that after the parish has compelled the owners to do
the work for all time, the roads are thrown upon the parish.81

John Edwin Bradfield82

[The practice in Islington has been for the vestry, instead of hearing
complaints about road maintenance, to turn them over to the highway
committee, which the vestry appoints; in the opinion of the witness,
that committee had already prejudged the question.]

Edition: current; Page: [513]
5841. In what way prejudged the question?—They have made the rates and
applied them.

5842. You think it is to the vestry collectively that recourse should be
had, and not to the highway committee?—I think the vestry certainly
ought to receive deputations and not hand them over to committees, but I
go further in the remedy which I advocate; I say that there ought to be
a power over the vestry in such a case as this, possessed either by the
police magistrate or the Metropolitan Board of Works. Mr. Layton also
referred to a letter; I should tell you that that letter was received by
the chairman of a public meeting, I believe, on Saturday, and it gave
him two days’ notice to get up a meeting of inhabitants, on a road about
three-quarters of a mile long, to go before the highway committee; this
letter was sent by the vestry clerk after the matter had been before the
highway committee two years and a half.

9 July

John Charles Buckmaster83

[The Chair, in establishing the credentials of the witness, elicited the
information that he had been very active in the government of
Battersea.]

5847. Have you continued to take an interest in the management up to the
present time?—Not much now; I have ceased during the last two or three
years to take much active interest in the affairs of the parish.

5848. Had you any reason for ceasing to interest yourself in the
matter?—I felt that I obtained so little support from the more
intelligent and influential ratepayers of the parish, that it seemed to
me hopeless to continue my efforts; I am now perfectly indifferent.

5849. You had reason to complain of the local management, and were
opposed to the manner in which it was conducted?—Yes, I was very much
opposed to the general local government of the parish. It seemed to me
to be committed to persons very respectable in their way, but persons in
whom I could feel no confidence with reference either to their judgment
on many questions or to the raising and expenditure of such large sums
of money as annually passed through their hands.

5850. Would you be good enough to state the points on which you had
reason to differ from the vestry, or to disapprove of their
conduct?—[Under the Local Management Act, the auditors are unpaid
volunteers, inadequate and unwilling to perform their duties properly;
consequently there is no proper oversight of the expenditure of rates.]

5851. The auditors, I presume, would not be required to judge of the
propriety of the expenditure, but only whether it had been really
incurred?—[They simply see the receipts. The collection of rates was so
badly done that the district board took it over, but now it is back in
local hands, and again mismanaged.]

Edition: current; Page: [514]
5852. By whom are the collectors of the local rates appointed?—The
churchwardens and the overseers.

5853. Then the vestry has no power over them?—None.

5854. Would they have any power of preventing malversations of this
sort?—The vestry seems to have no power in our parish; the churchwardens
and overseers make all the rates; the precepts are served on them, and
the vestries seem to me to have no duties, or, if they have, they never
perform them. Last year the vestry was convened only three times; once
to elect the four members to the district board; once to appoint three
members to the burial board; and once to fix the time for the going out
of a portion of the existing vestry.

5855. I presume that the powers which the Metropolis Management Act has
conferred on most vestries are, in your case, vested in the district
board?—The district board is made up of persons sent from the vestries
every year; we meet for the purpose, the first Wednesday in June, to
appoint six men to the district board; one year we had a very severe
contest in the parish; we were desirous, if we could, of getting a
different class of men into office; after a very severe contest in a
parish of 2,500 ratepayers, and collecting rates amounting to £70,000 or
£80,000 a-year, there were only about 200 ratepayers that voted in the
election, although for weeks before we had all the organization of a
contested election, with the public-houses opened, and bills and cabs,
and everything of that kind; but we failed entirely.

5856. That was with regard to the vestry?—[The strenuous attempt was
made because the vestry is the source of all power and government; the
failure to get the voters out resulted in the election of three
beer-house-keepers seeking licenses, two retired publicans, a retired
tripedresser, a hairdresser, a pianoforte tuner, an undertaker, and
people of similar class. People who did not vote said they had been
insulted enough.]

5857. To what do you ascribe this unwillingness of so many persons in
the parish to take part in the elections for the vestry?—[Though
thoroughly dissatisfied with the system, they see no way of improving
it. While action by the district board is better, it is hard to induce,
for example in his own case, concerning the preservation of footpaths
and right of way.]

5858. If I understand you rightly, what you complain of chiefly, both in
the vestry and in the district board, is indifference;—that they do not
trouble themselves about public objects?—They do not; they do not
perform the duties which they really ought to perform. With regard to
nuisances, we have had piggeries and nuisances, of the most abominable
character in the parish. At the present time I know of small houses in
compound, where the cesspools in the backyards have been overrunning
with filth, nearly six inches, for the last two or three weeks, loose
bricks have been laid down for the tenants to walk on to keep them out
of the filth as they go to the closets. You may ask why has it not been
removed? I spoke about it to the inspector of nuisances, and it is to be
brought first before a local Edition: current; Page: [515] committee,
then the district board; but all this takes time, and the tenants might
die with fever or cholera before any action is taken.

5859. A committee of the vestry?—[Yes, the most active member being the
owner of the houses. Knowing nothing can be done, people submit to the
abominable conditions.]

5860. What is the constitution of the district board?—The district board
is formed by members elected from the vestry.

5861. From the vestries of the different parishes?—[In the case of
Battersea, the twenty-four vestrymen, many of whom do not attend, elect
several members to the district board in June. The board, which has wide
jurisdiction, acts with contempt for local sensibilities.]

5862. The district board, I suppose, is constituted under the provisions
of the Metropolis Local Management Act?—Yes.84

5863. What is the extent of the district?—The district takes in
Battersea, Tooting, Streatham, Clapham, Wandsworth, and Putney.

5864. So that the extent of the district is considerable?—Taking the
boundary of the Thames at Battersea to Putney on one side, and from
Tooting to Clapham on the South, on the other, you will get the entire
area of the district comprehended by the district board.

5865. If I understand you rightly the complaints against the vestry and
the district board are rather negative than positive. You complain of
them for not doing things which they ought to do?—[Most of them try only
to keep down the rates and to build compound houses, which have become a
great nuisance because they are greatly under-rated.]

5866. In what manner does putting the houses into compound cause them to
be under-assessed?—The man who builds these houses and puts them into
compound, says to the churchwardens and overseers, “You see these are
weekly tenants, they may go out; the house may be empty, but whether it
is empty or occupied, I will pay the rates regularly.” The churchwardens
and overseers think that that is a capital offer, that it will save the
collector a great deal of trouble, and that they will be sure of their
money. The consequence is that the houses are put into compound, and
that is often the qualification for a man to be on the vestry. If it
were not for this compound property, there would be eight or nine men
now on the vestry who would be disqualified.

5867. In order to have the security of the owner for the rates, they are
willing to compound with him for a much lower amount, provided it is
paid throughout the whole year, whether the house is occupied or
not?—Exactly.

[The principle is that of the Small Tenements Act.]

5869. Is there any private Act in force in Battersea?—I believe there
was a Edition: current; Page: [516] small Local Act of Parliament
obtained some years ago.85 At that time the parish was almost entirely
market garden ground, and the small houses were occupied by men who were
engaged in cultivating this ground. I dare say there were very few poor
men receiving more than 12s. or 13s. a-week, and it was sometimes felt
difficult to get the rates from them. A solicitor, with the consent of
the churchwardens and overseers, obtained an Act of Parliament for the
purpose of putting this property into compound, and that Act of
Parliament (which was obtained under circumstances very different from
the present condition of the parish), has continued in operation to the
present time. The existing owners of compound property take advantage of
it, and the houses are put in at a third of their value.

[This practice is allowed under the Local Act.]

5871. As you have so unfavourable an opinion of the existing management
of the parish, will you tell us what improvements you would recommend,
in order to prevent the evils to which you have referred?—[The
management now is vastly inferior to what it was a half-century earlier.
If the present system is continued, there must be a great improvement in
the levying and collection of rates.]

[The present occupiers of compound houses could pay proper rates.]

5874. What length of time are the rates compounded for?—There is no time
specified, but if one of these compound houses should become a beer
shop, or any other kind of shop, then I believe the occupier is rated. I
do not believe that the overseers and churchwardens have the power of
putting them out of compound after they have once accepted them without
giving the owner a reason for so doing, which is rarely done.

[Discussion continued on the process of compounding, which was arranged
wholly and foolishly by the churchwardens and overseers at the behest of
the builders.]

5890. You mentioned that there were frequent arrears of rates, and that
it was necessary to summon, every half year, five or six hundred
ratepayers out of a total number of not more than 2,500; to what do you
ascribe those arrears and the necessity of summoning the
ratepayers?—[While the collectors retain their office, the body who
appoints them, the churchwardens and overseers, fluctuates in membership
and so loses control. Also, the collectors turn first to the large and
dependable ratepayers, the public companies and the respectable people
living at Clapham Common, and leave the rest for another day.]

5891. Then the want of looking after the collectors of the rate is the
great grievance in this case?—Yes; the churchwardens and overseers say,
“We are not Edition: current; Page: [517] going to incur any
unpleasantness with the collectors; they have many relations and friends
in the parish; we shall soon go out of office and have nothing more to
do with the matter.” They tell me, that with reference to the collector
of the poor rates, they are absolutely powerless; that although they are
responsible for the collection of these rates, they have no power to
remove the collector except for dishonesty.

5892. Is the collector appointed for life?—He is appointed by the
guardians for life if he likes to retain the situation.

5893. And have the guardians no power to remove him?—Yes; but the
guardians are made up of persons from other parishes, as well as
Battersea, and any attempt to remove the collector would probably not be
successful; I have written to the Poor Law Board two or three times
about the collection of the poor rates; unless you can show that a man
has positively done something that is criminal he is allowed to go on.

[In Buckmaster’s opinion, smaller ratepayers do not pay, and the larger,
while they may be indignant, often do not look into the matter.]

5896. In what manner are the collectors paid—by a percentage?—Yes; and
that makes it rather a disadvantage, because the collectors do not care
about taking the trouble to get these small sums. They may go out, and
in one morning earn £10 or £12, or £20 by per centages, which it would
take two or three weeks to earn by the collection of small rates. That
is made use of in favour of this system of compounding.

5897. What would you propose by way of remedying these inconveniences?—I
would propose that there should be more direct responsibility to some
permanent, and, perhaps, paid body. The churchwardens and overseers are
a changing body, and it takes them some time to become thoroughly
acquainted with the duties of their office, so that they are absolutely
in the hands of the collectors, and many parochial officers never do
understand or try to understand the many important duties which attach
to their office.

5898. To what body would you entrust this control?—I think with
reference to the poor rate, the Poor Law Board ought to have more
authority. I think their power should not be limited simply to seeing
whether the money had been legally expended. I think they ought also to
see whether it has been properly collected, and whether the assessment
of property is just, and whether the rates made are excessive. Their
functions seem now to be limited to the expenditure and not to the
collection, which they say it is the duty of the churchwardens and
overseers to superintend.

5899. In regard to the other local rates?—With reference to the local
rates, if the present system continues, I think the district board
should be made responsible for the collection of the whole rate in the
district, which should be uniform, subject to a paid auditor, and some
more direct supervision and responsibility. For the Edition: current;
Page: [518] protection of the ratepayers, and some easy method of
compelling the district board to do its duty.

5900. You mean, if the present local government by vestries and district
boards continues?—Yes; I think it might be patched up in that way.

5901. Do you think it is desirable that that system should continue?—I
think it very undesirable; it is more expensive and inefficient.

5902. What would you suggest in lieu of it?—It is very difficult to
suggest anything, but my impression is, that a larger organization is
necessary. You do not want a small organization for Putney, with its
local board, its vestry clerk, surveyor, inspector of nuisances, medical
officer, and all the paraphernalia of a great government, and then the
same thing repeated at Streatham, at Tooting, at Clapham, at Wandsworth,
and at Battersea. All this machinery is expensive; you cannot have
vestry clerks and surveyors in all these little parishes without paying
them, and it seems to me that if all these parishes were united into
one, the district would not be larger than some of the municipal
corporations in the midland counties and other parts of England, and
they would have the advantage of being under one jurisdiction.

5903. It would appear, however, that the district board is in some
degree a kind of experiment, on the principle of management by larger
districts; but you do not consider that experiment to be successful?—I
think it has been a failure, because they seem to have very limited
powers, for they are very indifferent to the exercise of the powers they
have.

5904. What would be your reasons for expecting a less degree of
indifference, and a greater degree of vigilance and activity, in the
exercise of their powers, from a body otherwise constituted?—[A more
intelligent body of candidates would be called forth by the greater
responsibility and authority.]

[The witness gave details of inadequacy and bias by the district board.]

5928. I understand you to say that you do not think the district board a
successful experiment?—I do not.

5929. And you would wish for an experiment on a still larger scale?—Yes,
under very different arrangements.

5930. In what manner would you have it conducted; how would you
constitute the local administration so as to be in your opinion
better?—The district board is made up of the same class of men as the
vestry. A man must first of all be on the vestry, that is, he must be
assessed at £25, or £40 a year as it is now; from the vestry he is sent
to the district board. Now as the vestry is, so will the district board
be, and I say that the vestries of our parishes are not of such a
character as to ensure that public confidence which I think such an
administration ought to ensure.

5931. Should you think it preferable that the members of the district
board should be elected directly by the ratepayers?—I think it would be
much better.

Edition: current; Page: [519]
5932. You think that a superior class of persons to those who constitute
the vestry, would in that case be willing to serve on the district
board?—I think that is very probable: the election to the district board
by the vestry is a very easy matter; half a dozen men meet together and
go through the form of a ballot, but it is no ballot whatever. One man
says to another, “We shall vote for Brown, Jones, and Robinson, and you
vote for the same”; the list is then put into a hat, and Brown, Jones,
and Robinson go to the district board.

5933. The members of the district board are elected by the vestry from
their own number?—Yes.

5934. Do you think that the vestry usually selects its best men for that
office?—I do not. There are certain men who are very anxious to be on
the district board.

5935. You think that it is more often for the convenience of the persons
elected, than for the benefit of the public that the choice is
made?—Yes, and perhaps they are anxious for the little position, which,
being on the district board, gives them, meeting as they frequently do,
more respectable men from other parishes.

5936. Do you think that if the district board was elected by the
ratepayers, you would get better men to serve on it?—I think if you had
a direct representation to the district board, without any assessment
qualification, you would get a better class of men, because other men
would become candidates. No person has now any chance outside the
vestry.

[The witness indicated he had never been a candidate for the district
board, not being qualified even to be on the vestry.]

5938. I think I understood you to say that, besides what you consider a
defect in the mode of electing the district board, its powers are not
sufficient?—I think its action, with reference to the collection and
expenditure of rates, is not under that control and supervision which it
ought to be.

5939. You think that they have sufficient powers, but that those powers
are not sufficiently controlled?—They do not exercise them. With
reference, for instance, to the footpaths across Wandsworth Common, I
wrote 16 letters to the Wandsworth district board, but I received no
assistance whatever from them. I then appealed to the district board,
with reference to the enclosure of about 10 acres of ground by a railway
company, which were not required for the purposes of their Act, and I
asked in a friendly way if they could tell me by what authority all this
was done, but they refused to give me any assistance or advice.

5940. Was that within the legal power of the vestry?—It was quite within
the power of the district board, and it was their duty to have inquired
into the matter.

5941. Do you consider that the extent of the district over which the
district board exercises its authority is sufficient, or would you have
a still larger district?—I would have a larger district, without
increasing the number of men. I am not quite sure whether in every case
voluntary service is good service, it is never felt as a responsible
service. A man neglects his duty, but what of it? You cannot expect him
Edition: current; Page: [520] to give up his time without some
equivalent. Those who do the public work should be paid for it.

5942. You would wish to have paid officers to perform the duties now
performed by these bodies?—I think there should be more paid officers;
you would then have greater and more responsibility and supervision.

5943. Do you think that there should be paid officers only, or that
there should be paid officers to constitute what may be called a local
executive, and a more popularly constituted body to vote the rates?—I
would keep up the present system of popular election, and extend it if
possible, but I think there should be some other more responsible body,
and perhaps it would be a matter of consideration, and more desirable,
that some portion of that body should be permanent and paid, but
responsible to some other and higher authority.

5944. You think it would be a good plan to have paid officers for every
branch of administration, who should be responsible to an unpaid body
elected by the ratepayers?—Something of that kind.

5945. By whom would you have these paid officers appointed?—The
appointment of these paid officers would, perhaps, be a difficulty. I
have not thought the matter out.

5946. Do you think it would be a good plan that there should be a
permanent chairman of the elected body, and that this permanent
chairman, who might be paid or not as might be thought advisable, should
be the responsible head of the local administration, should be
responsible for the appointment of proper persons to all the paid
offices?—I would not vest the appointment of the paid officers entirely
in the hands of such a person; I think there should be some board with
which he was acting that should have some power in the matter, or the
appointments might become jobs.

5947. By supposition he is the chairman of the elected body, and, being
chairman of the elected body, holding the same relation to it as the
Lord Mayor does to the Common Council, might be either the responsible
person to appoint the executive officers himself, or propose them to the
elected body?—Yes.

5948. And in that case there would be, perhaps, a responsibility which
you think is at present deficient?—I think, perhaps, that would meet the
difficulty. At present, we have several paid officers; we have a clerk
to the board, a surveyor, and two or three clerks; that is the
organization for the district board simply. In our parish we have a paid
vestry clerk, who does as little as possible, and another clerk, and we
have three paid officers. It seems to me, that if all these offices were
fused into one, it would be more economical for the ratepayers than
having the present number of paid servants.

5949. You think there is no use for the vestry, and that it would be
sufficient to have the larger district with a proper organization, an
elected council, and the requisite number of paid officers under them
without having any on a smaller scale?—Yes, and when I tell you that
last year the elected vestry only met three times, you can form an
estimate of how unimportant the vestry has become.

Edition: current; Page: [521]
5950. The vestry existing at the present time is merely an electoral
body to appoint these other persons?—Yes.

[They elect the churchwardens and prepare a list of overseers for the
magistrates who automatically take the first names. In reply to the
Chair’s information that according to the Act only houses up to £15
value could be rated to the owner, Buckmaster insisted that houses of
greater value, letting for up to 10s. per week, were being compounded
for.]

5954. May not that fact be owing to the very considerable rise that has
taken place in the value of property in many parishes, so that houses
originally not worth more than £15 a-year may now be worth £20?—That
will apply, no doubt, to a very large amount of property in the parish,
but not to all of it. I believe there is a kind of understanding between
the churchwardens and overseers, and the owners of these compound
houses. Supposing the churchwardens and overseers to be themselves
owners of compound houses, to any extent (and we have had abundant
instances of that), of course they would do the thing very lightly for
themselves.

16 July

John Fuller86

[Questions dwelt on various matters pertaining to the vestry of
Islington, which Fuller asserted was open to charges of gross
mismanagement.]

6125. Is there a weights and measures committee in your vestry?—Yes; it
is not what we call one of our permanent committees; it is selected from
members of other committees.

6126. Selected when there is any work to do relating to weights and
measures?—They are always elected on Easter Tuesday.

6127. Have you any remarks to make about that committee?—No, I know
nothing against them. I believe they are a very useful committee; I
think it is very essential that parties should be well looked after in
that respect.

6128. Have you anything to say about the lighting committee?—[There has
been some negligence.]

6129. Did you ever hear the weights and measures committee complained of
for not dealing sufficiently severely with tradesmen when possessing
false weights and measures?—It was proposed before the vestry that we
should publish the names of persons whose weights and scales had been
found incorrect. The weights and measures committee rather objected to
it; they said they did not like to take the responsibility of publishing
the names; but they did the next best thing, that is, they consented
that the reporters for the press should be present at meetings when the
names were announced, so that they might be published in the local
papers.

6130. Has there not been some complaint against those committees for
eating and drinking at the expense of the ratepayers?—Yes; it appears
that we allowed Edition: current; Page: [522] the committee, I think,
about £60 a-year for their expenses, and they made it about £60 or £70
more. They used, I believe, to go a little way out of town and have
splendid dinners with champagne, burgundy, and all the choice wines, and
three or four courses, and rose water after dinner.

[The event occurred three or four years previously.]

6132. But they did not expend more of the ratepayers’ money than you
allowed; the rest was at their own expense?—They kept within the money
allowed by the vestry.

James Wilson87

[Mill began after the Chair’s identifying questions.]

6182. I believe you have taken great interest in the question of
municipal institutions?—Yes.

6183. You have been an officer in municipal institutions in America many
years?—Yes.

6184. Has your attention been drawn to the distinction between the
practical working of municipal government in America and England?—Yes.

6185. In what part of America have you served municipal offices?—In the
first place, I was in New York, and latterly in New Orleans, also in
Canada.

6186. What offices did you fill in those places?—In one municipality, I
had the situation of auditor, and in another that of assessor.

6187. And things came to your knowledge respecting municipal
administration there, and the manner in which it was carried out, which
you think may throw light on municipal administration here?—Yes.

6188. Be so good as to state them?—In the first place, with regard to
assessment, it occurs to me that there is a very great difference
between the system of assessing property in this country and in America.
In America, all property, real and personal, is assessed for municipal
purposes, including income.

6189. Do I understand that the assessment is entirely on property and
not on rental, as it is here?—On property, real and personal.

6190. Here it is not an assessment on property at all, but the
assessment in the United States is on property, if I understand you?—It
varies in different States; in some States, the assessment is made on
the whole value of the property; in some other States, it is made upon
the annual value of the property, but in all the States, it not only
includes real property, but personal property, merchandise, money used
in business, professional income, and every other species of personal
property.

6191. You mean that the per centage is taken upon the estimated value of
the whole property of each person?—If you will permit me, I will give
you an instance Edition: current; Page: [523] in point, which will show
what I mean. As an assessor, I call upon an individual, and ask him the
amount of rent he pays, supposing the assessment to be upon the rental
(I take that for the purpose of making a fair comparison between your
system and theirs). If he states an amount lower than the amount I think
is reasonable, I add to that amount. If he has taken his house at a
period when property was too high, I deduct from that amount, giving
what I consider a fair estimate of the present value of the property.

6192. The assessor does that?—Yes.

6193. Is there any appeal from the assessor?—I will mention that. After
ascertaining the value of his real property, I ask what business he is
engaged in, and, if he is a professional men, the amount of his income.
That is put down at its annual value. If he earns £1,000 a-year, the
annual value would be £60 per annum. If he is engaged in mercantile
transactions, I take the average stock in trade, and the annual value of
that is supposed to be a sum represented by five or six per cent.,
according to the different States. That is included in the annual value,
and in the amount assessed against him; so that the basis of taxation is
much larger than it is here; it includes all that a man is possessed of.

[That is, for municipal purposes.]

6195. If you do not think that the declaration of a person himself is
correct, you add to it or diminish it, according to your judgment?—Yes.

6196. Is there any appeal from the assessor?—There is an appeal from the
assessor to the members of the municipality. As a general rule they
appoint a committee for the purpose of hearing those appeals, and if the
appeal is decided against the party, and he is not satisfied with it, he
can appeal again from that body to the county judge, whose decision is
final.

6197. So that ultimately, if he chooses, the matter may be carried
before a strictly judicial tribunal?—Precisely, I may also mention that
if the assessor desires to save trouble, or considers it a better way,
he has the option of presenting a declaration to the individual that he
may make, either by affirmation or oath, as the case may be, a statement
as to the amount of his real and personal property.

6198. His function seems to be similar to that of the Income Tax
Commissioners here?88—Somewhat so.

6199. Is there anything else which, in your capacity as assessor, struck
you as being important?—Local improvements are very generally done by
local assessment; for example, in the case of individuals in a
particular street or block of houses desirous of having some change
made; a new drain, or a common sewer, or a new pavement, or a new
causeway in the street; a number of them constituting in the whole a
majority as to value and numbers, present a memorial to the Edition:
current; Page: [524] corporation or municipality setting forth that they
desire this improvement; the property benefited by such improvement is
then visited by the assessor, who assesses the property according to his
judgment at the amount which each individual ought to pay towards the
improvement.

6200. Who is it that decides whether this improvement shall be made?—The
municipality.

6201. Then the subject is brought before the municipality first, and if
they decide in favour of the improvement being made the assessor
proceeds to assess the means of payment of all persons in the
district?—Yes; except that in the event of the locality being willing to
bear the whole of the expense they invariably get the improvement, but
where they ask the assistance of the municipality it is a question
whether they get it or not.

6202. When you speak of the locality you do not mean any definite
division of the district, but you mean any portion of the public
comprised within any boundary whatever who consider that they have any
interest in common?—Yes.

6203. Have you found this system work well?—I think so.

6204. You think it gives general satisfaction?—Yes.

6205. Is there any other point to which you desire to draw the attention
of the Committee in connection with the duties of assessor?—At present I
do not think of any other.

6206. You have also had experience in the capacity of auditor?—Yes.

6207. Have you anything to remark upon, which came to your knowledge in
that capacity?—With respect to the auditing of accounts it is an
invariable rule, in fact it is the law, that all accounts must be
published in the local papers, and paid for.

6208. At the expense of the rate?—At the expense of the ratepayers.

6209. How are the auditors appointed?—That varies in different
municipalities; but I think, as a general rule, one is appointed by the
head of the municipality and another by the members on a division.

6210. Then there is an officer who is at the head of the
municipality?—Invariably.

6211. What are the peculiar functions of that office?—[The title varies
in different jurisdictions, for example in counties there is a chairman
of supervisors, in townships a chairman, in towns a mayor.]

6212. What power does the chief (whatever may be his name) exercise
independently of the remainder of the body?—[In New York, he exercises
very great powers, being connected with the management of the county.
When there are small municipalities, they federate so that the mayor, as
head of the supervisors, becomes a member of the superior body in
control of the erection of schools, poor houses, and infirmaries.]

6213. School houses, poor houses, and infirmaries, belong to a larger
district than a municipality?—They do.

Edition: current; Page: [525]
6214. Consequently they require a special board to administer them; that
is, there is a board representing a larger district than the municipal
districts which has authority over the school houses, poor houses, and
infirmaries?—That is so.

6215. And how is this board appointed?—The townships each elect
supervisors; persons who have authority in the municipalities,
corresponding to your parishes.

6216. “Supervisors” is the name of the members of the municipal board of
the townships?—Yes.

6217. And the chairmen of the different township municipalities become
members of the County Board of Supervision?—Yes.

6218. The county board, then, is composed of the chairmen of the local
boards?—Yes.

6219. How are these chairmen appointed; are they elected by the
ratepayers to the special office of chairman, or are they elected in
common with other members of the board, and then, having been elected
supervisors by the ratepayers, are they appointed as chairmen by the
Board itself?—That is the way: they are elected amongst other
supervisors, and afterwards appointed by the respective municipalities
as chairmen.

6220. And these chairmen come together and form a board for the
county?—They do.

6221. And is there any board for a larger district than a county?—There
is no larger district recognised, except the State, which is the next
step. I will give you the respective steps: the village, having a board
of five trustees, the town, having a board according to the number of
inhabitants, of from seven to 20 or 30 persons, and in the case of New
York 41, the county, having a board consisting according to the number
of municipalities in the county, of from 30 to 60 or 80 members. Then
the State, which is at the head of the whole, comprising, of course, all
the counties; but that is an entirely separate affair, having no
connection with the municipal arrangements.

6222. It is one of the most important subjects in municipal
administration, what powers should be exercised by the elected board,
and what are the responsibility of the chairman individually; how is
that matter arranged in those boards in America with which you are
connected?—It is not invariable. They have changed the plan several
times in New York on this account; there is a very large foreign
population there; the city being now composed of more than half foreign
born people. The system was devised for the Americans themselves, who
are much better educated than we are (I speak as one of the humbler
classes myself). Having been trained and educated in this system of
municipal government, they found no difficulty in managing it; but they
have since changed it, so as to give the mayor a veto upon certain
measures; if the council pass a measure by a large majority the mayor
can put his veto upon it and stop it altogether.

Edition: current; Page: [526]
[The mayor is elected for two years.]

6224. Is he appointed by the Council?—In New York he is appointed by the
people.

6225. Is that frequently the case?—It varies in different States. As a
general rule, in the States, I think, the head of the municipality is
appointed by the people, but in the country it is the other way; the
chairman is elected by the municipalities. However, there is no rule
adhered to; it varies in different States.

6226. Have you formed any opinion as to which of these plans works
best?—I have not considered that matter sufficiently.

[Mayor and board are elected by the same suffrages.]

6228. If you had to give an account of the duties of the mayor, in a
large town in the United States, of what would you say they consisted?—I
should say that he was the general executive officer of the corporation,
that he did, or saw to the doing of everything done in the place.

6229. He is responsible to the corporation for the execution of those
public duties of which they are the controllers?—He is.

6230. Is he in the habit of consulting them generally, or does he
proceed on some general rule which they are only bound to see
observed?—In the large State of New York, particularly, the municipality
divides itself into committees, each taking charge of a particular
department: the mayor is, generally, a member of the most important of
those committees, and whatever business they transact must, in all
cases, come under his supervision.

6231. Is the power of these committees in any case paramount to his, or
are they merely intended to keep the body which appointed them, informed
as to his proceedings in order that they may exercise the duty of
controlling? In congress itself, there are committees appointed to
superintend every part of the business of Government, and consequently
every Act of the Government; but in spite of that, these committees have
not a controlling power over the president; is that the case in
municipal government, or does it stand?—That is generally the case; but
I have remarked already that in New York the mayor has a veto.

6232. In New York nothing can be done without the mayor’s
consent?—Nothing of importance.

6233. But that is not the case in most other places?—Not in general in
American municipalities.

6234. Generally, what is the extent of the power of the mayor; what
could he do of his own authority?—His power is limited by the general
Act of Incorporation; in the case of New York by the special act, which
they have for that purpose; although the whole of the country is
incorporated under general acts, there are certain towns that have
applied for and have obtained special acts, and New York is one of them.

6235. According to the general system of the country where there are no
special Edition: current; Page: [527] acts, is the mayor merely the
minister of the corporation, or has he powers of his own?—Generally he
is a mere minister of the corporation.

6236. In fact he executes their instructions?—He does.

6237. So that in the more general case it is the corporation itself, as
in this country, which administers, and the mayor is only the chairman
of their body?—Yes.

6238. But it is not so in some of the towns under special acts?—No.

6239. Do you think there is any growing tendency in the United States to
confide this greater degree of power to the executive officer, the
mayor, or whatever he may be called?—If we might judge from the case of
New York, there is, but that is an exceptional case.

6240. Owing to the great concourse of foreigners, but you think the
general system is that of administration by boards rather than by
individual officers?—Yes, the municipal business of New York and of some
other large cities is so extensive that it is impossible for the unpaid
members of the municipality to do it. In any case the actual duties are
delegated to separate boards; for instance, in New York the
superintendence of immigration is delegated to a special board.

6241. Is that a paid board?—A paid board. The duties are all done by
paid officers.

6242. Does the board consist of members of the corporation?—So far from
that being the case, the members of that board are appointed by the
Governor and Senate of the State of New York. The police of New York, a
most important matter, is also controlled by a board of the same
description appointed by the Governor and the Senate of the State,
altogether independent of the corporation.

6243. To that extent a portion of the work in other places belonging to
the municipal government is taken out of that category and is assumed by
the general Government of the State?—Yes.

6244. Is there anything else that you wish to state with regard to the
differences between the municipal government of the United States and
this country?—I have looked over the Bill proposing to establish
municipalities in the metropolis, and I have observed that there is a
difference in this respect, that the electors are proposed to be the
burgesses of the respective municipalities. Now, I can understand what a
burgess means in the City of London, where I believe there are special
privileges and large sums of money left in the way of endowments, and so
on.

[In the outlying districts of London, the ratepayers would be the proper
parties.]

6246. The intention of the Bill is that it should be the ratepayers.89
They would only be constituted burgesses by the district being
constituted a corporation. The Edition: current; Page: [528] name
burgess is like the name of alderman and common councilman adopted in
the Bill, as I understand, merely because they are terms used in
existing cases?—There is another suggestion which I may be allowed to
make, which is taken from American practice. I find that there are
references in the margin of the Bill to a variety of other Acts under
which the municipalities are to be constituted or to act. In the case of
America, all the powers under which a corporation acts are comprised in
one Act, so that each one of the municipalities, by means of a sixpenny
pamphlet, can see precisely the extent of their powers.

6247. Does any other suggestion occur to you?—All the elections for
municipalities in America take place in every State on a particular day
mentioned in the Statute; generally about the 8th of December; and
before that day a statement of accounts must be published in the
newspapers, so that the ratepayers may have an opportunity of checking
the expenditure.

6248. By whom are the auditors appointed?—One is appointed by the head
of the municipality and another by the council; that is the general
rule.

6249. Even when the head of the municipality is merely as it were the
chairman of the municipality, without having independent powers, it is
still usual that he should appoint one auditor, and the body should
appoint the other?—It is.

6250. Is the audit usually an effectual one? Does it give satisfaction
to the ratepayers?—I think so.

6251. Of course the duty of an auditor does not relate to the reasons
for the expense, but only to its having been actually incurred; but the
ratepayers who are judges of the reasons of the expense have
opportunities, if I understand you rightly, by a regular publication of
the accounts before the annual period of the elections, of judging how
far their representatives have done their duty during the
year?—Precisely so.

6252. That takes place annually?—Yes. In New York there is a special
arrangement. An auditor is appointed by the government of the City, and
he has a veto on expenditure which he does not find that the
municipality have legal authority to make.

[The questioning turned to the division of State and municipal powers,
and the witness said the New York waterworks were provided for by a
special State Act, giving borrowing powers to the city.]

6342. The works were made at the expense of the corporation?—At the
expense of the city.

[Wilson outlined the kinds of expenditure to explain the apparently high
municipal taxes, mentioning police, free schools, workhouses,
infirmaries, reformatories, lighting, watering, and paving.]

6399. And are the gaols included?—Yes.

6400. Is water laid on to every house?—To every house in New York; but
there are towns without water.

Edition: current; Page: [529]
[Wilson gave his opinion that in London the great thoroughfares and
public streets were in better repair than in New York; the reverse was
true of the back streets.]

6426. I believe that New York is said to be one of the worst places in
the United States in that respect?—Yes.

23 July

Edwin Chadwick

[Exceptionally, Mill, rather than the Chair, began the questioning.]

6494. Will you state the public offices you have filled?—As a
Commissioner of Inquiry into the Administration of the Poor Law, I have
had to consider the principles and to prepare measures which resulted in
the consolidation of the administration of 16,000 parishes into some 650
unions.90 As a Commissioner of Inquiry into the state of the
constabulary force in the country, I had to prepare principles of
organisation and action which have led to the substitution of a
parochial constabulary force by county police forces.91 As a consequence
of my report in 1842 on the sanitary condition of the labouring
population of Great Britain, I had a leading share in the preparation of
measures by which the administrative arrangement for the water supply
and drainage of towns have been consolidated in between one or two
hundred cases under local boards of health.92 I refer to these cases of
administrative consolidation, because in proportion as those principles
have been adopted by the substitution of paid for unpaid service; in
wider administrative areas economy has in every instance resulted more
or less coincident with efficiency.

6495. You have had your attention drawn very much to the principles
applicable to local administration as well as to general
administration?—Particularly.

6496. And you have paid very particular attention to the local
administration of the metropolis amongst others?—Yes. Under the Poor Law
Commission, I had to examine the parochial administration of the
metropolis. Under the Metropolitan Sanitary Commission, I had to
examine, with my colleagues, the administration of works under sewers
commissions and paving boards; and as part of the sanitary inquiry, I
examined especially the interment of the dead in the parochial
graveyards of the metropolis, upon which I reported. Under the
consolidated Sewers Commission, I had to prepare, with colleagues,
various measures for the amended drainage of the metropolis.93 Under the
Public Health Act, and as a Edition: current; Page: [530] member of the
General Board of Health, we had to direct examinations and temporary
organisations of the means of administering relief to the sick on the
occurrence of extraordinary epidemic visitations.

6497. It is well known that the experience which you acquired in all
these different capacities you have made use of in turning your mind to
the subject of the general principles of administration in its various
branches. Although several of the subjects with which you are especially
conversant are not within the scope of this inquiry, the Committee have
no doubt that the general principles which you have been led by your
experience to arrive at will be of great use in the inquiry?—It appears
to me that the best mode of considering administrative organisation is
to get a distinct view of what is required by the public to be done, and
then a clearer opinion may be formed of the sort of agency required to
do it. Now I venture to aver, in respect of the metropolis, that fully
one-third of the existing death-rate may, and ought to be reduced; that
is to say, taking the deaths at 60,000 per annum, 20,000 may be annually
saved, and 20 times that number of cases of sickness may be prevented by
measures, the results of which are so clearly ascertained, that if
adequate premiums were given, data might be offered to commercial people
as a private enterprise under which, with proper powers, they might
safely undertake to contract for the attainment of these results.

[In response to the Chair, Chadwick indicated that he referred to the
whole metropolis when asserting that a one-third reduction in the
death-rate was possible, and added that for every preventable death
there were twenty cases of preventable sickness.]

6499. What is the nature of the evidence on which you found this
opinion?—[The judgment is based on what has been done in typical old
buildings where adequate sanitary improvements have been made. Even
better estimates could be made from properly constructed new buildings.]

6500. What do you consider to be the obstacle that the present state of
things throws in the way of the adoption of improvements from which you
expect these great results?—[The answer might be deduced from a
description of what should be done and at what expense, which Chadwick
offered, by a new general and complete system of works replacing those
of the private companies.]

[Chadwick maintained his position, citing more evidence of what had been
and could be done at low cost.]

6506. The estimate which you have made with regard to the amount at
which these different things could be done is founded on actual
experience?—[The experience is drawn from various places. It may be
anticipated that average costs in London would be even lower.]

6507. You have mentioned the great improvements which in your opinion
remain to be effected in the local management of the metropolis. What in
your Edition: current; Page: [531] opinion are the administrative means
by which those great improvements, or any practical improvements, might
be effected?—[The great means is unified management of a larger
undivided area, as is evident, for example, concerning drainage.]

6508. You think therefore that the present management by which only what
may be called arterial drainage is in the hands of the sanitary
authority (the Metropolitan Board of Works), and the minor drains are in
the hands of parochial authorities or local boards of works, and the
house drainage sometimes not under any, is a vicious system?—Yes; my own
conclusions in respect to unity of management and the administrative
consolidation of works stated in 1842 were subsequently confirmed by the
Commissioners of Inquiry into the Health of Towns. In that commission
were Mr. Robert Stephenson, Mr. Cubitt, and other engineers; Sir Henry
De la Beche, and many men of scientific authority, and they concurred in
this; that the drainage of the house, of the street, and the site, also
the supply of water to towns, and the formation, the drainage, the
cleansing, and the maintenance of the roads of a district, comprising
the natural drainage area, must be under one and the same authority, and
that authority ought to be a public one; and all the consolidation in
other places has gone to that to bring these subject-matters under one
and the same authority, and that a public one.

6509. The whole drainage, therefore, of the metropolis, including the
house drainage, you think, ought to be entrusted to a single
authority?—[The many reasons for consolidation include the geology of
the region, economy, engineering concerns, and efficiency and the
resulting improvement in services.]

6510. Would you infer from this that the same body ought to have the
charge of the drainage of the metropolis and the roads of the
metropolis?—Yes, the footpaths and the carriage ways; suburban as well
as urban. In the particular instance cited of the metropolitan road
trust which worked so well, comparatively, to the smaller parochial
administrations, we believed that the consolidation was imperfect, dnd
that the consolidation with the drainage and surface cleansing
arrangements, which drainage arrangements were entrusted to a separate
authority, would be attended with further benefit.

6511. Sir Benjamin Hall’s Act was subsequent to that report, I
think?—Yes.

6512. Are you acquainted with the working of that Act?—[Chadwick said he
was not, but the benefits of consolidation could be seen in the parallel
improvements found when the district sewers commissions were united.]

6513. I understand that you rely for the improvement of local
administration principally upon the consolidation of the fragmentary
portions in which the work is now executed and superintended, and
placing them all under a single management; and you rely also for
enabling these single management boards to get through such a mass of
business upon the discharge of as much of it as possible by paid
officers who devote their whole time to the subject?—[To cease to rely
on part-time experts would save lives as well as money.]

Edition: current; Page: [532]
6514. Then, having regard to the existing state of things, and the means
by which it may be improved, what administrative changes would you
recommend in the present local administration of the metropolis?—[The
enormous scale of works required, with the consequent dangers of very
expensive mistakes—some already made—make it imperative that in devising
and carrying on great works, there should be a special commission
responsible to parliament rather than to ignorant vestry
representatives.]

[The questioning turned to Chadwick’s belief that there should and could
be two drainage systems, one for sewage, to be directed onto lands for
absorption, and one for rain and subsoil water to empty into the
Thames.]

6531. Your idea is, if I understand you, that there are certain things
necessary in order to contrive a new system, and get it going, which you
think can best be done by a temporary body created for that express
purpose, and which you think should be central rather than local?—Yes.

6532. But after the new system is once established, then it can be
delivered over to local bodies?—[In Chadwick’s view, perhaps to a new
body, but not to several, because disunity in superintendence would be
expensive at best and also disruptive if less than best.]

6533. But if a general system for the whole of the district that you
think ought to be included had been selected and actually carried into
execution, and brought into good working order, to whom would you
afterwards entrust the administration of it?—[A mixed administrative
body, including some responsible to parliament, some paid and some
selected representatives. Elections, however, are not the best means of
getting qualified persons.]

6534. You think that anybody locally elected would not be adequate even
to superintend the different branches of local administration when they
were well started?—I think you might possibly and by selection introduce
the representative element to some extent; but you should mainly rely on
permanent officers, as in the case of the Metropolitan District Roads
Commission, looking to the elected or selected persons merely for
supervisory services, not for any initiative or executive directions,
and I should connect the whole, in the case of the metropolis, under
immediate reponsibility to Parliament.

6535. That would be quite consistent with having local boards elected,
because I understand you to think that the main business, apart from the
superintendence, ought to be carried on by permanent officers who would
be selected for their special qualifications, and in that case the
business of any administrative boards could only be the voting of rates,
and seeing that proper persons were appointed to the offices, and that
the funds were applied to proper purposes?—Apart from any political
prejudices, the best specimen of administration is to be found in the
operation of unity of management in Paris. Looking at the strides they
are making there, we may well have reason to be ashamed of ourselves in
comparison. The Edition: current; Page: [533] conseil of the
municipality is appointed by the Government, and it is composed of men
of eminence in science; Dumas, the chemist, members of the Institute,
retired executive officers or administrators, who are competent to judge
of the measures submitted to them for their approval by the permanent
officers, and to audit and vouch for them. During the revolution of 1848
they made the body elective, and the competence and character of the
persons elected was so inferior in all respects, that by universal
public consent the old mode of responsible selection was resorted to.

6536. But I believe under the government of Louis Philippe the municipal
commission of Paris was elected by popular suffrage, although, I
believe, the qualification was rather high, being the same as the
suffrage for the Chamber of Deputies, which was high and restrictive.94
The commission, I think, was appointed in that way, and consisted then,
as it does now, of some of the most eminent men in Paris willing to
discharge those duties?—I am stating from recent communications in
saying that when they attempted to get a council by popular election,
the character of the body fell off so considerably that they reverted to
the system of nomination.

6537. Do you not think it is likely that in the time of the Revolution,
with the period intervening between the subversion of Louis Philippe’s
government and the commencement of the present government, the municipal
commission might have been elected more for political reasons than for
any special qualifications, and yet that this might not be the case in a
permanent state of things, even under popular election?—Apart from any
political questions, this is clear, that demands for labour in these
offices are greatly increasing, while the demands on the time of men for
their own professional pursuits, or their own personal special studies
are also increasing, and that you have fewer and fewer of a competent
and a valuable leisure class from whom you can get sacrifices of time
for public work. They have made their sacrifices, and done all they can
in the way of daily labour in connection with their professions. After
that they want the relief of amusement, and are not disposed, at least
in the metropolitan districts, as far as I have seen, to labour for the
public; and we find it to be exceedingly difficult to get committees of
the right quality for the requisite service.

[In response to the Chair, Chadwick indicated that even appointed
eminent men found it difficult to give sufficient time to serve the
metropolis.]

6539. Probably you would recommend that administrative bodies of this
character should, at any rate, have a permanent chairman, who would be
selected for his qualifications, and should be considered as a permanent
officer?—Yes, but Edition: current; Page: [534] any departure from the
principles of unity of administration and the combination of works for
the whole metropolis, I am convinced, will involve extra expense and
inefficiency.

6540. You are aware that in Paris, although there is but one
superintending municipal commission for the whole, the city is divided
into a great number of executive districts, each of which has a
mayor?—Those are the remains of old and effete functions and
organisations. The mayors, I believe, merely register and do some
notarial acts, in analogy with the mayors all over the country, but my
recent information is that there really is but one administrative body
at present in Paris, and that all the amendments going on are worked by
engineers or paid officers, with occasional supervision by the conseil;
there is nothing there like our inferior and wasteful parochial
management. The public intelligence there does not tolerate anything of
the sort.

6541. Then is your opinion not favourable to any subdivision of the
metropolis for any administrative purposes whatever?—[It is not to be
recommended in any of the areas of which he has a special experience,
such as public works and poor relief. Also, the administration of police
should not be elective, and should be united.]

[Chadwick added police supervision of water for fire control to his list
of properly centralized functions.]

6544. Altogether the result of your experience and reflection on the
subject, in all the departments with which you are specially acquainted,
is that the whole of the metropolis should be under one management?—Yes,
and from its being the seat of the Government, the Government itself
should be required to share the responsibility of that management. I may
mention as an instance of the recognition of legislative and
administrative principle that it is distinctly provided in the American
constitution that the seat of the Government, not only Washington
itself, but Columbia, shall be under a distinct and special Government,
responsible to the Senate, to Congress, or to the President.

[Chadwick would not commit himself as to the desirability of there being
a government department responsible for metropolitan management.]

6546. You think that the general executive of the country ought to have
a share in appointing members of the controlling body, whatever it may
be?—Certainly; they ought to be distinctly responsible for it. In
Parliament, Members now indicate their notions of a Parliamentary
responsibility as respects the metropolis, by asking questions about
particular streets, or concerning themselves with the action of minor
works there; and, certainly, works that concern about a seventh of the
population of the country may be well attended to by them; I think there
has been a gross dereliction of duty on the part of some representative
people in not attending to this whole matter.

Edition: current; Page: [535]
6547. Under such a consolidated body you would, I suppose, entrust the
different branches of the metropolitan government to permanent paid
officers, under the general superintendence of the body which was
partially elective and partially appointed by the crown?—Yes; but better
with honorary supervisory service selected by the union.

6548. In that way you would expect to obtain officers, with first-rate
qualifications, in each of the departments on whom would rest the
principal part of the administration, the duty of the board being
chiefly to look after them?—I think besides that you would, with
responsible paid service, also get a higher order of voluntary unpaid
service.

6549. You think you would obtain in the board itself a superior class of
persons to those obtained now for any local purposes?—Yes; but I am
clear upon this, that you cannot have in any of those works I have
specified, any separation without disastrous waste.

[Other members of the committee canvassed Chadwick’s opinions on diverse
administrative questions.]

6610. Have you anything further to state in elucidation of your
views?—[The virtues of the Liverpool administration had been much
exaggerated; it had failed, through the operation of special building
interests, to attend properly to matters of public health, and so
compared very unfavourably with French municipalities such as those of
Bordeaux and Lyons.]

[Again the questioning took in many aspects of the problems in
metropolitan government, before Mill asked the final question.]

6637. I believe you have given a statement of your views with reference
to the improvement of Poor Law administration as applicable to the
metropolis to the President of the Poor Law Board?—I have, especially as
to the medical relief of the sick poor.95

John Savage96

[Mill opened the questioning.]

6638. You are a Member of the Islington Vestry?—I am.

6639. And a representative in the Metropolitan Board of Works?—I am.

6640. How long have you filled those offices?—Since the passing of the
Metropolis Local Management Act in 1855.

6641. Have you been particular in your attention to local business
during all that time?—Yes; I have been constant in my attention, or
nearly so.

Edition: current; Page: [536]
6642. Are there any remarks you wish to submit to the Committee on the
working of the present system, or any improvements that it may admit
of?—Yes; I think there is one great improvement that might be made.
Assuming that these vestries and district boards are continued, I think
it would be a very great advantage in the larger ones. I will not say in
those composed of so small a number as 36 or 48 members, or possibly of
60, but in all those beyond that number, if they had a permanent
chairman. My experience, from that which I have seen, from a constant
attendance at my own vestry, and occasional attendances at others, has
confirmed me in my opinion that that would be a most desirable
improvement.

6643. Be so good as to state the advantages that you would expect from
it?—[The present disadvantages may illustrate the expected benefits; at
present there is a constant changing of chairmen in the Islington
vestry, with consequent irregularities and unfortunate situations,
including disrupted meetings. Part of the problem is that churchwardens
with one-year terms are expected to be chairmen.]

6644. The duties of chairman of the vestry at present comprise nothing
beyond presiding at the meetings?—[Usually nothing else is required,
though when Savage himself was chairman he also chaired the Highways
Committee, one of their busiest.]

6645. Does any duty devolve on the chairman as to the preparation of
business for the vestry?—It has not of necessity been the case; but
whilst I was chairman I was always in communication with the vestry
clerk, and had very much to do with the business, consulting him prior
to its being put in the paper. Still, no official duty of that kind
devolves on the chairman.

6646. I understood you to say that you thought there might be with great
advantage a permanent chairman, who might be made useful for
administrative purposes, independently of presiding at the meetings.
What administrative purposes had you in view?—I think if, as in the
Metropolitan Board of Works, it were expected of him that he should
attend the various committees and make himself thoroughly acquainted
with the whole business, and also upon certain occasions put himself in
communication with other vestries, or with the Government, or with the
Metropolitan Board of Works, as might be required; I do not mean in the
way of agitation, but to communicate with the Government, or the Board
of Works, or with other vestries upon matters common to each and
mutually interesting to us. I think in that way he might be made
extremely useful as an officer of the vestry.

6647. A sort of head of the local administration?—As a sort of head of
the local administration.

6648. In what manner would you have him appointed?—[He should be
appointed as the Chairman of the Metropolitan Board of Works is, by the
members at a special meeting. There should be a three-year term, though
Savage himself would prefer a permanent chairman, who could be removed
by a two-thirds vote.]

Edition: current; Page: [537]
6649. I believe the very able permanent chairman you have at the Board
of Works97 receives a salary?—He does.

6650. The other boards do not?—They do not.

6651. Should you recommend that the local permanent chairman should
receive a salary also?—That is a matter to which I have given some
consideration, and it does occur to me (without offering any dogmatical
opinion about it) that if you called upon the chairman to perform the
duties which I have suggested it would not be unreasonable that he
should be remunerated, of course, upon a lower and more moderate scale
than in the case of the Metropolitan Board of Works.

6652. Having regard to the administration of the metropolis under the
direction of a certain number of select and paid permanent officers, you
would probably see a considerable disadvantage in the administration
being so minutely divided as it is at present; you would probably wish
to give to each of the boards a larger area than they now have?—I have
not given so much consideration to the subject as I might have done if I
had intended to go fully into that question; but I think there is force
in the way in which you put it.

6653. Are you acquainted with the plan that has been recently proposed
for the division of the metropolis into municipalities, which would
correspond nearly, but not exactly, with the Parliamentary districts?—I
have heard of it.

6654. Should you think that the districts proposed in that plan, which
in some cases coincide with the Parliamentary districts, while, in other
cases the division is rather smaller, would be a good basis on which to
ground the local administration of the metropolis?—I am not prepared to
say; not having fully gone into it, I cannot give a decided opinion upon
it.

6655. Have you, in your experience, been led to think that the divisions
are at present too small or that no inconvenience arises from this
smallness?—Many of them are very small; my attention has been drawn more
directly to the larger ones, such as our own and some others, the City
of London amongst them; we have, as you are aware, under the Metropolis
Local Management Act several very large districts; the City sends to the
Metropolitan Board three members, and the other six districts two
members each.

6656. The magnitude of these districts is not much less than in the case
of the proposed plan; and in the case of the City of London it is not at
all less?—It is less. The parish of Islington, I may mention, comprises
half the borough of Finsbury.

6657. The difference between such a size as that of your district and
the size proposed in the plan is only a difference of degree and
detail?—That is all; I do think that the metropolis is split up into too
many divisions; I am rather of that opinion, without having very deeply
gone into the question, because, as I have said already, I have thought
of the larger districts, and perhaps have not turned my Edition:
current; Page: [538] attention so much as I might have done to the
smaller ones; but it has always struck me that they might well be
amalgamated and fused into larger districts.

[Savage reaffirmed his views as to the proper term for chairmen, and the
size of districts.]

6667. In the proposed plan, as in the case of the recent Reform Bill,
for Parliamentary purposes it is proposed that the Tower Hamlets should
be divided into two districts, and the parts proposed to be taken from
Finsbury and Marylebone to go to form an intermediate district of
Bloomsbury?—That would lighten the borough of Finsbury, which is in
itself a very large borough.

6668. Your vestry sends two members to the Metropolitan Board?—Yes.

6669. You have been very regular in your attendance, I
believe?—Tolerably constant.

6670. Has the same been the case with your colleague?—I think I may say
that he has been almost as constant as myself, but his health has not
been so good for several months lately, and his attendance less regular.

6671. Do you find that the attendance of the deputed members of vestries
is tolerably assiduous at the Metropolitan Board?—Yes, I think it is. We
average 35 or 36 out of the 45 members. I consider that the attendance
is very good: the average is about four-fifths; and, considering that a
few members come from great distances, and do not attend often, that
makes the general attendance still more regular.

6672. Has the election of a temporary chairman of the vestry of
Islington been the subject of dissensions in the vestry?—Yes; it has
caused very many contests during the last five years to obtain the
honour of the chair.

6673. You are aware that several of the vestries have come before this
Committee by petition; I believe yours has not?—No; they have not taken
any active part in the matter.

6674. Was that owing to the state of opinion in the vestry on the
subject?—I can hardly tell. They repose a good deal of confidence upon
most matters in their representatives. They do not make us delegates in
our own work, but leave us free to study their interests. They do not
meddle so much with outside matters that do not more immediately concern
their own business as some vestries do.

26 July

William Edward Hickson98

[Mill began the questioning.]

6684. You have turned your attention a great deal to the subject of
municipal administration generally, and to that of London
particularly?—I have.

Edition: current; Page: [539]
6685. You are a ratepayer of the City of London, and the owner of
buildings in the City, are you not?—I am.

6686. And you have been officially connected with commissions of
inquiry, and have made a report of the state of the manufacturing
districts, which was printed by order of the House of Commons in
1840?99—That was so.

6687. Are there any points in regard to the municipal administration of
the metropolis on which you have any communication to make to the
Committee?—[Had the question of municipal reform been properly tackled
in the mid-1830s, when expectations and enthusiasms were high, moderate
changes would have prevented the expenditure of the enormous sums now
being raised, estimated at £3,500,000 for the Thames Embankment and the
New Mansion House Street.]

6688. In what way do you conceive these sums of money would have been
saved?—[Actual savings would have been realized through the
consolidation of jurisdictions, the abolition of useless posts, the
reduction of salaries, and greater economy generally. The City of London
provides an example of the abuses resulting from divided jurisdiction;
Hickson’s own rates and taxes illustrate the problems, and show that the
burden in the City is much heavier than it is commonly stated to be.]

6689. Will you mention the items?—First there are the parochial and
union rates, which consist, first, of two new church building rates, of
6d. each.

[In response to the Chair’s probing, Hickson gave more details, then
handed in an account of his rates and taxes, and answered further
questions about it.]

6709. You include the whole direct taxation of the country, so far as it
falls on real property?—The whole of what is called direct taxation
(which I think a misnomer) comes, particularly in towns, upon house
rent, and this burden is now getting to such an extent as to approach
confiscation, and it checks and impedes most seriously the progress of
building improvements in regard to those dwellings best adapted for the
middle and working classes.

[The Chair again went into details about the rates.]

6720. Have you any suggestions to make with regard to the basis of the
municipal taxation?—I have a statement here, which I have drawn up to
give a short and comprehensive digest of my views on this subject.

[Hickson handed in the statement, and the Chair examined him on its
meaning and implications. His final question elicited the response that
a tax on furniture might be practicable, as on the Continent.]

Edition: current; Page: [540]
6750. Are you aware that the tax on furniture in France is, in some
cases, if not in all, virtually a sort of income tax, not being taken on
a valuation of the furniture, but on an estimate made by the revenue
authorities of what sort of furniture may be expected to belong to a
person who lives in such a house?100—I am not able to speak of furniture
estimates as so formed, and should doubt its being a universal fact.

6751. I am not aware that it is universal, but no doubt it must have
been resorted to on account of the inconvenience, difficulty, expense,
and liability to evasion which attended a valuation of the
furniture?—Just so, when the valuation attempted had been unnecessarily
minute.

[Other potential sources of taxation were discussed, and then the
questioning turned to property values.]

6785. Are there any parts of London where the value has actually
fallen?—I should think there are many. In my own case, in St. Dunstan’s,
there certainly has been no rise in the value during the 20 years I have
held the property.

[The proper emoluments, qualifications, and election of the Lord Mayor
of London came under discussion.]

6804. He would not be taken by rotation?—No, nor in the case of the new
Court of Aldermen I have proposed should I have the aldermen elected by
the whole of the ward.

William Rendle101

[The Chair asked the identifying questions, and then Mill began.]

6901. You have turned your attention to municipal administration
generally, and the local government of the Metropolis in
particular?—Only in so far as it is connected with the condition of the
lower classes, and more especially in connection with the question of
public health.

6902. You have written on the subject?—I have written on the subject,102
and the cause of my writings that I have put forth, partly in newspapers
and partly in pamphlets, has been an utter dissatisfaction with the
management of health matters connected with the poorest people.

6903. Will you state to the Committee anything you may be disposed to
say upon that subject?—[Many known causes for illnesses of the poor
could not be erased because poor law guardians and, after the Act of
1855, the officers of Edition: current; Page: [541] health, had not the
authority or means. He himself had resigned because he was not allowed
to carry out the duties of his office.]

6904. Was this from want of power on the part of the board of guardians,
or want of will?—[The problem lay not with the guardians, but with
members of the vestry, some of whom did not understand the mode of
implementing the new law, but also some of whom were obstructing because
of corrupt motives. Faced with the impossibility of his position, he had
resigned and, after one failure, was elected as a vestryman.]

6905. Did you, in that character, renew your exertions to obtain a
remedy of these evils?—It is since that time that I have used my
influence amongst the vestrymen, many of whom are patients of my own,
and among my friends, to work up a better state of things.

6906. Have you done so with any success?—Yes, principally owing to the
exertions of one of my friends in the vestry and myself, we have lately
obtained another inspector, and that inspector a most active man.
Previously our visits were to a very few houses, but now perhaps we have
100 cases inspected every week, and the new inspector tells us that out
of the 100 cases inspected, at least 90 of them (I think he said 39 out
of 40) are in a very bad sanitary condition and absolutely require
amendment. When I urged the appointment of the new officer, it was said
that nothing of the sort was wanted, and that the old officer was going
on very well, but it turned out that he did not generally inspect, but
waited for complaints to be made.

6907. So far as concerns that particular parish, some improvement has
been effected by the choice of more proper persons to the vestry,
yourself being one?—It has; but the endeavour to improve has been such
an up-hill fight as no one perhaps would willingly undertake, certainly
not unless he had some independence behind him, for there is a great
deal of offence arising out of it amongst neighbours.

6908. Do you think that the obstructions you met with arise from an
unwillingness to incur expense for fear of increasing the rates, or from
any interest that the members of the vestry have in keeping up the
present state of things?—[Both motives operate. One bad practice is the
use of influence by vestrymen to become paid officers.]

6909. What would you recommend by way of remedy for these evils? Would
you recommend a change in the mode of constituting the local boards, or
the substitution of anything else for the present vestry system?—I
published a pamphlet entitled London Vestries and their Sanitary Work,
at my own expense, and circulated it at my own expense. The Metropolitan
Sanitary Association required me to read a paper on the same subject,
which has also been published. I have endeavoured to show that the
extension of disease amongst the poor is partly owing to neglect in the
locality, and partly to neglect in the arrangements; and I have stated
in one of the pamphlets that there must necessarily be, in order to
Edition: current; Page: [542] counterbalance the self-interests which
are at work in small bodies, some power behind, readily to be got at, to
which you can appeal, to compel the local body to do its manifest duty.

6910. Of what nature do you think the body should be to which the
appeals should lie?—I think it should not be a controlling, over-riding
body, to destroy local representation or local power altogether; but
that if, for instance, a respectable minority in a vestry or even a
considerable number of ratepayers outside, who felt that their body,
whether elected properly or not, were not carrying out their duties in a
proper spirit, there should be a central body of a fully over-riding
power in that matter, to come down and insist upon the local authority
doing its duty according to law, or else to do the work itself and
charge it to the local authority.

6911. Have you turned your consideration to the question of how this
controlling body should be composed, or by whom it should be
appointed?—I do not think it should be the Metropolitan Board of Works,
because I can see plainly the pressure put upon the representatives of
the different vestries who form that Board. With regard, for instance,
to a first-class water supply, which is so much wanted in the
metropolis, I can fancy that the various interests in these bodies might
influence the members and prevent the public good that we should expect;
I would rather have a body to be called upon only now and then. I think
it should be a Governmental authority, such an office as might come out
of the Privy Council.

6912. A kind of department of health in the general government, or would
it include other subjects besides public health?—[Rendle replied that he
felt competent only concerning matters of public health. He then
mentioned the difficulty of dealing with the problem in the parish.]


II.: Select Committee on Extradition

“Report from the Select Committee on Extradition, together with the
Proceedings of the Committee, Minutes of Evidence, and Appendix” (6
July, 1868), PP, 1867-68, VII, 129-338.

12 May, 1868

Edmund Hammond1

[The questioning turned on the fact that a proposed treaty of 1859
between Britain and the U.S., extending extradition to embezzlement, was
rejected by the U.S. partly because of a clause requiring that it be
ratified by Parliament. There Edition: current; Page: [543] had been no
such clause in the Ashburton Treaty of 1842 (PP, 1843, LXI, 1-8), but it
had been ratified by Parliament, and all recent treaties involving money
or other matters requiring parliamentary sanction had included such
clauses.]

56. It was on the proposal of the American Government, was it not, that
the matter was taken into consideration at this time?—Yes, they proposed
to extend the treaty in the same manner as the treaty with France of
1843 had been extended.2 To that treaty an additional article was added
in 1845, and a further additional article in 1858, extending it to
crimes which had not at first been included.3

57. Then did our Government object to extend the treaty to the case of
embezzlement unless it were to include all embezzlement, and not merely
embezzlement of public funds?—I presume they did, because it would have
been of very little use to the mercantile community if it excluded
general embezzlement, which they were very anxious to have included.

[In response to the Chair, Hammond agreed that the British desire was to
make it general.]

59. However, the overture for an alteration in the Treaty came from the
United States?—Yes, it came from the United States.

[In the view of the witness, the negotiations substantively broke down
over the question of embezzlement, though formally over parliamentary
ratification. He recalled no controversy over piracy, though the
governments differed over its definition.]

69. Are there any other instances than that of Anderson4 in which either
America or this country have refused a case of extradition that was
demanded under the Treaty?—I am unable to say; because the Foreign
Office has no cognizance of the intermediate stages between the issue of
the warrant of apprehension and the warrant of extradition; but I have a
list of a certain number of cases which have occurred since the new Act
passed.

[The questioning turned to the Treaty with France, and Hammond handed in
a list of British demands for extradition since the Act of 1866.5]

90. These then are cases that have occurred since 1866?—Yes.

Edition: current; Page: [544]
[On the matter of French complaints that England hardly ever extradited
people to France under the original treaty,6 it was ascertained that a
new treaty had been negotiated in 1852,7 but had not been passed by
Parliament. France had eventually, in 1865, denounced the 1843 Treaty on
six months’ notice.8]

132. Do you mean that the draft of the new convention having failed to
become operative, owing to Parliament’s not passing the Bill that was
presented to give validity to it, there was, between the failure of that
attempt to make a new treaty in 1852 and the time when the French
denounced the old treaty in 1865, no intermediate negotiation between
the French Government and our own upon the subject?—Communications may
have passed, but they did not assume the shape of a negotiation; in
fact, I may say fairly, that it was felt to be hopeless to attempt to go
to Parliament for an Act to give effect to such an extradition treaty as
France would wish to have.

[Discussion centred on the failure to negotiate extradition treaties
with other states, owing, in Hammond’s judgment, to the futility of
taking to Parliament bills that would be thrown out.]

163. I think I have understood you to say that, within your official
experience, it is only with France that there have been any difficulties
about the actual execution of a treaty, and that the difficulties which
have arisen there, have arisen from our requiring an amount of evidence
which the French authorities do not think ought to be required?—In a few
words that is about the state of the case, I think.

[Discussion on difficulties in Parliament continued, and reference was
made to the complaint by the French government about unequal treatment.]

172. On what did the French complaint turn; was there any case of the
delivery of any prisoner to Denmark who would not have been delivered to
France?—I believe that the French Government, having made a great number
of treaties with different States, considered themselves very much
aggrieved because England would not come into what they sometimes called
a general law of Europe upon the subject of extradition. There could
have been practically no complaint about a person having been actually
given up to Denmark. The first person, I believe, given up to Denmark
was given up the other day, and he was not a convicted person.

173. Was the fact this, that whenever we gave up a person to Denmark the
Edition: current; Page: [545] Danish Government had to produce an amount
of evidence which France was unwilling to produce in a similar case?—The
Act of Parliament of 1866 applies to all treaties, and enables the
magistrate to be satisfied with the same character of evidence from all
countries.

[The Chair ascertained that concerning evidence all treaties were on the
same footing; the treaty with Denmark differed on a non-evidentiary
matter, the inclusion of condamnés.9]

176. The difference between the treaties as regards the condamnés is of
course a totally distinct question. In the case of a condamné the only
evidence would be the record of the condemnation, and proof of the
identity of the person; no other evidence would be required?—Yes.

177. But in the case of persons who are only accused, or who have been
condemned par contumace, that other evidence would be required, and I
suppose the evidence would be the same, whatever the country was?—Yes.

178. Therefore, there is no reasonable ground of complaint on the part
of France that we have done for Denmark what we have not done for
France?—No; not as regards the evidence on which extradition is granted;
the Act was made purposely general to apply to all countries.

[The witness developed at length his view that a general Act should be
passed, giving in detail the permissible kinds of evidence and a
definition of all extraditable crimes, without reference to reciprocal
treaties, and then criminals could be deported to countries covered by
specific Orders in Council.]

205. We understand in what way you get rid, by your plan, of
difficulties arising from the different definitions that the laws of the
two countries may give of the same crime. But how would you meet another
kind of difficulty which might require you to make a distinction between
different kinds of acts which still come under the same category of
crime in our own law? For instance, if there were to be a general
Extradition Act, it would, of course, extend to murder; now, the most
delicate cases of all are precisely the cases of those political
offences in which the person demanded would, according to the law of our
own as well as of any other country, be chargeable with the offence of
murder, if the Government chose to prosecute him for it. For example,
take the case of a person who shot a sentry from a political motive. If
that act had been committed in this country, would not he be liable to
be prosecuted for murder in this country, and if so, would he not, under
the Act which you propose, be liable to be delivered up to the country
claiming him?—The provision of the Act which I propose, of course, would
be subject to limitations and restrictions; in the first place there
would be the restriction that a Edition: current; Page: [546] person
should not be given up for a political crime; one of the clauses of the
Act would be, “No one shall be delivered up under this Act for a
political crime,” and also it would be provided that any man delivered
up must be bonâ fide tried for the crime for which he is delivered up.

[The question of politically motivated murders was discussed.]

208. The difficulty which we have now reached is exactly that which more
than any other it is the business of the Committee to find a means of
resolving, and the Committee would be extremely glad to receive any
suggestion you could offer for that purpose. The difficulty is this: any
disaffected person who for the purpose of changing the Government of a
country, has attempted to raise a civil war, or in any way gone beyond
speaking or writing, has technically made himself liable to a charge
either of murder, or attempt to murder, or robbery, or some other crime
which in other circumstances would be a proper subject for extradition.
You do not want to surrender persons who have done what they have done
solely as insurgents, but you do want to surrender them if they have
done it in any other character. The difficulty is to suggest a mode of
distinguishing the cases in which, although the origin of the offence
may have had something to do with politics, still it is not a proper
case for exemption, from the cases in which the general character of the
offence is properly political, and such as you do wish to exempt. For
instance, if a case has occurred of a person claiming the throne of a
foreign country, who landed in that country and shot a sentry,10 there
can be no doubt, I think, that in the general opinion of this country it
would have been wrong to have delivered him up, supposing he had escaped
to England. If, then, his extradition had been demanded upon a charge of
murder, do you think that the general Act which you would like to have
passed ought to be one that would have authorised extradition in that
particular case?—It is much better to let a man go scot free than to run
the risk of exposing a person given up under an extradition treaty to be
tried for a political offence. It is impossible to get at perfection,
and I would, rather than run that risk, exclude from the operation of
the Act, by a special clause, any crime committed in connection with a
political crime; I think it is always understood that persons charged
with political offences should not be given up. Under our present
treaties we should certainly not give up a person charged with a
political crime; but I am not sure whether we should be horne out in our
refusal by the terms of the treaties. They must be construed in this
instance by public policy.

209. It would not be possible, then, that the definition of the offence
in the general Act should exactly coincide with the definition of the
English law, because I apprehend that such an act as that to which I am
referred, would have been murder, as well as treason, under English
law?—The definition would, in the case supposed, be qualified by the
special proviso.

Edition: current; Page: [547]
210. Then you do not think that the Act ought to authorise the
extradition of every person charged with murder, even though the
evidence be conclusive that he committed it?—I think it would be
dangerous to do so if the murder was committed in connection with a
political crime; the only way you could meet the difficulty would be by
an understanding in some form or other, with the foreign Government,
that if a man given up under such circumstances, should be acquitted of
the murder, he is then to be returned to the asylum from which he was
surrendered.

211. Then he is to be tried for the murder?—He would be tried for the
murder, and if acquitted, would then be sent back to England.

[If convicted, he would be executed.]

214. Let us take the case of the American war; one cannot call anything
done by either of the belligerents, morally murder; but I apprehend that
technically a rebel who kills anybody in battle, might be tried for
murder?—The case of the Clerkenwell criminals would be the most
appropriate case;11 persons doing an act which, by our law, would be
murder, killing bystanders, for instance.

[Dwelling further on political crimes, Hammond gave his opinion that, in
the case of a Fenian killing a policeman for political motives, and
fleeing to France, Britain could not ask for his extradition.]

233. Not for the crime of murder?—No.

[Hammond’s interpretation of the present treaties was that though they
did not specifically exclude political crimes, because they were not
included in the lists of extraditable crimes, they were excluded in
practice. Therefore a person accused of treason by assassination would
not be given up.]

238. Might not there be a real intention of trying him for the offence
for which he was given up, and yet the offence might have been
political; for instance, that the alleged murderer had been concerned in
an insurrection, or in some political act in which persons lost their
lives?—I think the mere fact of his being concerned in an insurrection
would take his offence out of the category of crimes for which we should
give persons up.

239. You think that under an Act which made murder a case of
extradition, you could refuse to deliver up a political insurgent,
although he might have shed blood?—Certainly; of course when such a case
arose we should refer to the law officers of the Crown, and they would
have to pronounce an opinion upon it.

Edition: current; Page: [548]
[Under repeated questioning, Hammond, referring to his official
capacity, refused to say whether he thought foreign governments might
seek extradition on ordinary grounds for someone in fact suspected of
political motives.]

251. Might not a foreign government do that in perfect good faith?—Yes,
they might do so in perfect good faith, and, of course, if we gave the
man up we should be relying upon the good faith of the government to
whom we gave him.

252. But although they might be in perfect good faith in demanding a
person for the very offence for which they meant to try him, still might
not that be an offence really political, and one which ought not to be
made a case of extradition?—It might be so; there would be a choice of
difficulties; but, on the whole, I think it would be much safer not to
give the man up.

253. I mean without imputing any bad faith to the foreign
government?—Certainly.

19 May

Thomas Henry12

[Henry indicated that of six applications from France in two years, two
were successful. He then gave the details of one of the latter, a case
of fraudulent bankruptcy, when two unsuccessful appeals were made by the
accused. During the examination the bankrupt’s assignee appeared and
gave oral evidence.13]

292. Was the assignee cross-examined?—Yes; I ought to have mentioned
that the man was defended by a solicitor and counsel; in fact, in all
the cases I have known, the persons have been defended by solicitor and
counsel, and they have had ample time and opportunity for preparing
their defence. In this case, the first day when they appeared they said
they were unprepared, and I adjourned the case for two days, I think,
and then they came again and the case was fully gone into; they
afterwards went before the Court of Queen’s Bench. Perhaps the Committee
would like to see a short report of the case. It is given in Clarke’s
Treatise on Extradition, which I have here, and it is also very fully
reported in the Queen’s Bench Reports.

[Henry indicated that the second successful application had special
significance in clearing up a dispute over the meaning of French law.
The law officers had held that a jugement par contumace was a
condemnation, and therefore a person under such a sentence would not be
extraditable; Henry’s view, subsequently vindicated, was that it meant
merely a conviction of contempt of court, and that subsequent trial
under the substantive charge would follow extradition.]

Edition: current; Page: [549]
306. Perhaps that impression was founded upon the circumstance that a
jugement par contumace, although it is not practically so, is
technically a condemnation, since the sentence could not have been
executed on his return to France without a trial?—Just so; we did not
understand a judgment of that sort here, because we have no similar
judgment in the courts of this country.

[Henry averred that in England there was no such judgment in criminal
courts, though there was in Ecclesiastical courts, and in civil causes
there was judgment by default.]

309. A judgment by default in civil cases can be executed, can it
not?—Certainly; if the process of the court is served upon the person,
you can go on in his absence in a civil cause, but never on any criminal
charge.

[Henry outlined the American case,14 in which embezzlement, not an
extraditable offence under the Treaty, seemed clear, but the attempt to
prove forgery failed. In the trial it emerged that while forgery was a
State offence in New York, it was not a Federal offence, and the Treaty
was of course with the Federal government.]

352. There is no criminal law which applies to the United States
generally, is there?—Our criminal law is generally used there, I
believe. Still there are certain States which have passed Acts for
themselves, which are binding upon all courts in that particular State.
That was the case in the State of New York. However, the Court of
Queen’s Bench decided that that could not be taken into account, because
it was an Act of the Legislature that was peculiar and applicable only
to that State, and did not apply to the United States generally;
therefore the man was discharged.

[Questions were asked about the form of United States’ depositions.]

355. If the Court had been satisfied that it was forgery according to
the law of the United States, although not according to the English law,
could the accused person have been delivered up?—[When the point was
raised in court, it had been ruled that there must be a common element.
This was crucial, because offences are not easily equated in different
jurisdictions. For example, fraudulent bankruptcy is defined differently
in France and England, and, further, the English laws are subject to
change over time. It was Henry’s opinion that the word faux in French
law corresponded to the English forgery.]

362. Are there not cases which are not forgery by our law, although they
are faux by the French law?—I am not aware of any.

363. It has been generally said that there are, has it not?—Of course in
any extradition case we must be satisfied that it comes within both; at
least that is the Edition: current; Page: [550] received opinion upon
extradition law. I may, perhaps, here observe that extradition law is
comparatively in its infancy in this country.

[In Henry’s view, the law was working adequately, except that the number
of specified offences was too small. He was not aware that a defence on
political grounds had been made.]

368. I imagine, from the statement of cases you have given, that among
the very small number of cases that have occurred, no such case has come
before you?—No such case has come before me.

369. Supposing that the extradition of an accused person was demanded
upon a charge of murder, and it should appear that the murder alleged
consisted in killing some one in an act of insurrection, or attempted
insurrection, should you, in such a case as that, consider yourself
bound or at liberty to deliver him up?—I should look at the depositions
to see whether the case amounted to treason. If the case amounted to
treason, then it would not be within the treaty, because the treaty does
not include treason as one of the offences.

370. Do you think that by including murder, and not including treason,
it would justify a court of justice here in refusing the surrender of
any person who could have been tried for treason, for the same act for
which he was demanded on a charge of murder?—The law of extradition
expressly excludes political offences. In our treaty there is no clause
to that effect; but it is well understood law, and it is laid down by
all the French authors, but especially in a circular letter from the
Minister of Justice addressed to all the magistrates in France,15 that
in matters of extradition political offences are to be ignored; that is
to say, no extradition is to take place for a political offence.

371. That might be interpreted to mean that a person who had committed a
political offence, such as sedition, or an attempt at insurrection,
though attended with any violation of life or property, could not be
demanded under the treaty?—He could not.

372. That is clear?—Yes, it is. It would, perhaps, be right to mention
to the Committee that that is generally laid down as a principle of
French law, with regard to extradition, and all their treaties contain a
clause, that political crimes are not to come within the treaty. I have
here a copy of all their treaties; they are 53 in number.

[All French extradition treaties, Henry established, contained a clause
excluding political crimes, except three in which an additional clause
made applicable crimes against the head of government.16]

Edition: current; Page: [551]
384. So that it appears that by the interpretation of the French
Government, proved by this public act, of concluding a supplemental
treaty, they could not, under the extradition treaties, have demanded
even a person who attempted the life of the Emperor of the French?—They
could not previously to the supplemental treaty.

[Henry referred again to the circular letters binding French magistrates
not to claim persons for political crimes, so the lack of such a clause
in the British Treaty made no practical difference.]

387. Was there in the original treaty between France and Belgium any
special provision against the delivery of political offenders?—There
was; I will read the words in the first treaty which relate to it; it is
dated the 12th December 1834: “Il est expressément stipulé que
l’étranger dont l’extradition aura été accordée ne pourra dans aucun
cas, être poursuivi ou puni pour aucun délit politique antérieur à
l’extradition ou pour aucun fait connexe à un semblable délit, ni pour
aucun des crimes ou délits non prévus par la présente convention;” that
was the first Belgian treaty.

[The question arose as to the status in French law of the circular
letter which, Henry opined, was effectively law, France not being quite
like England in that respect.]

401. But, then, could not any future Minister of Justice or of the
Interior (whichever it is that issued it) revoke that circular
letter?—Then if he did that we could revoke the treaty.

[Henry reaffirmed the effective status of the circulatory letter.]

406. That is good evidence no doubt of what the present views of the
French Government are upon the subject, but those views may change?—No
doubt.

[The circular letter, dating back as far as 1841, expresses rather the
French government’s view than its treaty duties.]

408. There are two questions; one is whether a person whose extradition
is demanded for forgery, or some other offence, may be tried for
something else, which something else may be a political offence; that is
clearly precluded by the article you read in the Belgian Treaty, except
so far as that is modified by the subsequent treaty. But is not it
consistent with the article in the Belgian Treaty, that the very offence
on which a person might be demanded upon a charge of murder, or some
offence against property, might really be a political one, as in the
case of the deserter who shot the gendarme?—If the original demand was
for one offence they could not under any circumstances try him for a
different offence.

409. But suppose they had made their demand originally for an offence
which may include cases really political, though it is not peculiarly a
political offence, such as murder. If they had made a demand for a
person upon a charge of murder, Edition: current; Page: [552] no doubt
they could not have tried the person upon any charge except that murder,
but might they not have tried him for that murder, although it might
have been a political murder?—Under the first treaty they could not.

410. You are sure of that?—Yes, I am sure of that, but now it is a
different thing, in consequence of the supplemental treaty. France
leaves to every country the right of judging what is a political
offence. I particularly inquired when I was in Paris, and indeed since,
whether they had any definition in their code, or in any of their books,
as to what was a political offence, and they said, “No, it would be
impossible to have a definition of it; we must leave to every country to
judge what they deem a political offence, and if they so deem it, to
refuse to deliver up a person demanded.”

411. There they would have no ground of complaint against us in whatever
manner we defined a political offence?—Yes, but they thought that
question was likely to arise between France and Belgium, they being
adjoining countries, and both sovereigns considered that it was
desirable at that time to have the clause inserted which I have read.

[The issue of defining crimes arose, and Henry pointed out that English
judges already had to take account of French law, for example,
concerning bankruptcy.]

447. As well as the English?—Yes, it must be both. That is the opinion
of the Lord Chief Justice; at present there must be what he calls a
common element.17

[Henry was examined further on the inclusion of defined extraditable
crimes.]

496. If those offences were included which you think should be included
in the Extradition Treaties, do you not think that political offences
might be brought within them?—I do not think any of the offences I would
put in would be such that political offences could be included in them.

497. You would include murder?—Yes; no doubt the question might arise
upon a charge of murder, as in the case which I put where in the Italian
war a man shot a gendarme in Italy and escaped to France.

[Henry would include attempts to murder which also, of course, might
then be ruled to be political.]

499. You would have full power of receiving any evidence admissible by
our own legal rules, to prove, not that the act had not been done, but
that it was, properly speaking, political, and not murder or
robbery?—Yes.

500. If that was made out to your satisfaction, or if such a case was
made out as you would have acted upon if it had been a case beginning
and ending in our own country, you would think yourself justified in not
delivering up the person?—I should. I should say you have made a charge
against the accused of murder, but Edition: current; Page: [553] the
charge really against him is treason; treason is not in the treaty, and
therefore I cannot give him up; your warrant is for a different offence
from that which he has really committed.

501. You would consider yourself at liberty to limit the technical or
legal meaning of the word murder, so that it should not include any case
that admits of being charged as treason?—Yes, I should in an extradition
case.

[Discussion of French procedures included the timing for
cross-examination.]

525. At what stage of the proceedings?—When the case comes before the
Cour d’Assises.

526. That is, at the final trial?—Yes.

527. Therefore, that does not apply to the depositions sent to you?—No,
it does not; it could not be otherwise where an accused had absconded
before a warrant was issued.

[In Henry’s view, the French sent all depositions on to the British when
a case was in issue, although they said only that those sent were “the
depositions.”]

532. It might be only that they might think there was enough already,
and that it would be superfluous to send more?—Yes.

533. Yet, if they did send more, it might lead to the discovery of flaws
in the evidence?—I have always the power to say, I will remand this
case; and as there were other depositions taken, I require them to be
sent over.

[Concerning French interpretation of political crimes, Henry was of
opinion that particular circumstances would determine whether an
attempted assassination was political or not.]

564. Supposing that a political motive existed, and that no other motive
was alleged?—Then it would be clearly treason.

565. That being so, you think that the extradition treaties would not
extend to that case?—No, certainly not, as they exist at present, with
the exception of Belgium and the Pontifical States, and Chili.

566. And then only by virtue of special supplemental engagements,
limited to attempts upon the life of members of the Royal family?18—Yes;
that takes them out of the general rule.

[An attempt upon a member of a royal family, if made for private
motives, would not exempt from extradition.]

569. But it is clear to you, that where the motive is political, a man
cannot be given up, although he may have committed murder?—There is not
the slightest Edition: current; Page: [554] ground for apprehension with
regard to that. The moment you show that it is treason, it becomes
political, and is not the offence with which the man was charged.

[Again it was affirmed that France’s extradition treaties included a
clause exempting political offences.]

579. That is not the case with the treaty between France and England, is
it?—It is most curious that that was excepted; I cannot tell why.

[Attention being called to the anomaly that a person accused of murder
could avoid extradition if also accused of treason, Henry indicated that
the law or treaty could be so framed as to avoid the problem.]

607. Will you inform the Committee what mode you would suggest of
drawing the distinction?—Yes; you might draw the line at any attempt to
overturn the Government, for example. I do not know whether the House of
Commons might wish to go so far as that; am I merely asked my own
opinion about it?

608. Merely your own opinion?—I think the exception, with regard to
political offences, goes rather too far in France.

609. What would you think, for instance, of such a definition as this:
that if an act charged as murder had, if committed at all, been
committed in the course of an insurrection, or for the purpose of
inciting to insurrection, with a view to change the Government, it
should be considered a political offence; but, if not, it should be
considered an ordinary offence?—That is to say, if it was in a state of
civil war.

610. If it was in a state of civil war, or if it was done for the
purpose of inciting to civil war?—That would apply to the Clerkenwell
case,19 because it may be that the Fenians who blew up the Clerkenwell
prison wanted that as a commencement.

611. Still, all the evidence would tend to show that they only wanted to
release the prisoners?—Yes.

[Henry was of opinion that clauses could be worded so as to distinguish
between shooting a policeman or soldier in an insurrection or seditious
riot, and shooting him in the back on the street.]

622. Would you be able to state to the Committee in what way it could be
defined?—I should require a little time, if that is to be reduced to
writing; I am not prepared, sitting in this chair, at this moment, to
draw up an Act of Parliament which would meet that object, and give a
definition.

[Given time, he would have no objection to attempting such a
definition.]

624. You alluded to another distinction which might be drawn, and which
might be important; for instance, it might be proper to treat as murder
the killing of Edition: current; Page: [555] anyone in a seditious riot
which was not an insurrection; that would just cover the case of the
Clerkenwell people, or the Manchester people;20 because when the object
is merely to obstruct the operations of the Government, but without any
prospect or design to effect a change in the Government, it is much more
desirable to check that than the other?—Yes; I had that distinction in
my mind.

[As to the case of a person condemned par contumace, the same evidence
would be required as for anyone else.]

636. He would be treated like any other accused person?—Yes, we call him
an accusé.

26 May

Thomas Henry, continued

[After discussion of several French terms, the witness said he would
never act on his own knowledge of their meaning, but only with expert
advice.]

699. Is it not the practice in France, when persons who are present and
persons who are absent are charged with being concerned in the same
crime, to find those who are present guilty, and condemn those who are
absent par contumace, the only reason for considering them contumacious
being that they could not be found in the country to serve the process
upon?—I believe that is so; but that is a matter which I would rather
leave to a French advocate also.

[Referring back to his last answer to Mill, Henry said he had assumed
that Mill meant it was impossible to serve the process.]

705. I meant only so far impossible to serve him, that the person could
not be found in the country?—Yes, when he cannot be found.

[Henry read his proposed clause concerning political offences: “No
person shall be claimed or surrendered for a political offence;
political offences shall be deemed to be such offences as are committed
by persons engaged in insurrection or rebellion against a reigning
Sovereign or Government; but any attempt against the life of any
reigning Sovereign, or against the life of any member of his family,
shall not be deemed a political offence within the terms of the treaty.”
The wording came under question.]

721. Would it not be necessary to add not merely offences committed by a
person in insurrection but acts committed with a view to excite
insurrection, because the act in question may be the first step in an
insurrection, as, for instance, Edition: current; Page: [556] in the
case in evidence of a person claiming a throne and invading a country;
the first act which he might do might subject him to a charge of murder,
and yet he could not be said to have been engaged in insurrection
previously, because the act would have been the first overt act of
insurrection?—I think it would be desirable to add that; but I did not
feel at liberty to go much further than I have done.

[After questions concerning Orders in Council, Mill turned to another
topic.]

725. You mentioned the case of Müller?21—I did.

726. What evidence was furnished to the American Courts in that case?—I
sent over what I considered very full depositions, and I sent over two
warrants of arrest by different packets. I believe it was the first time
that that had been done, but I considered that it was perfectly legal to
do it. It was important that the officer who arrived first should have
the opportunity of arresting Müller, and not knowing which would arrive
first, I sent two warrants.

727. Did you send any person to give oral evidence?—Yes; I was going on
to add, that I recommended that some of the material witnesses should
accompany the officer, and I believe that it was fortunate that I did
so.

728. Does it appear to you unreasonable in itself, apart from the
objections which some foreign governments might feel, that it should be
necessary, whenever the extradition of any person is applied for, to
send some witness capable of being cross-examined, who could testify to
the main facts of the case?—I think it would not be practicable. I think
so much objection would be made to it, that they would rather decline to
make applications than submit to that condition.

729. You think, however, that it was fortunate that you did so in the
case of Müller?—I believe it was.

730. If you had not, do you believe that the case could not have been
established against him?—I do not go quite that length, but I handed in,
last time I was examined, a report of what took place before the
magistrate, in New York, in that case; I judge from that; but if the
Committee would like to know what took place before the American
magistrate, the inspector who went over there and heard everything,
could be examined; it was Inspector Tanner.

[Questioning centred on the interpretation of terms.]

748. I understand you to say that, by the present practice, and, as you
conceive, by the present law, the country upon whom a demand is made has
a right to define what is a political offence, for which they will not
deliver up: would it not, then, be Edition: current; Page: [557] better
that the treaty should merely exclude the delivering up of all political
offenders, leaving the decision as to what are political offences to the
surrendering country; and do you not think that any definition of what
is a political offence, or any rule to be laid down, as it could be only
a rule to be laid down for the guidance of our own courts, would be
better laid down in an Act of Parliament than in a treaty?—I think it
would. I only prepared this as the Committee requested me to do so.

[Henry reaffirmed his view that the French took great care in criminal
proceedings.]

755. I understood you also to say that the depositions furnished to you
in support of a demand for extradition are furnished in a stage of the
proceedings at which the accused person has had no opportunity of
cross-examination?—Yes, just so; and it is entirely ex parte evidence
which has not been subjected to the amount of scrutiny to which it would
be subjected before you. That is necessarily so, because the accused
person has gone away; and, therefore, any evidence which is taken must
of necessity be taken in his absence.

756. Unless he has escaped?—He was not forthcoming; there was no
opportunity of having him present. The depositions before our tribunals
before the warrant is granted are taken ex parte. In that case they are
not called depositions; they are called informations, but they are taken
ex parte.

757. But if a person charged before you, who did not attend to the
summons, and against whom depositions had to be taken in his absence,
was afterwards apprehended, would he not be brought again before you,
and would not his case be again heard before he was committed?—Yes.

758. In that case he would have an opportunity of saying whatever he
could say in his defence, and of producing counter evidence, if it were
in his power to do so?—Yes; no doubt our system is better in that
respect.

759. Therefore the depositions taken before you are a stronger assurance
of there being a good primâ facie case against the accused person than
the depositions taken in France are?—We cannot alter their practice in
that respect.

[The treaty between France and Belgium provided that a person accused of
attempted assassination of a sovereign, even from political motives,
would be given up.]

764. But that is under a supplemental treaty, is it not?—Yes.

765. Which supplemental treaty France, if I understand you rightly, has
with only three countries?—Yes.

766. I think you said that those were Belgium, the Papal States, and
Chili?—Yes.

[The examination returned to the question of whether the depositions
sent by the Edition: current; Page: [558] French were complete, Henry
reaffirming that he believed them to be so, but could not prove them
so.]

793. Is that which is sent called the dossier?—It is; it is the name
known in their chambers.

794. Is it certified to be the dossier, or is it certified to be an
extrait du dossier?—It is not an extrait; I never saw an extrait.

795. It is certified; but there is no certificate from which you could
tell that what is sent is the whole, though you think it is?—Yes; that
is the form in which it comes.

[Contrasts between French and English procedure were discussed.]

818. In any case you would not deliver up any one on these depositions,
until he had been heard upon the effect of the depositions, and had an
opportunity of disproving what the depositions stated?—Yes, he or his
counsel would have that opportunity.

819. But they would not have the advantage of cross-examination; that
they could not have under the circumstances?—No; but if they could
afford to bring over evidence to disprove what was stated in the
depositions, they would have the opportunity of doing so.

820. They would be allowed to comment upon the depositions, and to raise
any argument founded upon their not having had an opportunity of
cross-examination?—They would; and they have introduced that argument in
nearly every case.

Henry Thurstan Holland22

[The witness mentioned, in connection with engagements for extradition
by colonies, the case of Malta and Italy.]

827. Would there be the power of trying an Italian subject in Italy, for
a crime committed in Malta?—I think the Italian Government would have
that power.

828. But we should not?—No; a colonial court could not try for offences
committed out of the colony, except in certain cases specified by
Imperial Acts.

[A British subject could be tried in England or Ireland for a murder
committed anywhere.]

830. I believe the French Government had not that power until a recent
Act was passed in France, by which French subjects were enabled to be
tried on their return to France for crimes committed in foreign
countries?—An article was inserted in the Code in 1866.23

831. I believe they had not that power before?—Possibly not.

Edition: current; Page: [559]
[The questioning was miscellaneous.]

837. Under the convention which concerns Malta,24 could political
offenders be demanded?—There is no mention made of political offenders;
but they would not be surrendered, I apprehend, according to the general
rule. It has always been understood that political offenders are not to
be given up.

838. What is the date of that convention?—The date of the convention is
1863.

839. Was there any convention previously between the Maltese authorities
and any of the Italian Powers before the kingdom of Italy was
constituted?—None. I have desired inquiry to be made into that point,
and I can find none.

[Inter alia, the arrangements between the British West Indies and
Venezuela were discussed.]

900. I believe it is said that in some of the Spanish American States,
it is usual for brigands to describe themselves as patriots, and to
assume the guise of insurgents against the reigning power, and cover
their acts by that means. In such a case as that, have you any idea by
what considerations a Colonial Government would be guided in determining
whether to surrender or to refuse to surrender a person charged with
brigandage?—I apprehend that if there is a scintilla of political
motive; if there is any political character in the offence of any sort
or kind, they would refuse to give the man up.

[Reference was made to the refusal to give up to French Guiana people
who had merely fled to British Guiana.]

912. If I rightly understand what you said, it would have been necessary
to have delivered up those persons, if it had been in Malta?—After the
ordinance had been passed, I think it would have been necessary to have
given up persons charged with any of the crimes specified.

913. Breaking prison was included among the cases for which there was to
be extradition there?—Yes; I think it was included.

914. In that case, if it had been in Malta, the authorities would have
examined whether the refugees had been imprisoned for a political
offence or not?—I should rather imagine that it would be for a prisoner
who was charged, and brought up before a magistrate, to set up the
defence. If he could in any way set up that it was a political offence,
he would be allowed to do so. That has always been the case before our
magistrates in the American cases; the offender has always been allowed
to set up the defence that he was acting under orders from the
Confederate Government.

915. So that, although breaking prison is an offence for which
extradition can in that case be demanded, still, if the person was in
prison for a political offence, his breaking prison would also be
considered a political offence, and he would not be Edition: current;
Page: [560] surrendered?—It would be rather difficult to give a distinct
answer to that question. I should think he would not be surrendered if
he had been imprisoned for a political offence.

[Concerning the Guiana case, the British had issued an Ordinance25
providing for delivery of escaped convicts, on the presentation of
evidence of the conviction, identity, and escape; it was not put into
effect, however, as the French refused to pass a corresponding law.]

924. If the French had consented to come under a corresponding
obligation, and the Colonial Ordinance had come into force, would it
have been necessary under that ordinance to give up a person who had
escaped from confinement, having been placed in confinement as a
political offender?—I should think certainly not; it would not have been
necessary to give up political offenders who had escaped from
confinement.

925. My question refers to this; if nothing was requisite to be produced
but evidence of the conviction, the identity, and the escape, it seems
as if the country from whom extradition was demanded were precluded from
entering upon the question of how the person came to be imprisoned?—I
should imagine not; I speak with diffidence, because I have not had much
experience upon the matter; but I understand that it is an implied rule
governing all these treaties and conventions, that political offenders
are not to be given up. Sir Thomas Henry said that if a prisoner came
before him, whether he was accused of crime, or had escaped from prison,
if he could show that he was really imprisoned for a political offence,
or that he was only accused of a political offence, he would not be
surrendered.

926. If a colonial legislature were to pass an Act, by which they should
be empowered or required to surrender political offenders, you think
that, according to the principles acted upon in the Colonial Office, the
Royal sanction to that Act would be refused?—I should incline to think
so.

[The examination turned to colonies in the East Indies.]

960. Before the surrender of any person upon the demand of the Sultan of
Borneo, or any other Asiatic prince, what kind of previous examination
takes place?—It is only in the case of Borneo that we have such an
arrangement;26 it does not apply to any other Asiatic prince.

961. The Rajah of Quedah?—That treaty is under consideration yet, but it
is substantially in the same form.27 The application is made to the
Governor in each Edition: current; Page: [561] case; the Governor then
issues his warrant to any magistrate to aid in apprehending, and the
magistrate inquires into the case. If he is satisfied, he certifies back
to the Governor that he is satisfied, and the Governor issues his
warrant of delivery.

[Depositions would be sent, but were not governed by a specific clause.]

963. Is there a British resident, or any other British agent, at the
Court of the Sultan of Borneo or the Rajah of Quedah?—Not at Quedah; the
British resident is at Siam. Quedah is under the authority of the King
of Siam.

[The Governor of Labuan is also the agent for Borneo.]

965. Are you aware what used to be the practice under the East India
Company’s government with regard to the extradition of persons demanded
by the native princes?—No, I cannot say that I am.

966. Are you aware that in most cases there was a right on the part of
the native Government to demand prisoners in certain cases, but that
when there was, as there usually was, a Resident or other political
officer stationed at the Court of a native Prince, the trial which the
person underwent when delivered up was virtually a trial by that British
officer; because, although it might be ostensibly by the tribunal of the
native Prince, it was the duty of the Resident to watch over the
proceedings, and he had a right to be fully cognisant of them, and, in
fact, no sentence could be passed of which he did not approve?—I was not
aware of that.

[The arrangements between Hong Kong and China came under examination.]

982. Do you find that, in the case of China, that takes place which
takes place very often with the Native princes of India, namely, that
insurgents are demanded as robbers?—I do not think we have any case in
the Colonial Office of any insurgent having escaped to Hong-Kong, and
being demanded. The truth is we have very few cases indeed in the office
that I can find, but I can quite understand the possibility of such a
case.

983. The usual practice of the Native princes in India is to demand
those as robbers whom they wish to punish as insurgents?—I can quite
understand that.

9 June

Edmund Hammond, resumed

[It emerged that there were cases in which individuals had been given up
to Britain where treaties did not exist, simply out of good
disposition.]

1068. Are there any instances in which we have delivered up any person
in that unofficial way, as a matter of complaisance?—I should think not;
but Sir Thomas Henry could best speak to that.

[Hammond amplified his previous evidence on several matters.]

Edition: current; Page: [562]
1094. Did I rightly understand you upon the former occasion to say, that
although you think that offenders should not be delivered up, if there
is even a slight tinge of politics in the offence, yet you saw a
difficulty in providing against that by the terms of treaties?28—[Yes;
there is no provision in our existing treaties for exempting political
offenders from surrender; but the thing is understood, and we certainly,
I think, should object to giving them up. I believe Sir Thomas Henry the
other day quoted an instruction of the French Government to their
different préfets, saying that a man was not to be given up who was
charged with a political crime. That, of course, as between the French
Government and their own officers, is quite sufficient; but
internationally it is not sufficient, because it involves no
international obligation between France and England. I only wished to
make the observation because there was some stress laid upon that letter
of the French Minister to préfets. Internationally it involves no
obligation, though in the improbable supposition that the French would
ask for a political offender, of course we should feel ourselves at
liberty to quote it against them.

1095. But Sir Thomas Henry, besides referring to that instruction, also
said that in all the numerous extradition treaties between the French
Government and other nations, with the exception of that with England,
there is an express provision that political offenders are not to be
surrendered?29—I have not examined the treaties carefully, but I think
most probably that is the case, because it would be in the spirit of the
French instructions.

1096. Those treaties, of course, are internationally valid?—Wherever
that provision is contained in an extradition treaty, of course it is
internationally valid; but there is no international validity in the
instructions to the préfets.

1097. If those treaties are found to work well, do you see any
difficulty or objection to our having such a provision in any future
treaty we may enter into?—No; certainly we ought to have such an
article. I should be very glad indeed, if we could make an arrangement
that a man given up for a crime should, after being tried for that
crime, be sent back to this country if he was acquitted; but we should
have great difficulty in reciprocating it. The case of Lamirande was
somewhat similar; the French Government said, “We have got him, and we
cannot legally give him up.” That was precisely the answer we should
make in England in a similar case.

1098. Might you not have an alternative provision, that each Government,
if such a case arose, should either send the man back, or set him at
liberty; and although we could not, consistently with our own law, send
him back, we could consistently with our own law set him at
liberty?—Yes; but you could not put him in the same position of security
in which he stood before he was given up. Many a man is set at liberty
at the Old Bailey, and re-arrested at the door.

Edition: current; Page: [563]
1099. In order not to demand from foreign Governments what we were not
prepared to reciprocate, we might be obliged to give that alternative,
instead of stipulating that he should be sent back to the country from
whence he had been taken, since we could not comply with that condition
on our own side?—I think it would be very illusory, because, even
supposing you prevented his being tried again, you would leave him under
the surveillance of the police of the country in which he was set at
liberty, and therefore the man would not be in the same position as if
he had been sent back to England. But I apprehend that, in passing an
Act of Parliament, there would be very little difficulty in making
provision for the supposed case in the Act, and as the Act of Parliament
would be special in all its circumstances, one speciality more or less
would not signify much.

1100. You see no reason why we should not pass an Act of Parliament
which would authorise us, in the case of the acquittal of any person who
had been surrendered by France, or any other country, to send him back
to that country; you see no objection to our binding ourselves to do
that by treaty, and passing an Act of Parliament to enable us to do
it?—I see no objection to it at all; it would be something like the
Alien Act.30 Whether there would be any constitutional difficulty, I
cannot say; you might pass a special Act, but it would be to meet a
particular case which might never occur.

1101. It would be very different from the Alien Act, would it not?—Yes;
I am only mentioning that with regard to sending a man out of the
country. We had power under the Alien Act to send a man out of the
country. I can see no reason why we should not have a similar power in
the case supposed.

1102. It would not be liable to the objections which have been raised to
the Alien Act, would it?—No.

Richard Mullens31

[Concerning the difficulty of proceeding in cases of fraud, Mullens
mentioned the case of Heilbronn,32 who fled first to France and then to
the U.S., whence he was extradited, but was found not guilty of
forgery.]

1157. Was this man convicted for larceny on a separate indictment?—Yes;
he was charged on two separate indictments, one for forgery and the
other for stealing.

[Heilbronn had not claimed protection subsequently. The case ran from
1853 to the end of 1854, as Mullens recollected.]

1160. Was it at the Old Bailey?—Yes, it was at the Old Bailey.

Edition: current; Page: [564]
[Mullens asserted that all extradition cases, including those of persons
found in Scotland and Ireland, should be held in one central court in
London, where the cases would be examined most carefully.]

1180. You think that when a foreign government asks for extradition, we
ought to give the accused person the benefit of the best criminal
tribunal we have?—I think so, I think we ought to have a thorough
investigation, and only to give up persons in cases in which we are
thoroughly satisfied.

[The interrogation turned to preliminary proceedings in extradition
cases.]

1193. What do you think of the admission of written depositions?—I think
you could not obtain extradition without them. Take the case of America.
In Windsor’s case they sent over depositions. If I recollect right, I
doubted in the first instance whether those depositions were sufficient,
and I had to send again for more.

[Mullens was of opinion that someone accused, acquitted on the offence
specified in the warrant of extradition, could be tried for another
offence, provided it was on the same facts.]

1209. Then he would be tried for the same act, though it might be a
different crime?—Yes.

[The French Treaty is such that only one offence could be specified in a
warrant.]

1216. As I understand it, the treaty with America would not prevent our
trying a man upon a different offence from that for which he has been
given up?—It would not; there is no stipulation that he shall not be
tried for another offence.

1217. Would you wish to extend that state of things to other
countries?—With regard to America I have never found any difficulty
about it; but since I have heard the question discussed in this room, I
began to think a little more about it, and with regard to the continent
of Europe we might consider it necessary that there should be some
stipulation as to what should happen to a man if he was acquitted of the
crime with which he was charged in the extradition warrant.

[If someone is accused of a crime other than that given in the warrant,
he should, with the permission of the other government, be tried for
it.]

1222. If that were the case, might he not be tried for a political
offence also?—He might.

1223. Do you think that that would be desirable?—Certainly not.

1224. How would you guard against it?—That was one of the points I was
coming to. In any convention, or in any Act of Parliament, or in any
arrangement we might enter into, there should be an express stipulation
that no person should be delivered up for a political offence.

Edition: current; Page: [565]
[The effect should be that no one should be tried for an offence not
stipulated in a treaty, and that political offences should be excluded.]

1227. The offence must not only be one arising out of the same facts,
but it must also be an offence mentioned in the extradition treaty?—Yes;
I think so; it must be an offence for which he could have been delivered
up if his extradition had been first demanded upon it.

[Questioning continued on the problems of trial for more than one
crime.]

1230. Is not there this difficulty; the supposition is, that a man is
delivered up upon a charge of larceny, and you have reason to suppose
that he has committed the crime of murder. Before he could be delivered
up on the ground of larceny, primâ facie evidence must be adduced of his
being guilty of larceny?—Yes.

1231. In the case supposed, in which there was no previous idea of
trying him for murder, no primâ facie evidence would have been adduced
in the country delivering him up of his being guilty of murder, and
therefore he would have been delivered up for trial without the security
of primâ facie evidence adduced in the country delivering him up, that
he was guilty of that crime?—He would never, or at least under very rare
circumstances indeed, be put upon his trial here without an examination
before a magistrate, which would give notice of the fact that he was
charged with that crime.

1232. Undoubtedly; but it seems to be admitted that before any person is
surrendered for murder, there must not only be security that he shall be
regularly tried in the country which receives him, but also a
preliminary investigation in the country delivering him up, and primâ
facie evidence must be adduced in that country, such as would justify
his committal for trial in that country by the laws of that country. If
so, and if a person was demanded, and primâ facie evidence adduced
against him of one crime, and he were afterwards to be tried in the
country receiving him upon another, he would be tried without the
security of the primâ facie evidence of that second crime adduced in the
country delivering him up, since the primâ facie evidence which would
have been there adduced, would have been only primâ facie evidence of
the crime for which he was surrendered, and not of the other on which he
was subsequently tried?—Yes, it was for that reason that I threw out the
suggestion, that the consent of the Government delivering him up should
be asked, before he was tried for some other offence than that for which
they gave him up.

[Questions were raised about the undesirability of immunity from
prosecution of someone who stayed in the U.K. after having been
acquitted on the charge for which he was extradited, when evidence of
his guilt on another charge was subsequently discovered.]

1237. Would not that case be exactly met by a stipulation to be inserted
in the Edition: current; Page: [566] treaties, that after a person had
been acquitted of the crime for which he was charged, he should be sent
back to the foreign country which delivered him up; we should then be
able again to demand his surrender for the other crime, provided we
could produce primâ facie evidence of it, that was satisfactory to the
tribunal of the other country?—Yes.

[Some treaties expressly gave the acquitted the choice of staying or
returning.]

1239. But in this case he would not perhaps accept the option of being
sent back. Might he not have the option of either being put upon his
trial at once for the other crime or of being sent back for a
preliminary examination in the country which had given him up?—I do not
think that he should be sent back.

1240. The case is this: he has been acquitted or perhaps convicted, of a
minor crime, and it may be desired to try him for a greater crime, such
as murder: should you see any objection to allowing him the option I
have mentioned, that is, to try him for the murder here unless he claims
to be sent back to the country which had given him up; and if he does
so, then to demand his extradition afresh, and produce the requisite
primâ facie evidence against him?—I should not go through that
formality. If we were prepared here with the evidence of another crime,
I would not give him the option of going back to the country which
delivered him up, but I would at once apply to the other Government for
its consent to our trying him for the other offence.

1241. But what if the other Government said it could not give its
consent except in primâ facie evidence of the commission of the greater
crime. It probably would do so, if it was a Government like ours which
really requires primâ facie evidence of the crime before it grants
extradition. I apprehend we should make the absence of an examination
here an objection to giving our consent to the prisoner’s being tried
for another crime abroad?—We should have no difficulty in sending to the
foreign Government the depositions upon which the man might be committed
for trial for the second offence.

[Someone who took the option of return, might, if faced with another
charge implying extradition, flee to a third country that had no treaty
with the U.K.]

1244. In such a case might not the practice be adopted of delivering him
up to the officers of justice of the foreign country, instead of setting
him free on the frontier?—That would entirely meet it.

16 June

Nestor Treitt33

[The witness explained, inter alia, that attempts against the
sovereign’s life Edition: current; Page: [567] should be considered
under the heading of assassinations, and so not seen as political
crimes.]

1302. As assassination is never regarded as a political crime, it is of
great importance to know what is the definition of assassination
according to the French law; because all homicide, even of the first
order of criminality, is not necessarily an assassination in France. We
do not make that distinction in our English law?—I will show you the
distinction which exists in the text of the law. An assassination is an
act of homicide committed with premeditation; a murder is the crime of
homicide committed without premeditation, so that an assassination is
distinguished from other kinds of homicide. There are two sorts of
homicide; that which is committed with premeditation, which is called
assassination, and that which is not committed with premeditation, which
is called murder simply.

1303. Then, all murders committed with premeditation, even with
political motives, would be cases of extradition, would they not?—They
would be cases of extradition. In 1866 I wrote a report, which must have
been sent about that time to the Foreign Office, in which I developed
the difference which you allude to, and said that in cases of
extradition under a treaty it was necessary to take into account the
motive which inspired the premeditation. I can cite an example to
illustrate that.

[Treitt was not sure whether his report had yet been published in
England.]

1306. Is the consideration which you think ought to be given to the
question as to the motive which has inspired the assassination,
recognised by the French law?—[It is not, and consequently
assassinations inspired by ideas of vengeance, rape, or any other
passion, are confused with political assassinations.]

[The interrogation dwelt on definitions of French legal terms.]

1312. Suppose now, that murder had been committed on the person of a
Frenchman, who was either a political functionary, or even the
sovereign, in an attempt at insurrection; and that this murder had been
premeditated in this sense, that the insurrection was premeditated,
though it could not be foreseen that the death of this person would have
resulted from it, but only that deaths would result from the attempt;
would that case be regarded in France as an assassination?—The question
which you put to me is not new in this sense, that an attempt against
the life of a public functionary, or other person, on the part of a
subject, from a motive of vengeance, has been considered as a crime de
droit commun. Thus, supposing an insurgent has a personal hatred against
a public functionary or anybody, and takes advantage of an insurrection
to attempt his life, that has been considered as a crime de droit
commun. But when there has been simply a meurtre as a consequence of the
insurrection, that has not been considered then as a crime de droit
commun, but as a political crime, as being part of the insurrection. In
one Edition: current; Page: [568] word, a crime committed on a person
during an insurrection does not become a crime de droit commun, unless
it has been inspired by private vengeance on the part of him who has
committed the crime.

[Treitt indicated the distinction between a sovereign’s being killed
indiscriminately among a group, in which case the crime would be
political, and his being killed intentionally, in which case it would
not, even though the act occurred in an insurrection.]

1317. We understand that; but you are aware that in war, and
particularly since the introduction of the new weapons, it is common to
aim at an officer, knowing him by his uniform; that is not done from
vengeance, or from ill-will against the individual in particular, but as
an act of war?—You will observe that in the case you cite, it is not the
individual who is shot at, but the person clothed with the dignity of an
officer. If it is a general, one shoots at the general; but one does not
shoot at the particular man who is the general.

1318. Could not it be said in the same way that Tibaldi shot at the
sovereign, and not at the individual?34—But you will observe that that
was a direct attempt against the person; he knew the person at whom he
shot; Tibaldi knew the individual he wished to kill, and I would make a
distinction between a criminal who did not know the person he would kill
and attempted his life only as holding a certain position, and a
criminal who knew the person he attempted to kill. That would be the
distinction one might make before a jury.

1319. Then in that case one could not, even in time of war, shoot at a
person whom one knew, knowing at whom one shot, without being guilty of
assassination as a crime de droit commun?—You know the manner in which
Lord Nelson died. It is said that the French vessel had on board an
excellent shot (I forget his name at the moment). He asked the captain
of the vessel, “Shall I shoot him?” because he saw Nelson on the deck of
the Victory. The captain of the French vessel did not give the order to
shoot Nelson. He said, “Do your duty as a soldier.” The man did so, and
shot Nelson. You see that the distinction exists.

[The questioning turned to the status of the French circular on
extradition.]

1399. This circular was issued by the then Minister of Justice, M.
Martin du Nord?35—Yes, under the Government of Louis Philippe. The
circular is very liberal.

[Treitt affirmed that there was now no objection in France to the
British law on extradition.]

Edition: current; Page: [569]
1403. In the French procedure is the accusé necessarily confronted with
the witnesses before the final trial?—He is generally confronted with
the witnesses upon the instruction, and at the trial he is always
confronted with the witnesses.

1404. In his defence has he a right to ask questions of the
witnesses?—His defender and he have the right to cause questions to be
addressed to the witnesses; but they must be addressed through the
intervention of the president.

1405. Then, it would depend upon the discretion of the president to put
those questions; he can refuse to put them?—He can refuse to put them,
but then, if he refuses, the avocats defending the accused draw their
conclusions, and the question may be brought before the Cour de
Cassation, whether the president was not wrong in refusing to put a
question; for example, if it was a question which was necessary for the
defence, and the president has refused to put it, the Cour de Cassation
may quash the arrêt, on the ground that a necessary question has not
been put.

1406. Would that be the case; for example, when questions are proposed
to be put for the defence, with the object of diminishing the value of
the evidence against the accused by bringing out contradictions in the
evidence?—It is at the discretion of the president to put such
questions, or to refuse to put them.

1407. Does the president generally permit questions of that kind to be
put?—Yes, generally; but I will beg you to observe that in the
discussion on the plaidoyer in defence, the avocat has the right to show
contradictions.

1408. But the avocat cannot show the contradictions unless he can put
questions to the witnesses on the trial with reference to the evidence
they have given previously?—The witnesses whose depositions have been
taken in writing on the instruction are called again at the trial, and
then they make their depositions vivâ voce, and if there is a
discrepancy between their depositions given then and those given before
the avocat, the accusé has a right to call attention to it, and to ask
the president to put a question as to why there is a difference between
the written evidence and the verbal evidence.

1409. Then, he could ask the witness for an explanation of the
contradiction between his evidence given at the trial and that which he
had given previously?—Perfectly.

1410. But those questions, passing through the president, are
necessarily in the language of the president; the question is put in the
manner in which the president expresses it?—Yes, that happens sometimes,
and it is often the cause of warm discussions between the defence and
the court.

1411. That is to say, the defence can complain against the president
with regard to the manner in which he puts the question?—Perfectly; the
defence can do that; there is entire freedom on this subject. One can
boldly cause all questions to be put, only the president of the Cour
d’Assises, when the question contains an insinuation against the
character or honour of the witness, hesitates to reproduce it.

Edition: current; Page: [570]
[The question was discussed of whether Ledru Rollin,36 who was condemned
par contumace over the Tibaldi affair, would have been extradited from
England had the proposed treaty been agreed.]

1414. Then if the French Government had demanded the extradition of M.
Ledru Rollin before his condemnation par contumace, as being an accusé
only, you think that the English Government could not have refused that
extradition without violating the treaty?—They could not have refused it
without violating the treaty in the French sense, but that would not
have been the case in the English sense, because, according to the mode
of interpreting the treaty in England, it was necessary that the English
judge should have a certainty of the guilt of the person accused; he
does not content himself with the proof of the guilt furnished to him,
he wishes more considerable evidence.

1415. He wishes more considerable evidence, but he does not require to
be convinced of the guilt of the person accused; he only requires to
have such proof as would justify the committal of the person for trial
if he was an English subject, and subject to the jurisdiction of the
English tribunals?—My answer to your question is, that if the French
Government had demanded M. Ledru Rollin as an accusé before he was
condemned par contumace, for complicity in the attempt of Tibaldi,
according to the spirit of the treaty, and according to the
interpretation given to the treaty in France, England ought to have
delivered him up, I think; the extradition of another réfugié, M.
Bernard, was equally demanded at that time, but M. Bernard was not
delivered up; proceedings were taken against him in England, and he was
acquitted.

[French law allows trial for complicity in a crime committed in France
of persons not resident in France at that time; it would apply for their
extradition. This procedure would have covered Ledru Rollin’s case.]

1423. Does not the French law recognise something which is called moral
complicity?—[Yes, but it has been applied in only one case, that of a
journalist who was accused of inciting by his articles an attempt on the
life of the duc D’Aumale. The term has never been accepted.]

1424. What was the name of that writer who was then accused?—His name is
Dupoty.37

1425. It was not M. Armand Carrel?—No.

1426. Do you remember that M. Armand Carrel was subjected to a procès
Edition: current; Page: [571] criminel for complicity in the crime of
Fieschi?38—At that time, the phrase “moral complicity” was not invented.

1427. Are you sure of that?—I am quite sure.

1428. M. Armand Carrel published a brochure at that time: it was in
1836, I think, under the title of Extract from the dossier of a person
charged with moral complicity in the attentat of such a date?39—Your
memory must be confusing between two cases, I have read the pamphlet to
which you alluded. This is what occurred. After Fieschi’s attempt,
Armand Carrel was arrested and remained eight days in confinement. When
he came out, he published the documents which had been seized at his
house, and in his publication he said he had been interrogated by the
judge on his moral participation in the attempt. But he never had to
submit to a trial on that account. The words “moral complicity” only
appeared in the brochure.

1429. And that expression has not been used on any other occasion?—No;
moral complicity has not been admitted in French criminal law. I will
hand in to the Committee a small brochure, which I have here, written by
a young judge in France, in which he speaks of the good results of the
visit of Sir Thomas Henry to Paris.

Henry Thurstan Holland, resumed

[Interrogation returned to practice in Malta.]

1445. In 1849, after the taking of Rome, if I remember right, a number
of refugees from Rome were either deported from Malta or refused
permission to land in Malta. I do not know which it was; but one or the
other took place, I believe?—In 1848 there was a great arrival of
Jesuits, who were compelled to leave Naples.

1446. But this is the very reverse; these were people flying from the
Jesuits?—Yes; I was going to say that some of these were afterwards
deported. All the cases in 1849 of which we know anything will be found
in a Paper printed for the House of Commons on the 12th of March 1850.40

Edition: current; Page: [572]


Appendix C


Petitions in the House of Commons (1866-68)

After 1842, petitioning had little effect on the House of Commons, but
Mill was continuing a strong Radical tradition in agreeing to present
petitions, seeing himself like his earlier congeners as a representative
of the unrepresented, especially of minorities. Though there can be no
question about his whole-hearted support of the views of some of the
petitions, it must not be assumed that he agreed with all of them;
indeed he not infrequently presented petitions on both sides of an
issue, and his opposition to that concerning Napier (5 June, 1868) is
part of the record. This appendix is not therefore a record of his
beliefs; it is, however, an index of his repute nationally as well as
locally, and of his exceptionally busy and regular parliamentary
activity.

The reports are summarized from the Reports of the Select Committee of
the House of Commons on Public Petitions [RPP], checked substantively
whenever possible against those in The Times [TT], and (for 1867)
against the St. Stephen’s Chronicle. Indication is given when the
petition is given in full in an Appendix to RPP, or summarized as part
of the entry. In one case, when Mill presented in one day (5 May, 1868)
over one hundred individual petitions in favour of Municipal Government
for the Metropolis, the entries are (as in TT) conflated into one.


1866

19 February

For repeal or reduction of the duty on fire insurance, from merchants,
manufacturers, and traders of the city of Westminster. (No. 229, 772
signatures; TT, 20 Feb., p. 6.)

22 February

That adequate provision might be made for the religious worship and
instruction of Catholic juvenile offenders in the Industrial School at
Feltham, from members of the Roman Catholic Church in Farm Street,
Berkeley Square. (No. 282, 257 signatures; TT, 23 Feb., p. 6.)

Idem, from members of Saint Mary’s Roman Catholic Church, Horseferry
Road. (No. 283, 733 signatures; TT, 23 Feb., p. 6.)

That provision be made for the spiritual instruction of Roman Catholic
adults and children in workhouses and reformatories, from members of
Saint Mary’s Roman Catholic Church, Horseferry Road. (No. 287, 711
signatures; TT, 23 Feb., p. 6.)

Edition: current; Page: [573]
Idem, from members of the Roman Catholic Chapel in Farm Street, Berkeley
Square. (No. 288, 260 signatures; TT, 23 Feb., p. 6.)

27 February

For repeal or reduction of the duty on fire insurance, from the Minerva
Permanent Benefit Building Society. (No. 408, 1 signature; TT, 28 Feb.,
p. 6.)

Idem, from the Freehold and Leasehold Permanent Benefit Building
Society. (No. 409, 1 signature; TT, 28 Feb., p. 6.)

Idem, from the London Permanent Benefit Building Society. (No. 410, 1
signature; TT, 28 Feb., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Mutual Reversionary Investment Society (Limited). (No.
411, 1 signature; TT, 28 Feb., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Carlton Permanent Benefit Building Society. (No. 412, 1
signature; TT, 28 Feb., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Professional and Commercial Benefit Building Society.
(No. 413, 1 signature; TT, 28 Feb., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Athenaeum Permanent Benefit Building Society. (No. 414, 1
signature; TT, 28 Feb., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Standard Benefit Building Society. (No. 415, 1 signature;
TT, 28 Feb., p. 6.)

12 March

For extension of the suffrage to all adult males (excluding peers, those
of unsound mind, and those convicted of crimes), and vote by ballot,
from inhabitants of the City of London and the Metropolitan Districts,
in a public meeting in St. Martin’s Hall, Longacre, 12 Dec., 1865. (No.
1461, 1 signature [Edmond Beales], printed in App. 180, pp. 77-8; TT, 13
Mar., p. 5.)

For repeal or reduction of the duty on fire insurance, from members of
the Independent Building Society, No. 7. (No. 1738, 1 signature; TT, 13
Mar., p. 5.)

Idem, from members of the Land, Building, Investment, and Cottage
Improvement Company (Limited). (No. 1739, 1 signature; TT, 13 Mar., p.
5.)

Idem, from members of the Independent Building Society, No. 6. (No.
1740, 1 signature; TT, 13 Mar., p. 5.)

13 March

For readjustment and redistribution of Irish Church property, from the
parish of Scarriff and Moywe, County Clare. (No. 1708, 323 signatures,
printed in App. 185, p. 79; TT, 14 Mar., p. 5.)

Edition: current; Page: [574]
10 April

Praying that those who have suffered from vaccination may be examined at
the bar of the House before the Vaccination Bill is passed, from John
Lofts and others. (No. 3430, 62 signatures; TT, 11 Apr., p. 6.)

12 April

In favour of the Representation of the People Bill, from working men of
London in public meeting assembled in St. Martin’s Hall. (No. 3776, 1
signature [George Potter]; TT, 13 Apr., p. 5.)

17 April

In favour of the Hop Trade Bill, from the brewers of Westminster. (No.
4935, 4 signatures; TT, 18 Apr., p. 6.)

27 April

In favour of the Representation of the People Bill, from the Vestry of
the parish of St. James’s, Westminster, under their common seal. (No.
5871, sealed, printed in App. 523, p. 211; TT, 28 Apr., p. 6.)

Idem, from inhabitants of Westminster in public meeting to the number of
2500 assembled (the Members for the City being present) at St. James’s
Hall. (No. 5872, 1 signature [Charles Westerton], printed in App. 524,
p. 211; TT, 28 Apr., p. 6.)

7 May

For reduction of public expenditure, from the gentry, merchants,
professional gentlemen, and others in Westminster. (No. 7049, 828
signatures; TT, 8 May, p. 8, identifies the topic as abolishing the duty
on fire insurance and modifying the Income-tax, and says 834
signatures.)

14 May

For a committee of inquiry into the attitude of the working classes
towards the opening of the national museums, etc., on Sundays, with
evidence from the trade societies and representatives of the large
workshops, from a meeting of 1000, including delegates from Trade
Societies, in St. Martin’s Hall, Dec. 1865. (No. 7357, 1 signature,
printed in App. 627, p. 250; TT, 15 May, p. 8.)

Praying that in the Bill for the completion of the approaches to the
Thames Embankment, the site of Northumberland-house may be treated on
the same principles of justice and equity as any other property, from
the vestry of St. James’s, Westminster. (No. 7785, sealed; TT, 15 May,
p. 8.)

17 May

Praying that two representatives in Parliament may be granted to the
Scottish Edition: current; Page: [575] Universities, from the Principals
and Professors of the University of St. Andrews, signed by the
Vice-Chancellor, Principal John Tulloch. (No. 7340, 1 signature, the
petition not assigned to Mill in RPP;1 TT, 18 May, p. 6.)

In favour of spiritual instruction for Roman Catholic pauper children,
from wives and mothers belonging to the Roman Catholic congregation of
St. Mary’s Horseferry Road. (No. 7475, 231 signatures; TT, 18 May, p.
6.)

Praying for an inquiry into his suggestions respecting sewage, the
ventilation of the Houses of Parliament, the magnetic and meteorological
survey, and other subjects, and into the circumstances under which he
was removed from an appointment under the Board of Ordnance, from
Franklin Coxworthy. (Not in RPP; TT, 18 May, p. 6.)

29 May

Against the Bills authorizing the construction of gasworks in the
neighbourhood of Victoria Park, from inhabitants of the eastern and
other divisions of the metropolis. (No. 8099, 358 signatures; TT, 30
May, p. 6.)

1 June

Against the Bills authorizing the construction of gasworks in the
neighbourhood of Victoria Park, from inhabitants of the parishes of
Stepney, Bow, Hackney, etc. (No. 8325, 224 signatures; TT, 2 June, p.
6.)

7 June

For extension of the electoral franchise to all householders, without
distinction of sex, who possess such property or rental qualification as
may be appointed for male voters, from Barbara L.S. Bodichon and others.
(No. 8501, 1521 signatures,2 printed in App. 747, p. 305; TT, 8 June, p.
5.)

8 June

Against the Bills authorizing the construction of gasworks in the
neighbourhood of Victoria Park, from members of the East Central
(London) Temperance Association. (No. 8705, 58 signatures; TT, 9 June,
p. 6.)

11 June

Against the Bills authorizing the construction of gasworks in the
neighbourhood of Edition: current; Page: [576] Victoria Park, from
inhabitants and frequenters of Victoria Park. (No. 8706, 566 signatures;
TT, 9 June, p. 6, implies only one petition submitted.)

Idem, from inhabitants and frequenters of Victoria Park. (No. 8707, 396
signatures; TT, 9 June, p. 6, implies only one petition on this subject
submitted.)

Praying for a general, in lieu of a county, area of rating for
compensation for losses by cattle plague, from inhabitants of the
township of Hyde, Cheshire. (No. 8813, 105 signatures; TT, 12 June, p.
7.)

Praying for an investigation of the petitioners’ right and interest in
21 acres of land, of which they state that they have been unjustly
deprived, from Joseph Gibbins and others, chiefly farm labourers, of
Shawell, Leicestershire. (No. 8846, 8 signatures; TT, 12 June, p. 7.)

5 July

For a committee of inquiry into the currency laws, with a view to
protect the working classes and their families from the injury done them
by a high rate of discount, from working-men of the city of Cambridge.
(No. 9447, 45 signatures; TT, 6 July, p. 6.)

Against the Bills authorizing the construction of gasworks in the
neighbourhood of Victoria Park, from inhabitants of the East and North
of London. (No. 9449, 100 signatures; TT, 6 July, p. 6.)

6 July

Praying for justice generally, and specially that the memory of her late
husband, who had illegally suffered the death of a traitor and a felon,
might be vindicated, and his sentence and execution be declared to have
been illegal, from Mrs. Maria Jane Gordon, late of Kingston, Jamaica,
and now of 40 Avenue Road, Regent’s Park, widow of George William
Gordon, who was recently executed in Jamaica. (No. 9451, 1 signature,
printed in App. 829, p. 341; TT, 7 July, p. 6.)

20 July

Praying that in case of any mediated intervention by France in the
affairs of Italy the House will take measures to discountenance such
intervention, from Mr. W.J. Linton, of Brantwood, Coniston, Lancashire.
(No. 9569, 1 signature; TT, 21 July, p. 5.)

23 July

For the postponement of the Artisans and Labourers’ Dwellings Bill to
another Session, from the Board of Works for the Strand District. (No.
9526, sealed; TT, 24 July, p. 6.)

Edition: current; Page: [577]
2 August

Praying for inquiry into the conduct of Sir Richard Mayne and the police
under his command, in regard to preventing a meeting from being held in
Hyde Park, on the 23rd of July last, from inhabitants of the
Metropolitan District, in public meeting assembled at the Agricultural
Hall, Islington, on 30 July, 1866. (No. 9670, 1 signature [Edmond
Beales], printed in App. 875, p. 376; TT, 3 Aug., p. 4 [saying 25th
rather than 23rd July].)

10 August

Praying that the House will take steps for preventing the annexation of
Mysore, and for maintaining that tributary State with every possible
security for British interests and for the prosperity of the people of
the country, from General John Briggs, the First Commissioner of Mysore;
General J.S. Fraser, late resident at Hyderabad and at Mysore; Sir John
Low, late member of the Supreme Council of India; Colonel Haines, late
Judicial Commissioner at Mysore; General Jacob, late Commissioner of the
Southern Mahratta Country; Sir Robert Hamilton, late agent to the
Viceroy in Central India; and 50 others. (No. 9640, 56 signatures,
printed in App. 869, pp. 36871; TT, 11 Aug., p. 6.)


1867

12 February

For Committee of Inquiry into allegations made with reference to the
appointment of Sir Fitzroy Kelly to be Chief Baron of the Exchequer,
from Rigby Wason of Corwar, Ayr. (No. 330, 1 signature; TT, 13 Feb., p.
6.)

15 February

Against the sale of intoxicating liquors on Sunday, from the minister
and members of Trinity Independent Church, Dewsbury, Yorkshire. (No.
123, 198 signatures; TT, 16 Feb., p. 6.)

28 February

For residential and registered manhood suffrage and vote by ballot, from
Henry Beal, of 9, Charles Street, Portman Square. (No. 984, 1 signature;
TT, 1 Mar., p. 4.)

1 March

Praying that legislative provision be made for the removal to certified
Roman Catholic schools of all Roman Catholic children in workhouses,
from the Roman Catholics of the congregation of Farm Street Church,
Berkeley Square. (No. 1034, 301 signatures, printed in App. 89, pp.
38-9; TT, 2 Mar., p. 6.)

Edition: current; Page: [578]
4 March

For the repeal or reduction of the duty on fire insurance, from the
Westminster Permanent Building Society. (No. 1254, 1 signature; TT, 5
Mar., p. 7.)

Idem, from the Second Warwick Building Society, held at the Saint
Leonard’s Institution, Pimlico. (No. 1255, 1 signature; TT, 5 Mar., p.
7.)

Idem, from the Second Warwick Benefit Building Society, held at the
Saint Leonard’s Institution, Pimlico. (No. 1256, 1 signature; TT, 5
Mar., p. 7.)

Idem, from the First Pimlico Building Society, held at 37 Warwick
Street, Pimlico. (No. 1257, 4 signatures; TT, 5 Mar., p. 7.)

5 March

Stating that the petitioner was the first proposer of schools of design
and industrial exhibitions; that with much labour and considerable cost
he drew up a plan, for which he was promised pecuniary remuneration by a
committee of the House of Commons; that a sum of money for this purpose
was voted by the House, but never received by him in consequence of his
not knowing when or to whom to apply for it, and praying that the
intended remuneration may be given to him, from Robert Thomas Stothard.
(Not in RPP; TT, 6 Mar., p. 6.)

8 March

For repeal or reduction of the duty on fire insurance, from the Seventh
Pimlico Building Society, 37 Sloane Square. (No. 1284, 1 signature; TT,
9 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Athenaeum Permanent Benefit Building Society, held at 30
Regent Street, Piccadilly. (No. 1285, 1 signature; TT, 9 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Freehold and Leasehold Permanent Benefit Building
Society, held at 20 Great Marlborough Street, Regent Street. (No. 1286,
1 signature; TT, 9 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Professional and Commercial Benefit Building Society,
held at 20 Great Marlborough Street, Regent Street. (No. 1287, 1
signature; TT, 9 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Carlton Permanent Benefit Building Society, held at 30
Regent Street, Piccadilly. (No. 1288, 1 signature; TT, 9 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Mutual Reversionary Investment Society (Limited), 30
Regent Street, Piccadilly. (No. 1289, 1 signature; TT, 9 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Land, Building, Investment, and Cottage Improvement
Company (Limited), 18 Adam Street, Adelphi. (No. 1290, 1 signature; TT,
9 Mar., p. 6.)

Edition: current; Page: [579]
12 March

In favour of opening the British Museum and similar institutions thrice
a week, from 7 to 10 p.m., from inhabitants of St. Saviour’s, Chelsea,
at a meeting held on 6 March at the National School Rooms. (No. 1523, 1
signature; TT, 13 Mar., p. 6.)

Praying that the penalties for deficient weights and measures may be
confined to cases of fraud, from the tradesmen of Dean Street, Old
Compton Street, and other parts of Soho. (No. 1559, 126 signatures; TT,
13 Mar., p. 6.)

14 March

For the restriction of Sunday trading, from the tradesmen of Bloomsbury,
etc. (No. 1638, 126 signatures; TT, 15 Mar., p. 4.)

For a measure re-establishing the exemption from rates of hospitals and
other like charities, from the House Committee of the Westminster
Hospital. (No. 1659, 1 signature, the petition not assigned to Mill in
RPP;3 TT, 15 Mar., p. 4.)

15 March

Praying that women be admitted to the electoral franchise on whatever
qualifications—of property, rent, taxation, or education—which the House
may adopt in the case of men, from Mrs. Elizabeth Wilmshurst French, of
Staplehurst, Kent. (No. 1562, 1 signature; TT, 16 Mar., p. 6.)

18 March

In favour of the Bill for the abolition of Tests in the University of
Oxford, from the members of the Senatus Academicus of the University of
St. Andrews. (No. 1779, 9 signatures, printed in App. 179, p. 84; TT, 19
Mar., p. 5.)

19 March

In favour of the repeal or reduction of duty on fire insurance, from the
Thirteenth Saint Martin’s Mutual Benefit Building Society, 119 Long
Acre. (No. 1825, 1 signature; TT, 20 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Eleventh Saint Martin’s Mutual Benefit Building Society,
119 Long Acre. (No. 1826, 1 signature; TT, 20 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Fifth Saint Martin’s Mutual Benefit Building Society, 119
Long Acre. (No. 1827, 1 signature; TT, 20 Mar., p. 6.)

Edition: current; Page: [580]
Idem, from the Sixty-fourth Starr Bowkett Benefit Building Society, held
at the school room, Grafton Street Chapel, Grafton Street, Fitzroy
Square. (No. 1828, 1 signature; TT, 20 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Twelfth Saint Martin’s Mutual Benefit Building Society,
held at 120 Long Acre (No. 1829, 1 signature; TT, 20 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Metropolitan and Suburban Benefit Building Society, 387
Oxford Street West. (No. 1830, 1 signature; TT, 20 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the No. 1 Ancient Order of Foresters Building Society, Star
and Garter, Poland Street, Oxford Street. (No. 1831, 1 signature; TT, 20
Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Warwick Mutual Benefit Building Society, held at the
Queen’s Arms, Warwick Street, Pimlico. (No. 1832, 1 signature; TT, 20
Mar., p. 6.)

Against the Metropolitan Improvements Bill, from the vestry of the
parish of St. Martin in the Fields. (No. 1875, sealed; TT, 20 Mar., p.
6.)

20 March

For a searching investigation into the present mode of inspecting
weights and measures, from the tradesmen of Westminster and Pimlico.
(No. 2052, 151 signatures; TT, 21 Mar., p. 6.)

21 March

Against the Metropolitan Improvements Bill, from the Board of Works,
Westminster District. (No. 2008, sealed; TT, 22 Mar., p. 5.)

22 March

For the complete enfranchisement of the working classes, from George
Jacob Holyoake. (No. 1889, 1 signature, summary with entry, p. 165; TT,
23 Mar., p. 6.)

In favour of amending the Printworks Act by reducing the hours of labour
for women and children, from the workpeople employed at Belfield
Printworks, Rochdale, Lancaster. (No. 2034, 200 signatures; TT, 23 Mar.,
p. 6.)

Idem, from the workpeople employed at Hollingworth Mill Printworks,
Hollingworth, Chester. (No. 2035, 71 signatures; TT, 23 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the workpeople employed at Dinting Vale Printworks, Glossop,
Derby. (No. 2036, 510 signatures; TT, 23 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the workpeople employed at Reddich Vale, Lancaster. (Not in
RPP; TT, 23 Mar., p. 6.)

Edition: current; Page: [581]
25 March

That the national museums, picture galleries, botanical gardens, and
similar collections be open to the public on Sunday afternoons, from the
employés of Messrs. Arnold, Jermyn Street, St. James’s and others. (No.
2081, 30 signatures; TT, 26 Mar., p. 3.)

Idem, from the employés of Messrs. P. and W. Wilson, tinplate workers,
Wardour Street, Soho. (No. 2082, 71 signatures, printed in App. 236, p.
107; TT, 26 Mar., p. 3.)

Idem, from the employés of the London Journal Office. (No. 2083, 32
signatures; TT, 26 Mar., p. 3.)

26 March

Against the Metropolitan Improvements Bill, from a public meeting at
Exeter Hall. (No. 2305, 177 signatures; TT, 27 Mar., p. 5.)

Idem, from a public meeting at the Store Street Rooms, Tottenham Court
Road. (No. 2306, 155 signatures; TT, 27 Mar., p. 5.)

1 April

Against the Metropolitan Gas Bill, from Lawrence Lord Barnes. (No. 2677,
1 signature; TT, 2 Apr., p. 6.)

Idem, from William John Blew. (No. 2678, 1 signature; TT, 2 Apr., p. 6.)

2 April

For alteration in the Representation of the People Bill to get rid of
certain qualifications for the franchise, to admit women to the
franchise, to alter the redistribution scheme, and to control bribery at
elections, from Richard Sleman, an elector of Tavistock. (No. 2488, 1
signature, summary with entry, p. 228; not in TT.)4

For inquiry and redress concerning the petitioner’s claim concerning
remuneration from the Committee on Arts and Manufactures, etc., from
Robert Thomas Stothard. (No. 3038, 1 signature, summary with entry, p.
255; not in TT.)

4 April

For the opening of the national museums, etc., on Sunday afternoons;
from Edition: current; Page: [582] working men of various trades in the
metropolis. (No. 3061, 264 signatures; TT, 5 Apr., p. 6.)

Idem, from the employés of the Savile House Printing Establishment,
Beaufort Buildings. (No. 3062, 34 signatures; TT, 5 Apr., p. 6.)

Against the Metropolis Gas Bill, from Robert Cradock Nichols. (No. 3743,
1 signature; TT, 5 Apr., p. 6.)

Idem, from John James Mullins. (No. 3744, 1 signature; TT, 5 Apr., p.
6.)

Complaining of the present system of selling and hawking goods on
Sunday, and praying for a law to confine trading on that day to articles
of necessity, from tradesmen of Westminster and Pimlico. (No. 3145, 187
signatures; TT, 5 Apr., p. 6.)

5 April

Praying that the suffrage be granted to women on the same conditions of
property, rating, rental, or otherwise, on which it may be granted to
men, from Emma Winkworth, Lydia E. Becker, Jacob Bright, and others of
Manchester. (No. 3094, 3086 signatures,5 printed in App. 320, p. 141;
TT, 6 Apr., p. 5.)

8 April

For extension of the elective franchise and vote by ballot, from the
Executive Committee of the Reform League. (No. 4366, 3 signatures
[Edmond Beales, William Dell, George Howell], printed in App. 343, p.
151; TT, 9 Apr., p. 6.)

Against the Metropolis Gas Bill, from Benjamin Rawlings, Brompton. (No.
4551, 1 signature; TT, 9 Apr., p. 6.)

Idem, from Sarah Gunthorpe, Brompton. (No. 4552, 1 signature; TT, 9
Apr., p. 6.)

9 April

In favour of the Metropolis Gas Bill, from consumers of gas in the
parish of Saint Martin in the Fields. (No. 5403, 1 signature; TT, 10
Apr., p. 6.)

Idem, from consumers of gas in the parish of Saint Clement Danes. (No.
5404, 18 signatures; TT, 10 Apr., p. 6.)

Idem, from consumers of gas in the parish of Saint George, Hanover
Square. (No. 5405, 34 signatures; TT, 10 Apr., p. 6.)

Idem, from consumers of gas in the parish of Saint Saviour’s, Southwark.
(No. 5406, 19 signatures; TT, 10 Apr., p. 6.)

Edition: current; Page: [583]
Idem, from consumers of gas in the parish of Saint Ann, Fulham. (No.
5407, 29 signatures; TT, 10 Apr., p. 6.)

Idem, from consumers of gas in the parish of Saint James, Westminster.
(No. 5408, 29 signatures; TT, 10 Apr., p. 6.)

Idem, from consumers of gas in Kennington, Lambeth. (No. 5409, 36
signatures; TT, 10 Apr., p. 6.)

11 April

For extension of the elective franchise to women, from Clarissa
Handforth, 4 Grove Street, Ardwick, and others. (No. 5442, 875
signatures; TT, 12 Apr., p. 5.)

Idem, from Elizabeth Hulme, 97 Collyhurst St., and others. (No. 5443,
230 signatures;6 TT, 12 Apr., p. 5.)

In favour of the Metropolis Gas Bill, from consumers of gas in the
parish of Saint Mary le Strand. (No. 5728, 34 signatures; TT, 12 Apr.,
p. 5.)

Idem, from consumers of gas in the parish of Saint Paul, Covent Garden.
(No. 5729, 24 signatures; TT, 12 Apr., p. 5.)

Idem, from consumers of gas in the parish of Saint Martin in the Fields.
(No. 5730, 25 signatures; TT, 12 Apr., p. 5.)

Idem, from consumers of gas in the parish of Saint Margaret,
Westminster. (No. 5731, 19 signatures; TT, 12 Apr., p. 5.)

Idem, from consumers of gas in the Vauxhall Bridge Road. (No. 5732, 29
signatures; TT, 12 Apr., p. 5.)

Idem, from consumers of gas in Pimlico. (No. 5733, 30 signatures; TT, 12
Apr., p. 5.)

Idem, from consumers of gas in Millbank. (No. 5734, 22 signatures; TT,
12 Apr., p. 5.)

Idem, from consumers of gas in the District of Knightsbridge. (No. 5735,
27 signatures; TT, 12 Apr., p. 5.)

Idem, from consumers of gas in the parishes of Saint Margaret and Saint
John the Evangelist. (No. 5736, 27 signatures; TT, 12 Apr., p. 5.)

29 April

In favour of the Metropolis Gas Bill, from 1,812 consumers of gas in
Westminster. (No. 6141, 1867 signatures;7 TT, 30 Apr., p. 6.)

Edition: current; Page: [584]
30 April

Against the Metropolitan Improvements Bill, from the City of
Westminster. (No. 6194, 221 signatures; TT, 1 May, p. 6.)

Idem, from St. James and St. George, Westminster. (No. 6195, 140
signatures; TT, 1 May, p. 6.)

2 May

In favour of the Metropolis Gas Bill, from the Board of Works for the
Lewisham District. (No. 6942, sealed; TT, 3 May, p. 6.)8

Idem, from the Board of Works for the Westminster District. (No. 6943,
sealed; TT, 3 May, p. 6.)

Idem, from the gas consumers of Brighton. (No. 6944, 7 signatures; TT, 3
May, p. 6.)

Idem, from the gas consumers of Bolton, Lancaster. (No. 6945, 89
signatures; TT, 3 May, p. 6.)

6 May

Deprecating interference on the part of Government with the intended
public meeting in Hyde Park, from the Council of the Reform League at
Aberdeen. (No. 8271, 1 signature; TT, 7 May, p. 6.)

Idem, from the Council of the Reform League at Parkhead. (No. 8272, 38
signatures; TT, 7 May, p. 6.)

9 May

For restriction of selling and hawking goods on Sundays, from tradesmen
of St. James’s, Westminster. (No. 8663, 181 signatures; TT, 10 May, p.
6.)

13 May

For restriction of selling and hawking goods on Sunday, from tradesmen
and others of Fetter Lane and neighbourhood. (No. 9108, 105 signatures;
TT, 14 May, p. 7.)9

Idem, from tradesmen and others of Henrietta Street, Chandos Street,
Bedford Street, and places adjacent Covent Garden. (No. 9109, 229
signatures; TT, 14 May, p. 7.)

Edition: current; Page: [585]
Idem, from tradesmen and others of Carey Street, Chancery Lane, and
neighbourhood. (No. 9110, 201 signatures; TT, 14 May, p. 7.)

14 May

To be heard against the National Gallery Enlargement Bill, by the Select
Committee, from the vicar and churchwardens of Saint Martin in the
Fields. (No. 9210, 4 signatures, summarized in the entry; TT, 15 May, p.
6.)10

Idem, from the vicar, churchwardens, and others of the parish of Saint
Martin in the Fields. (No. 9211, 6 signatures; TT, 15 May, p. 6.)

20 May

For extension of the elective franchise to women, from Sarah Steinthall
and others of Manchester. (No. 9669, 1750 signatures;11 TT, 21 May, p.
7.)

Idem, from Sarah Patchell and others of Manchester. (No. 9670, 108
signatures;12 TT, 21 May, p. 7.)

For altering the time for closing the gates of the gardens of Chelsea
Hospital, from inhabitants of the neighbourhood. (No. 9718, 35
signatures; TT, 21 May, p. 7.)

Against the Traffic Regulation (Metropolis) Bill, from the Board of
Works for the Westminster District. (No. 9743, sealed, printed in App.
617, p. 262; TT, 21 May, p. 7.)

23 May

In favour of opening the British Museum and other national institutions
on Sunday afternoons, from the employés of Charles Aldin, builder, South
Kensington. (No. 9781, 65 signatures; TT, 24 May, p. 6.)

27 May

Against the Metropolis Gas Bill, as amended, from the Board of Works for
the Westminster District. (No. 10,098, sealed, summarized in entry; TT,
28 May, p. 8.)

“Mr. Mill hoped that under the peculiar circumstances of the case, which
was one of pressing exigency, the House would permit him to say he had
just received a telegram from Dublin stating that a petition from
Fellows and other gentlemen connected with Trinity College for the
remission of the capital sentence on the Edition: current; Page: [586]
convict Burke had this day been very numerously signed.” (Not in RPP for
subsequent dates; TT, 28 May, p. 8.)

5 June

Praying that an opportunity be afforded the petitioner of proving
experimentally the efficacy of his treatment of the cattle plague, from
Professor Antonio Bini of the Licensed Chymical Laboratory, Leicester
Square. (Not in RPP; TT, 6 June, p. 8.)

6 June

In favour of the London Coal and Wine Duties Continuance Bill and
against the Metropolitan Improvements Bill, from the inhabitants and
ratepayers of Regent Street, Oxford Street, and neighbourhood. (No.
10,892, 195 signatures; TT, 7 June, p. 6.)

Idem, from the inhabitants and ratepayers of Piccadilly, Jermyn Street,
and neighbourhood. (No. 10,893, 47 signatures; TT, 7 June, p. 6.)

Idem, from the inhabitants and ratepayers of the City of Westminster.
(No. 10,894, 115 signatures; TT, 7 June, p. 6.)

Idem, from the inhabitants and ratepayers of Saint Margaret and Saint
John, Westminster. (No. 10,895, 59 signatures; TT, 7 June, p. 6.)

13 June

Against the sale of intoxicating liquors on Sunday, from the inhabitants
of Oakhill, near Bath. (No. 10,720, 57 signatures; TT, 14 June, p. 6.)

17 June

For the opening of the British Museum and other national museums etc.,
on Sunday afternoons, from working men resident in London. (No. 11,181,
203 signatures; TT, 18 June, p. 8.)

Praying to be heard before the Select Committee on the Hours of
Regulation Bill, from Messrs. Woodfall and Kinder. (Not in RPP; TT, 18
June, p. 8.)

18 June

Representing the petitioner’s great services as the originator of the
railway system and of other important inventions, and his distressed
circumstances, and praying for inquiry and some recognition of his
services, from William Henry James, civil engineer. (No. 11,367, 1
signature, summarized in entry; TT, 19 June, p. 6.)13

Edition: current; Page: [587]
20 June

In favour of alterations in the Factory Acts Extension Bill and Hours of
Labour Regulation Bill, from Messrs. Savill and Edwards, printers. (No.
11,361, 1 signature; TT, 14 June, p. 6.)14

Stating that the petitioner’s treatment of cholera in Limehouse and
Spitalfields during the late epidemic has been eminently successful, and
praying for inquiry into its character and merits, from James Barnett.
(Not in RPP; TT, 21 June, p. 6.)

28 June

Praying for inquiry into the excessive mortality from consumption and
its connexion with rebreathed air, and for legislation directed to the
removal of its causes, from Dr. MacCormac, consulting physician to the
Belfast Hospital. (Not in RPP; TT, 29 June, p. 8.)

5 July

Praying for justice to Prince Azee Jah Bahadoor, of the Carnatic, from
the Foreign Affairs Committee of Keighley. (No. 11,977, 3 signatures,
printed in App. 882, p. 372; TT, 6 July, p. 7.)

8 July

For the opening of the British Museum and other national institutions on
Sunday afternoons, from working men, residing in the metropolis. (No.
11,893, 156 signatures, summarized in entry; TT, 9 July, p. 6.)

10 July

Against the Sunday Trading Bill, from tradesmen and residents of
Lambeth. (No. 12,110, 279 signatures; TT, 11 July, p. 6.)

19 July

For inquiry into the possibility of giving better accommodation to the
public in the grounds of Chelsea Hospital, from the inhabitants of the
neighbourhood. (No. 12,278, 9 signatures, summarized in entry; TT, 20
July, p. 6.)

5 August

For an address praying the Queen to acquaint Foreign Powers that the
Declaration of Paris, having been made without her authority or consent,
is not binding on this country, from the Birmingham Foreign Affairs
Committee and from the Foreign Affairs Committee of Ladywood,
Birmingham. (No. 12,667, 4 signatures; TT, 6 Aug., p. 6.)

Edition: current; Page: [588]
7 August

Praying that a Bill be passed to allow affirmations or declarations to
be taken instead of oaths in judicial proceedings, from inhabitants of
the metropolis. (Not in RPP; TT, 8 Aug., p. 6.)

12 August

For an address praying the Queen to acquaint Foreign Powers that the
Declaration of Paris, having been made without her authority or consent,
is not binding on this country, from the Home and Foreign Affairs
Association at Macclesfield. (No. 12,670, 2 signatures; TT, 13 Aug., p.
3.)


1868

21 February

Praying that at least two representatives may be given to the Scottish
Universities, from the General Council of the University of St. Andrews.
(No. 1131, 1 signature, printed in App. 53, p. 26; TT, 22 Feb., p. 6.)

In favour of the Bill for Restricting the Sale of Liquors on Sunday,
from the Pimlico A.A. Band of Hope, Vauxhall Bridge Road. (No. 1447, 1
signature; TT, 22 Feb., p. 6.)

5 March

In favour of the Bill for prohibiting the sale of intoxicating liquors
on Sunday, from Thomas Edwardes and others. (No. 1926, 90 signatures;
TT, 6 Mar., p. 4.)

Praying for the appointment of a Minister of Public Instruction, for
introducing Art instruction into national education, and other
educational improvements, from Robert Thomas Stothard. (No. 2336, 1
signature, summarized in entry; TT, 6 Mar., p. 4.)

10 March

For the repeal or reduction of the duty on fire insurance, from various
benefit building societies. (No relevant petitions are assigned to Mill
in RPP, but unassigned Nos. 2747-57 are from various societies in
Westminster; TT, 11 Mar., p. 5.)

13 March

For the reduction or abolition of the duty on fire insurance, from the
Globe Permanent Benefit Building Society. (No. 3521, 6 signatures, not
assigned to any Member in RPP; TT, 14 Mar., p. 6.)

16 March

Against the Bill for restricting the sale of liquors on Sunday, from
Westminster and Edition: current; Page: [589] other places. (No. 4046,
530 signatures, not assigned to any Member in RPP; TT, 17 Mar., p. 5.)

26 March

For the reduction or abolition of the duty on fire insurance, from the
Eighth Saint Martin’s Mutual Benefit Building Society, 120 Long Acre.
(No. 6487, 5 signatures; TT, 27 Mar., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Effra Mutual Benefit Building Society, 50 Carey Street,
Lincoln’s Inn. (No. 6488, 1 signature; TT, 27 Mar., p. 6.)

For an address to Her Majesty, praying the Queen to acquaint Foreign
Powers that the Declaration of Paris, having been made without her
authority or consent, is not binding on this country, from the Home and
Foreign Affairs Association of Macclesfield. (No. 6506, 2 signatures,
printed in App. 275, p. 123; TT, 27 Mar., p. 6.)

30 March

Praying that in the Reform Bill for Scotland two representatives, at
least, should be assigned to the Scottish Universities, from the
Principals and Professors of the University of St. Andrews. (No. 6580, 1
signature; TT, 31 Mar., p. 5.)

Praying that in the Reform Bill for Scotland the clause or clauses which
would incorporate in the General Council any graduates who have not
resided and studied at the University may be omitted, from the General
Council of the University of St. Andrews. (No. 6581, 1 signature,
printed in App. 285, pp. 128-9; TT, 31 Mar., p. 5.)

3 April

Against the disestablishment of the Irish Church, and praying that if
the resolutions be carried, the House will immediately dissolve the
Union and withdraw the grant to Maynooth, from Hoxton, Westminster, and
other places. (No. 9100, 41 signatures; TT, 4 Apr., p. 6.)

Against the disestablishment or disendowment of the Protestant Church in
Ireland, from Westminster. (No. 9101, 180 signatures; TT, 4 Apr., p. 6.)

23 April

For an improved municipal government of the metropolis, from F.D.
Lambert, 20 Devonshire Place. (No. 10,977, 1 signature; TT, 24 Apr., p.
6.)

Idem, from Major-General Lord Frederick Paulet, Albany. (No. 10,978, 1
signature; TT, 24 Apr., p. 6.)

Idem, from Comyn, Ching, and Co., 28 and 29 Castle Street, Long Acre.
(No. 10,979, 1 signature; TT, 24 Apr., p. 6.)

Edition: current; Page: [590]
Idem, from William Hargreaves, 12 Chepstow Villas, Bayswater. (No.
10,980, 1 signature; TT, 24 Apr., p. 6.)

24 April

For the repeal or reduction of the duty on fire insurance, from bankers,
merchants, manufacturers, and traders of the City of Westminster. (No.
10,694, 571 signatures; TT, 25 Apr., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Fourth Saint Martin’s Mutual Benefit Building Society,
119 Long Acre. (No. 10,695, 2 signatures; TT, 25 Apr., p. 6.)

Idem, from the Thirteenth Saint Martin’s Mutual Benefit Building
Society, 119 Long Acre. (No. 10,696, 3 signatures; TT, 25 Apr., p. 6.)

4 May

For restriction of selling and hawking goods on Sundays, from
Westminster, Pimlico, Chelsea, and parts adjacent. (No. 14,830, 303
signatures; TT, 6 May, p. 5.)

5 May

Against Mr. Ayrton’s amendments to the Artizans and Labourers’ Dwellings
Bill, from Bassishaw, City of London. (No. 14,889, 44 signatures; TT, 6
May, p. 8.)

In favour of municipal government for the metropolis, from a large
number of individual petitioners. (Nos. 14,934-15,095 and 15,891, each
signed; TT, 6 May, p. 8.)

11 May

In favour of municipal government for the metropolis, from F.E. Walpole,
3 Queen’s Street, Mayfair. (No. 15,894, 1 signature; TT, 12 May, p. 6.)

Idem, from Ernest F. Webb, 4 Westbourne Villas, Harrow Road. (No.
15,895, 1 signature; TT, 12 May, p. 6.)

Idem, from Henry Burchett, 9 Saint Stephen’s Square. (No. 15,896, 1
signature; not in TT.)

Idem, from Arthur Provey, 34 Somerset Street. (No. 15,897, 1 signature;
not in TT.)

12 May

Praying for an alteration in the vagrant laws, whereby householders and
ratepayers may no longer be punishable as vagrants because they practise
astrology, from Christopher Cooke, Ryde, Isle of Wight. (No. 15,908, 1
signature; TT, 13 May, p. 6.)

Edition: current; Page: [591]
13 May

In favour of municipal government for the metropolis, from John Watkins,
34 Parliament Street. (No. 16,068, 1 signature; TT, 14 May, p. 8.)

Idem, from J. Hardwicke, M.D., Deputy-Coroner. (No. 16,069, 1 signature;
TT, 14 May, p. 8.)

14 May

For extension of the electoral franchise to women, from Mary Somerville
and others. (No. 15,933, 21,783 signatures;15 TT, 15 May, p. 6.)

In favour of municipal government for the metropolis, from Henry Latham,
15 Upper Westbourne Terrace. (No. 16,071, 1 signature; TT, 15 May, p.
6.)

Idem, from William Aston Blount, 1 Eaton Place West, Belgrave Square.
(No. 16,072, 1 signature; TT, 15 May, p. 6.)

18 May

In favour of municipal government for the metropolis, from Francis
Edward Reade, 7 Saint James Street. (No. 16,233, 1 signature; TT, 19
May, p. 6.)

Idem, from William Stevenson. (No. 16,234, 1 signature; TT, 19 May, p.
6.)

21 May

In favour of municipal government for the metropolis, from Reginald E.
Thompson, M.D., 21 South Street, Park Lane. (No. 16,376, 1 signature;
TT, 22 May, p. 4.)

22 May

Against the chartering and endowing of a denominational University in
Ireland, and in favour of opening Trinity College, from the Presbytery
of Coleraine. (No. 16,353, 19 signatures; TT, 23 May, p. 5.)

25 May

Complaining that proceedings have been taken against the petitioner by
the Attorney-General for not having made a declaration and entered into
recognizances, under the Act of 1 William IV, c. 73, and praying for the
repeal of that and all similar Acts, from Charles Bradlaugh, Sunderland
Villa, Northumberland Park, Tottenham, editor of the National Reformer.
(No. 16,481, 1 signature; TT, 26 May, p. 6.)16

Edition: current; Page: [592]
26 May

In favour of the disestablishment of the Irish Church, from a public
meeting at St. Mary Cray, Kent. (No. 16,447, 1 signature; TT, 27 May, p.
6.)

5 June

Representing the injustice of the Abyssinian War, and praying that the
House will not confer its thanks upon General Sir Robert Napier and the
army, and will appoint a Select Committee to inquire into the whole of
the transactions relating to Abyssinia, from the Home and Foreign
Affairs Association of Macclesfield, Chester. (No. 16,639, 2 signatures,
summarized in entry; TT, 6 June, p. 6.)

Complaining of the prosecution of Mr. Bradlaugh, of the National
Reformer, under the Act of 1 William IV, c. 73, and praying that this
and all similar Acts be repealed, from a public meeting of residents of
Greenwich and Deptford. (No. 16,975, 1 signature; TT, 6 June, p. 6.)

Idem, from a public meeting assembled at Cleveland Hall, Cleveland
Street, Fitzroy Square. (No. 16,976, 52 signatures; TT, 6 June, p. 6.)

8 June

For the repeal of the Acts of 60 George III, c. 9, and I William IV, c.
73, under which the pending prosecution of Mr. Bradlaugh has been
instituted, from Matthias Robinson and others. (No. 16,979, 4
signatures; TT, 9 June, p. 6, which identifies the petitioners only as
“certain persons at Chelsea.”)

9 June

In favour of the Married Women’s Property Bill, from inhabitants of
Belfast. (No. 16,954, 399 signatures; TT, 10 June, p. 6.)

10 June

In favour of Married Women’s Property Bill, from inhabitants of
Birmingham. (No. 17,114, 2434 signatures; TT, 11 June, p. 6.)

Idem, from inhabitants of Rochdale. (No. 17,115, 612 signatures; TT, 11
June, p. 6.)

12 June

In favour of municipal government for the metropolis, from Messrs.
Truman, Hanbury, Buxton, and Co., General Sir De Lacy Evans, and other
ratepayers in London. (No. 17,119, 731 signatures;17 TT, 13 June, p. 6.)

Edition: current; Page: [593]
Idem, from Edmund B. Ray, 15 Prince’s Gate, Hyde Park. (No. 17,120, 1
signature; TT, 13 June, p. 6.)

16 June

For the repeal of the Acts under which the National Reformer has
recently been prosecuted, from residents in Harrow Road and its
vicinity. (No. 17,226, 82 signatures; TT, 17 June, p. 8.)

17 June

In favour of the Municipal Corporations (Metropolis) Bill, from James
Beal, 209 Piccadilly. (No. 17,335, 1 signature; TT, 18 June, p. 6.)

25 June

For extension of the elective franchise to women, from inhabitants of
Lichfield. (No. 17,362, 311 signatures; TT, 26 June, p. 8.)

29 June

For the extension of the elective franchise to women, from inhabitants
of Alnwick. (No. 17,364, 163 signatures; TT, 30 June, p. 9.)

9 July

For extension of the elective franchise to women, from Eliza Cairnes and
others. (No. 17,616, 972 signatures; TT, 10 July, p. 4.)

Praying that the power may be restored to parochial authorities of
rating the landlords in respect of small tenements or houses let for
periods less than a year, and that Clause 7 of the Representation of the
People Act be so modified, from inhabitants and ratepayers of the parish
of Saint Matthew, Bethnal Green, and adjacent parishes. (No. 17,620, 21
signatures, printed in App. 780, p. 363; TT, 10 July, p. 4.)18

14 July

Against the proposed concessions to the Portpatrick, Belfast, and County
Down Railway Companies, from Rigby Wason, of Corwar, Ayr. (No. 17,665, 1
signature, summarized in entry; TT, 15 July, p. 6.)

Edition: current; Page: [594]


Appendix D


I.: Manuscript Draft of The Westminster Election of 1865 [2] (1865)

MS, Mill-Taylor Collection, M/T II/1/12, draft of No. 6.

it is probable that many here present would wish me to explain why I
have, till now, abstained from all the usual practices of a candidate,
and only now for the first time appear at a meeting of the electors. My
reasons were stated in the letter in which I consented to be made a
candidate; but that need not hinder me from repeating them. When I said
in my letter that for myself I do not desire to be in Parliament, I
meant what I said. I have no personal objects to promote by it, while it
would involve a great sacrifice of my tastes and pursuits, as well as of
that freedom which I value the more because I have only recently
acquired it, after a life passed in the restraints and confinement of a
public office. These private considerations, however, I have waved; but
there is something which I could not wave; the strongest repugnance to
the means by which the suffrages of the electors are ordinarily sought.
To be selected by an important body of one’s fellow citizens as the
representative of the higher part of their minds—their understandings
and consciences—their sincere opinions and their patriotic feelings—is
one of the very highest honours which a citizen of a free country can
receive. But to get into Parliament as the representative of that
portion of the electors, or that part of the electoral mind, which is to
be got at by money—or which is to be reached by trickery—by saying one
thing and meaning another—by making professions not meant to be acted
upon or which, being contrary to one’s own convictions, it would be even
more dishonest to keep than to violate—this I regard as no honour at
all, but a disgrace. Therefore, when some members of this great
constituency made me the most unexpected and most flattering proposal to
present me for your suffrages, I answered that if it were so, it should
not be by spending £10,000 in corrupting and debauching (by strictly
legal means of course) all among you who are corruptible and
debauchable; neither should it be by taking a single pledge, except that
of being always open and unreserved with you; neither should it be by
soliciting your votes, for I look upon the whole system of personal
solicitation as a mistake; though I am far from condemning those who
merely conform to a bad custom, provided they do nothing to make the
custom worse than they found it. Edition: current; Page: [595] But
election to Parliament ought not to be a matter of favour. I have no
right to ask such favours, nor you to grant them: you are conferring a
solemn trust, and you have no right to bestow it on any but the fittest
man. This was my reply: and to the honour of Westminster (I may say that
much though I am myself concerned) there was found a body of men who had
a sufficiently high sense of public principle and of their own honour
and that of the constituency to say, Not the man who does these things,
but the man who will not do them, is the right man for Westminster, and
we will try if the electors of Westminster do not think so too. That,
gentlemen, is the reason why I am a candidate. And it would have been
quite inconsistent with a candidature grounded on these principles, to
have come among you and sought your votes directly and personally. My
principles are, that you ought to elect the fittest man: would it have
been decent for me to go about among you and say, I am the fittest man?
What would you think of a candidate who said, It is your duty to choose
a man of merit, Here am I, a man of merit, choose me? I am not here
because I propose myself, but because others propose me: and I hope you
do not suppose that I think all the fine things about myself which have
been said and written about me, with so much exaggeration but with a
strength and depth of kind feeling for which I can never be sufficiently
grateful, by numbers of people almost all personally unknown to me. You
will, I know, excuse what is excessive in these eulogiums, being aware
how natural it is for a man to be overpraised, as well as to be unjustly
attacked, at a contested election.

Perhaps you will ask, if for these reasons I did not for such a length
of time appear before you, why I do so now? I do it for two reasons. In
the first place, I was told, by those who had good means of judging,
that many of you wished to know more of me than they could learn from
what I have written. Now you have a right to an opportunity of judging
for yourselves of the man you are asked to vote for. Whatever you want
to know about my political opinions, I am bound to tell you—and I
pledged myself—it was the only pledge I gave—to tell it you with perfect
openness. It would have been as easy for me as for others to have put
forth a plausible profession of political faith—not like those
colourless and meaningless addresses the newspapers are filled with,
which Tory, Whig and Radical might equally sign—which bind them to
nothing, and are consistent with almost any vote. I might have made out
a long bona fide list of important subjects on which I have the
satisfaction of believing that I agree with you—I might have glided
gently over all points of difference and kept a discreet silence on
every opinion that could startle anybody. Did I do this? I did the very
opposite—I issued no address, but engaged to answer any question you
chose to ask about my political opinions—and those you did ask, I
answered with an unreserve which has been a kind of scandal to the
electioneering world. What obliged me to say anything to you about
women’s voting or about representation of minorities? Would any of you
have thought of questioning me on those points? Not one: but you asked
me what were my opinions on reform: and being asked it did not suit with
my idea of plain dealing Edition: current; Page: [596] to keep any of
them back. By this I lowered myself immensely in the opinion of those
who think that the sensible thing for a candidate is to dissemble and
finesse, and commit himself as little as possible. How injudicious!
cried one. How unpractical! said another. “How can he expect to be
elected on such a programme?” was the thought even of sincere friends.
In answer to all which, I beg them to consider—First, that perhaps I
would rather, if I had to choose, be honest, than be elected. Secondly,
that perhaps the electors of Westminster may also have a taste for
honesty, and may think that the man who deals honestly with them before
he is elected, will be likely to deal honestly by them if elected. One
thing I am sure of—that, even though a man may now and then lose an
election by it, in the long run there is nothing so practical as
honesty; and that this is a lesson politicians will have to learn.

You will scarcely expect me to go through the catalogue of the political
topics of the day, and tire you with things which you all know as well
as myself. It is better that I should confine myself to giving
explanations on any points on which you think that they are needed. All
I will attempt now is to give you an idea of the general tendency of my
opinions. I am here as the candidate of advanced Liberalism, and I
should like to tell you what, to my understanding, that expression
means. Mr. Gladstone, in one of those memorable speeches which have
taught all sincere reformers in the country to look to him as their
future leader, has given us his idea of the difference between
Liberalism and Toryism. Liberalism, he says, is trust in the people,
limited only by prudence; Toryism is distrust of the people, limited
only by fear. This is a true and apt statement of the distinction in one
of its practical aspects; but there is a still larger mode of conceiving
it. The Liberal is he who looks forward for his principles of
government: the Tory looks backward for his. The Tory thinks that the
really best model of society and government lies behind us—from which we
are departing more and more; consisting in the subjection and dependence
of the mass of the community, in temporal matters, to the hereditary
possessors of property, in spiritual, to the Church. He accordingly
opposes, up to the last moment, whatever carries us further from this
model. When beaten, he may sincerely accept his defeat, as a necessity
of the age; but he still hankers after the past: he still thinks that
good government means the restoration of the feudal principle in some
shape, perhaps a shape better adapted to the time; and he continues to
resist all further progress in the new direction. The Liberal thinks and
does the reverse of this. He thinks that we have not yet arrived at a
perfect model of government—but that it is before us, not behind: that
we are still too far from it to be even able to see exactly what it
is—but that we can clearly see in what direction it lies; not in some
new form of dependence but in the emancipation of the dependent
classes—more freedom, more equality, more responsibility of each person
for himself. That is the first article of my political creed. And this
is the second. Believing as I do that society and institutions are and
ought to be in a state of progressive improvement—that Edition: current;
Page: [597] it is the very nature of progress to lead us to see truths
which are not yet seen to be truths—but that by a diligent study of the
past, and application of thought to great questions, it is possible to
see for a certain distance before us, to perceive some of these truths,
and help other people to see them—I therefore think that both in
politics and in other matters there are truths which it is already time
to proclaim, though in the existing state of opinion the time has not
come when they can be carried into practice. That, gentlemen, is what I
mean by advanced liberalism. But does it follow, because a person has
something to say about the future, that he must be incapable of judging
of the present? That if he thinks for tomorrow, he can know nothing
about today? The dunces tell you so: but I venture to reverse the
proposition. The only person qualified to judge rightly or safely for
today, is the one who includes tomorrow in his deliberations: who can
see what things we are tending to; which of the tendencies we should
favour and which resist; and who will take care that his policy of the
moment shall fit us instead unfitting us for the greater good of the
future.

I have mentioned one of the reasons why having at first abstained from
attending public meetings, I appear before you now. But there is another
reason. The contest has changed its character. It is no longer personal
to myself. You have not now merely to decide whether you will choose me
rather than another man. The question now is, whether the representation
of Westminster, hitherto the most honourable seat in the House of
Commons, is to be obtained by the honest choice of the electors or by
money. That the answer to this should be even doubtful is enough to
rouse the strongest feeling of shame in every inhabitant of Westminster
who remembers the ancient reputation of his city. We Reformers profess
to desire, that the great landed nobility and gentry should no longer be
able to hoist their sons and protégés into Parliament over the heads of
the constituencies—passing over the minds of the electors, and working
through their private interests or their hereditary subserviency. This
we object to, and with reason: but what better shall we be, or what will
it profit us to weaken the aristocratic influences, if all we gain is
that seats in Parliament are put up to auction? What is it but putting
them up to auction when they are knocked down to the man who has the
longest purse, and is willing to open it widest? Of all existing
political nuisances, this is the one which it most concerns all of us to
resist; for it is the single one which is increasing, while almost every
other is diminishing. The great facilities for moneymaking which arise
from the unexampled commercial prosperity of the country, are raising up
crowds of persons who have made large fortunes, or whose fathers have
made fortunes for them, and whose strongest desire is to make those
fortunes the means of purchasing what is called position—in other words,
admission into the society of persons higher in rank than themselves.
Now there is only one way in which this can be effected by money;
namely, through a seat in Parliament. I am the last man to think
disparagingly of such persons, or to pretend that they have no business
to be in Parliament: many of them have a strong claim, by their
knowledge and Edition: current; Page: [598] abilities, to a seat in the
House, and are such men as it can ill spare. But the mischief is, that
it is precisely those among them who are least capable of getting
elected on their merits—who have no chance of making their way into what
is called good society by their talents, their education, or their
breeding—it is exactly those who are tempted to employ the only other
means open to them of obtaining their end, the lavish expenditure of
money in corrupting electors. For there is corruption which is not
technically bribery. To gain a seat by giving money to the electors is
not less corruption because the elector does not receive the money for
his vote, but for ostensible services; it makes no moral difference
whether a working man is paid for voting, or for putting, for instance,
a placard in his window. A candidate who succeeds by these means, like
one who opens the public houses, goes to Parliament as the
representative of the vices of the constituency. There is no hope that
people will be shamed out of these things until they are cut by society
for doing them. You cannot prevent such things from being attempted; but
you may perhaps prevent them from succeeding. An experiment is being
tried on you, the electors of Westminster. An effort is made to bring in
a Tory candidate by an expenditure of money more profuse than any Tory
ever ventured upon before in this city. Since it is very well known that
the majority of the electors of Westminster are not Tories, it is not
uncharitable to say that the supporters of the Tory candidate rely
chiefly on money. Had they really thought that the electors have turned
Conservative; that you have had enough of Reform; that in your opinion
enough has been done in the way of constitutional improvement, and you
are now anxious to prevent further change, they would have selected for
the distinction of this seat one of their foremost men—one of those who
are an honour to their party—such a one, let us say, as Lord Stanley.
When instead of the man of greatest merit, they offer you the one who is
willing to spend most lavishly, they shew plainly in what they put their
trust.

Will you suffer this to succeed? The eyes of all England are on you; all
lovers of freedom and purity of election are looking to you with anxious
hope. And there is another, a very different sort of persons who have
their eyes on you too: those (they are very numerous) who cultivate a
contempt for the people. All such persons are watching you, hoping to
find you worthy of their contempt. They are already chuckling over what
they think the probable success of the extraordinary efforts making to
debauch you. They are saying that you have it not in you to elect any
person but the man who will spend most money among you—that you have not
public virtue for it; that public virtue is not to be expected from such
people as you are; and they are eagerly waiting to see you justify their
opinion of you. I trust you will disappoint them. If you elect me, and I
turn out a total failure—if I disappoint every expectation which has
been formed of me—you will have nothing to be ashamed of; you will have
acted an honest part, and done, at all events, what seemed best for the
country. Can the same thing be said if you return the candidate of a
party against which Westminster has consistently protested for nearly a
Edition: current; Page: [599] century, and if his victory is due to his
money? If this constituency should so degrade itself, it will be a deep
mortification to all who put faith in popular representation;
Westminster will have fallen from her glory, and can no longer hold her
head as high as she has done; and the progress of popular principles,
which cannot be stopped, will have to go forward for the present without
Westminster.


II.: Manuscript Draft of Representation of the People [2] (1866)

MS, Houghton Library, Harvard University, MS ENG 1105, incomplete
version of No. 16.

although the question on which the House will be called on to divide
relates ostensibly to the mere order of proceeding, it will scarcely be
denied that we are really discussing the main question; and I need make
no apology for confining myself to that. When it is maintained that the
House ought not to pass the bill which has been proposed to it, until
there has been laid before it some other proposal for the improvement of
our representative system, the supposition must be that the present
measure, if passed without any such supplementary measure, would be
injurious. For if it would not be an injurious, but merely an incomplete
measure—one after which there would still remain much to be reformed—the
mere common-sense rule of doing one thing at a time would fully justify
the course which the Government have adopted. Now, although according to
the almost universal opinion of Reformers, many important things will
remain to be done after this bill has been passed—though we are, I dare
say, as sincerely desirous as the noble mover of the amendment that
family and pocket boroughs should be extinguished and that the excessive
political influence of a few noble and opulent families should be
reduced—though in our desire to make it more difficult for wealthy men
to buy their way into the House of Commons or to shut the doors of the
House against poorer men by their lavish and strictly legal expenditure,
I am bold to say that we do not yield to the wealthiest man
present—though we are perfectly orthodox on these cardinal points of
Conservatism1

quick about it—they concealed their presence so successfully—their votes
made such an imperceptible difference—they had all this power of
endangering our institutions and so obstinately persisted in not doing
it—that honourable gentlemen are quite alarmed, and tremble at the
thought of the frightful abyss into which we have not fallen. Well, Sir,
it certainly appears that this amount of Edition: current; Page: [600]
enfranchisement of the working people has done no harm: but though very
useful in many other respects, as a representation of the classes is
worth nothing at all: for it makes no difference what absolute number of
voters a class has if it is always outvoted. If the working classes
mustered 26 per cent in every constituency in the kingdom and no more
than that proportion in any, it would be the same thing in a class point
of view as not being represented at all. If indeed the mechanism of our
electoral system provided any representation of minorities—if those who
are outvoted in one place could join their votes with those who are
outvoted in another—if any means existed by which 26 per cent of the
electors could succeed in returning 26 per cent of the
representatives—then indeed the arguments against which I am contending
would have a claim to be considered. But as it is, the share of the
working classes in the representation is not measured by the number of
working men on the register, but by the number of constituencies in
which working men are the majority, and even that only shews the extreme
limit of the influence which the working men can exercise, not that
which they will. It seems there are some half dozen constituencies in
which working men are already the majority, and I put it to honourable
gentlemen, would anybody ever have suspected it? At the head of these
constituencies is Coventry: are the members for Coventry usually very
zealous champions of working class ideas? It certainly has been remarked
that these gentlemen whatever may be their politics otherwise, usually
vote quite correctly on the subject of French ribbons; and as that kind
of merit comes most naturally to Conservatives the members for Coventry
are often Conservative. But I have not heard that any of them ever
proposed a tax on power looms or anything else which might be supposed
to promote the class interest of his constituents as working men, apart
from their employers. If we look at any of the places where working men
possess a considerable number of votes, what manner of men are the
candidates for whom those votes are given? Almost always great employers
of labour: aI admit that the high character and enlightened opinions of
the gentlemen chosen fully justifies the choice buta so far from
representing the class interests of working men, they are drawn from the
very class between whose immediate or apparent interest and that of
working men the principal collisions take place. Considering the
innumerable modes of influence to which voters are subject, I cannot but
think that even if this bill so far altered the constituency that the
working classes by mustering the whole of their strength, had the power
of returning by small majorities 200 of the 650 members of this house,
there would not be fifty of that number who would represent the feelings
and opinions of the working classes or would possess their special
confidence. For my own part I should not think the whole 200 too many on
the principle of class representation. Even if they were unanimous there
would be more than two to one against them when they were wrong: they
could never carry any working class object unless they were supported
Edition: current; Page: [601] constantly [?] at least by 130
representatives of other classes, and when they obtained this support
there would, I think, be a very strong presumption of their being in the
right.

It has been asked—and the person who has asked it with greatest emphasis
is my right honourable friend the member for Calne—what practical good
do we expect from lowering the franchise? What good measures are there
which cannot be carried in the present House but which we expect to be
able to carry in the Reformed one? Well, Sir, this is a reasonable
question, and Reformers ought to be able to answer it; but it is a
little unreasonable to expect that it should be answered to the
satisfaction of this House. If I understand my right honourable friend
correctly, he thinks we ought to come to the House with a catalogue of
complaints against itself of wrong things which the House does and ought
to be prevented from doing, and good things which it leaves undone, and
ought to be compelled to do, and when convinced by our arguments, the
House pleads guilty and cries peccavi, then it will be time to bring in
a Reform Bill. Sir, my right honourable friend says we ought not to
proceed on a priori reasoning but should be practical; I want to know
whether this is his idea of being practical. Why, Sir, what he calls a
priori reasoning, but which I call the rational probabilities of the
case, are the only ground on which this matter can possibly be debated:
for if ever we descend to particulars, and point out this or that in the
conduct of the House which we should like to see altered, we imply what
may be a good argument elsewhere but cannot possibly appear so to the
House, for the very reason the House do these things is that they do not
think these things wrong; if they did, they would amend them: So that we
could not possibly advance our cause by entering into particulars while
we should stir up all the most irritating topics in the whole field of
politics. Suppose for instance—and I purposely choose a small instance
to give the less offence—suppose we were to say that if the working
classes had been represented it would not have been found so easy as it
has been for honourable gentlemen whose cattle are slaughtered for the
public good to get compensation twice over, once by a rate and once by
the rise of price? I use the case only for illustration; I lay no stress
upon it; but I ask, if the debate on a Reform Bill ought to consist of a
series of discussions on such subjects as this, and many others much
more irritating still? I will ask one more question. If, when the Reform
Bill of 1831 was introduced, its proposers had foretold—which they could
not do, for they did not know it themselves—that in consequence of it we
should abolish the corn laws—that we should abolish the navigation
laws—that we should grant free trade to all foreign nations without
reciprocity—that we should reduce the postage on inland letters to a
penny—that we should renounce the exercise of any authority over our
colonies—and various other things which have come to pass—do honourable
gentlemen think that these announcements would have greatly inclined the
Parliament of the time towards passing the bill?

Sir, all of us know well that we commit a thousand mistakes and hold a
great Edition: current; Page: [602] number of erroneous opinions: but we
do not know which of our opinions these are, for if we did, they would
not be our opinions. Therefore every reflecting man takes precautions
beforehand against his own errors without waiting to have the particular
instances pointed out, and if he is a conscientious man as well, if
there are things which from the character of his mind or his habits of
life he is in danger of not perceiving, he is glad that there should be
others who will. Now this is all that I ask honourable gentlemen to
concede in the present case. What is the reason why we are so often told
that classes should be represented? I apprehend, it is because every
class knows some things which are not so well known by other people, and
ought to have the opportunity of stating them; and because every class
has peculiar interests which require to be protected, and no protection
is so effectual as its own. These may be called a priori doctrines, but
so is the doctrine that a straight line is the shortest distance between
two points: they are as much truths of common sense and common
observation as that is, and every person of common sense acts upon them
as confidently. Well then, I claim the benefit of these principles for
the working classes. They require it more than any other class, for
reasons which are obvious. The class of lawyers, for instance, or the
class of merchants, are amply represented in this House, although there
are no constituencies a majority of which consists of lawyers or of
merchants; but it must be remembered that a successful lawyer or
merchant easily gets into Parliament by his wealth and social position,
and when there is just as good a representative of lawyers and merchants
as if he had been elected on purpose; but no working man is ever likely
to be returned to Parliament except by a constituency of working men—and
not only no working man, but no man who looks at working men’s questions
with working men’s eyes. Is there, I wonder, a single member of this
House who knows and could explain to the satisfaction of working men,
the working men’s view of strikes, for instance? Are there many of us
who so thoroughly understand the subject of apprenticeships, let us say,
or of the hours of labour, as to have nothing to learn on the subject
from intelligent operatives? I know that along with much valuable
knowledge and many just ideas you would sometimes find pressed upon you
erroneous opinions—mistaken notions of what is for the true interest of
the working classes. And if those classes were preponderant in the
House, attempts might possibly be made to carry some of those wrong
notions into practice. But there is no question at present about making
the working classes preponderant in the House: what is asked for them is
such a measure of representation as shall ensure that their opinions may
have a fair hearing, and may be met by fair arguments addressed to their
own understanding, by persons who can enter into their manner of looking
at questions and can adapt their arguments to it. This is never done
now. When anything at all is said in this House on the questions which
are near the hearts of the working men, all the doctrines which they
require to be convinced of are taken for granted; or if any Edition:
current; Page: [603] reasons are given, they are such as never reach
their minds. In general, when people attempt to correct the errors of
working people they do it as if they were speaking to babies—any reason
is thought good enough. They are so little aware of what is in the mind
of a working man that their answers are always wide of the mark. They
never touch his real difficulties and merely give him a contemptuous
opinion of those who use them. Do not suppose that working men would
always be unconvincible by such arguments as ought to convince them. It
is not one of the faults of democracy to be obstinate in error. An
Englishman who had lived some years in the United States recently
expressed his opinion of the Americans by this observation: he said
“they are the most teachable people on the face of the earth.” It is not
indeed to be expected that an old country should be as teachable as a
new one, in which old traditions, and fixed habits have less power; but
I believe neverthless, it will be found that the educated artisans,
those at least who interest themselves in politics, are more teachable
than any other class. There are several reasons why they should be so:
for one thing, they are, as a rule, more in earnest than any other
class; their opinions are more genuine, less influenced by hopes of
personal advancement; and their social position is not such as to breed
self-conceit. Above all, there is one thing to which I believe almost
every one will testify who has had much to do with them and it is a
point of which my own experience supplies very striking examples: there
is no class which so well bears to be told of its faults, and to be told
even in harsh terms, if they believe that the person who so speaks to
them speaks what he thinks, and has no purpose of his own to promote by
it. I can hardly conceive a nobler course of national education than the
debates of this House will become, when the various notions, right and
wrong, which are fermenting in the minds of the working classes, and
many of which go down very deep into the principles of the social union,
are fairly argued and genuinely discussed in this place. It has been
remarked of all classes of persons with what comparative readiness they
resign themselves even to the refusal of what they ask, when everything
which they could have said for themselves has been said by somebody for
them in the course of the discussion. The working classes have never had
this tranquillizing assurance—they have always felt that they were
judged without being listened to—and it is not in human nature to bear
this without deep dissatisfaction.

If I may now be permitted to say, in general terms avoiding all topics
that can give offence, in what respect I think the proceedings of this
House would be practically improved by the presence in it of a body of
persons representing the opinions and wishes of working men, I may refer
honourable gentlemen to Tocqueville who is so favourite an authority in
our political discussions when2

Edition: current; Page: [604]


III.: Manuscript Draft of Women’s Suffrage [1] (1869)

MS, Mill-Taylor Collection, Vol. XLI, full draft of No. 144.

the first thing which presents itself for us men who have joined this
Society—a Society instituted by ladies to procure the protection of the
suffrage for women—is to congratulate them on the success of this their
first effort in political organisation. The admission of women to the
suffrage is now a practical question. What was, not very long ago, a
mere protest in behalf of abstract right, has grown into a definite
practical aim, seriously pursued by many thousands of active adherents.
No sooner did a few ladies of talent and influence, fostered in those
principles of justice and believing in those elements of progress which
are now renewing the life of every country in the world—no sooner, I
say, did a few of these ladies give the signal that the time was come to
claim for women a share in those blessings of freedom which are the
passion and the glory of every noble nation—than there rallied round
them unexpected thousands of women, eager to find expression for
aspirations and wishes which we now learn that multitudes of our country
women had long cherished in silence. The thousands who have signed the
petitions for women’s suffrage, year after year, are evidence that I do
not exaggerate when I say this. For my own part, I have all my life held
the opinion that women have the same right to the suffrage which men
have; and it has been my good fortune to know many ladies much better
fitted to exercise it than the majority of the men of my acquaintance. I
may say too, to the credit of my own perspicacity, that I have long been
of opinion that the disclaimers of all wish for political or any other
equality with men, which until quite lately have been almost universal
among women, were but a form of that graceful and amiable way of making
a virtue of necessity, which always distinguishes women. Nevertheless, I
must acknowledge, I did not expect the amount of sympathy, and of more
than sympathy—of ardent and zealous support—which this movement has
called forth among women and among men also of all opinions and parties.
We have had a success, quite out of proportion to our apparent means,
and which would be unaccountable were it not for certain potent allies
that have been working for us.

The first of these precious auxiliaries is the sense of justice. When
not stifled by custom or prejudice, the natural feeling of justice is on
our side. We are fighting against privilege on one side, disabilities
and disqualifications on the other. We are protesting against arbitrary
preferences; against making favorites of some, and shutting the door
against others. We are claiming equal chances, equal opportunities,
equal means of self-protection, for both halves of mankind. That
political suffrage which men are everywhere demanding for themselves as
the sole means by which their other rights can be secured to them, we,
for the same reason, Edition: current; Page: [605] and in the name of
the same principles, demand for women too. We therefore take our stand
on natural justice; and to appeal to that, is to invoke a mighty power.

The other auxiliary which is working for us, with ever increasing
strength, is the progress of the age; what may be called the modern
spirit. All the tendencies which are the boast of the time; all those
which are the characteristic features and animating principles of modern
improvement—are on our side. There is, first, the growing ascendancy of
moral force over physical; of social influences over brute strength; of
the idea of right over the law of might. Then, there is the
philanthropic spirit; that which seeks to raise the weak, the lowly, the
oppressed. There is the democratic spirit; the disposition to extend
political rights, and to consider any portion of the community as
insufficiently cared for unless it has a voice in choosing those by whom
the laws are made and administered. There is the free trade spirit; the
desire to take off restrictions; to break down barriers; to set people
free to make their own circumstances, instead of chaining them down by
law or custom to circumstances made for them. Then there is the force of
that which, to the shame of past history, I am obliged to call the new
conception of human improvement and happiness; that they do not consist
in being passively ministered to, but in active self-development. And
over and above these specific practical forces at work in society, we
have on our side one of the strongest and best modern
characteristics—not pointing, as those do, to a particular course of
outward action, but consisting in a general disposition of our own
minds: the habit of estimating human beings by their intrinsic worth; by
what they are, and by what they do; not by what they are born to, or by
the place in which accident or the law has classed them. Those who are
fully penetrated with this spirit, cannot help feeling rich and poor,
women and men, to be equals before the State, as, from the time of the
Christian era they have been proclaimed equal in the sight of God. And
this feeling is giving us powerful aid in our attempt to convert that
Christian ideal into a human reality.

To shew how unequivocally and emphatically the spirit of the age is on
our side, we need only consider the various social improvements which
are in course of being attempted, or which the age has fully made up its
mind to attempt. There is not one of those improvements which would not
help the enfranchisement of women; and there is not one of them which
the enfranchisement of women would not help. There is not one of them
which can be even tolerably realized unless women, with their moral and
intellectual capabilities properly developed, are associated in the
work. From the time when society takes upon itself the duties required
of it by the present state of civilization, it cannot do without the
intelligent cooperation of women: and the pedantic nonsense we now hear
about the sphere of women will be felt to be merely ridiculous when
pleaded as an excuse for excluding women from the minor matters of
politics, when their assistance cannot be dispensed with in the most
arduous.

Look at education, for instance: that is almost the one great cry of the
day. Edition: current; Page: [606] Statesmen, scholars, public writers,
all join in it: great and small, rich and poor, Tories, Whigs, and
Radicals, the higher, the middle, and the working classes with one voice
declare that the country cannot do without a good system of national
education—descending to the very bottom of society, and, allow me to
add, ascending also to the top. The best people have been saying this
for generations; but the political changes recently made, and the
prospect we have of more, have made the necessity manifest to all. Now,
then, we ask of rich and poor, Tories, Whigs and Radicals: Are you going
to educate a nation without women? Let alone the equal right of women to
a share in the benefit; I ask, can it be given to the rest of us without
their active help? When once we set about really teaching the children
of all classes of the community—it will not be like the merely nominal
teaching they mostly now receive—we shall need a vastly greater number
of schoolmasters than we can afford to pay if we reject the assistance
of half, indeed of much more than half, the available strength. Women
are the acknowledged best teachers of young children; and numbers of
them are eager both as volunteers and as professionals, to put their
hand to the work. The only hindrance to their being equally capable
instructors of more advanced pupils, is that they cannot teach what they
have not been allowed to learn. They will have to be taught all the more
valuable branches of knowledge if only that they may teach them to
others. In the country in which there is the widest diffusion of popular
instruction, the Northern States of America, a large majority of the
teachers are already women; and that, by no means exclusively in the
elementary schools: and they are found to be particularly efficient
teachers of male pupils. Is it likely, then, that when women find
themselves, side by side with the men of the present, teaching and
training the men of the future, they will believe in any right of their
pupils to political superiority over them? Will they feel themselves
less worthy of a vote, think you, or less entitled to it, than the men
whom they themselves have taught how to use their votes? And I should
like to see the face of the man, so taught, who would stand up and
refuse it to them.

Let us turn next to the management of the poor: and by the poor, I mean
the recipients of public relief; the pauper population. That formidable
difficulty weighs on the spirits of all our thinkers, and of all
conscientious public administrators: and the more they think, the more
they seem overwhelmed with its arduousness. I venture to predict that
this great national, and more than national, this human concern will
never be successfully treated until women take their share, and perhaps
the leading share in the management of it. A wide experience has taught
to thoughtful men, that the only true principle of a poor law is to give
relief (unless of a very temporary nature) to adults, nowhere but in
public establishments—in workhouses, and, for those who need them,
hospitals: and this method has been tried: but the workhouses and the
workhouse hospitals have been so execrably managed; the pillage has been
so profligate, and the unhappy inmates have been so brutally neglected
and ill-used; that the system has broken down, and Edition: current;
Page: [607] public feeling shrinks from enforcing it. If this is ever
remedied, it will be when pauper establishments are looked after by
capable women. As mere visitors, it is to them we in great part owe the
discovery of the enormities by which the public have been sickened, and
which has escaped the watchfulness of men expressly selected for their
fitness to be inspectors of poorhouses. The fittest person to manage a
workhouse is the person who knows best how to manage a house. A woman
who has learnt to govern her own servants, will know how to do the same
thing with workhouse servants. Very few are the male guardians and
inspectors sufficiently conversant with details, to be competent to
check the dishonesty, to stimulate the zeal, and to overcome the
indolence of all those concerned in administering to the wants of any
large agglomeration of human beings. Every experienced traveller knows
that there are few comfortable inns when there is no hostess. And the
gigantic peculations of the commissariats of armies, joined to the
dreadful sufferings of the wounded soldiers from the insufficiency of
the medical and nursing staffs, all bear testimony to the fact that men
do not possess the heaven-born faculty which they arrogate to themselves
for doing well on a large scale what they disdain to serve an
apprenticeship to doing on a small scale. If home is the natural sphere
of women—and I am by no means called upon to contest the assertion—those
branches of politics which require faculties that can only be learnt at
home, are the natural sphere of women too. But there are great spheres,
and little spheres: and some people want women to be always content with
the little spheres. I don’t.

In the same manner, in all that concerns the details of the public
expenditure: what superintendence and control is comparable to that of
an experienced mother of a family, who knows, or has learnt to find out,
what things ought to cost, and whose daily business it has been to
discover and check malversation and waste in every department of a large
household? Few men have had much of this kind of practice; multitudes of
women have had it. If we are to meet the demand of the age for a
government at once cheap and efficient, which shall cost little, but
shall give us all that we ought to have for the money, the most vigilant
and capable agents for making the money go as far as it can, would
generally be found among women.

One important public function, at least, has devolved on women from the
commencement: the nursing of the sick is a privilege which men have
seldom denied to women. The nursing of the sick in most public
establishments is from the necessity of the case, mainly performed by
women: and it is now understood, that they ought to be educated women.
No ignorant person can be a good nurse: a nurse requires to know enough
of the laws of health and the treatment of disease, to be at least able
to observe sanitary rules, and to understand the meaning of symptoms:
and much more than this will be required when the prevention and cure of
disease become a branch of public administration; a result towards which
things are rapidly tending. There are many difficulties in dealing with
the poor: many hindrances, both moral and economical, to doing for them
all that most of us would Edition: current; Page: [608] wish to do. One
thing, however, the nation appears to have fully made up its mind that
it will not grudge them: and that is, the use of their health. In this
one respect it is felt that the poor law instead of doing too much, does
not do nearly enough: the medical staff of our Unions is wretchedly
underpaid, and nothing near so numerous as it ought to be. And how is it
to be made efficient; how are the localities to afford the expense of
providing a sufficient number of persons with the requisite
qualifications—if we persist in shutting the door upon those women who
are claiming from us medical education in order that they may be fit for
such duties as these? Until the medical profession is opened to women
there never will be an adequate supply of educated medical practitioners
for any but the rich. And, independently of regular practitioners, there
are numbers of women who from their domestic occupations, cannot give
their whole time, but who would willingly give part of it, either as
volunteers or at a small remuneration, for work which would be too
costly if paid for at the value of the time of a medical man in good
private practice. But when women are entrusted with functions like
these, and educated for them, will they be content to be excluded from
the common privileges of citizenship? and how long will it be possible
to exclude them?

Society is feeling every day more and more, that the services of women
are needed for other uses than “to suckle fools and chronicle small
beer.” Many are now saying that they ought to be better educated, in
order that they may be able to educate men: and truly, if they are to
educate men, the education of a well educated man cannot well be denied
to them. But these very moderate reformers are falling into the same
mistake about women, which was committed about the working classes.
People were willing to educate the working men, but expected them, after
being educated, to be content with the same treatment which they met
with before. They would be quite happy, it was thought, when their
improved faculties qualified them to be more useful servants, and would
never think of claiming their share of mastership, nor a voice in the
choosing of masters. It has not so turned out with the working classes;
nor will it so turn out with women. Those who are fit to train men for
their work, will think themselves fit to take a share in the work, or,
at the lowest, in choosing those who are to direct it. The higher
education of women, and their political emancipation, are sure to go
forward together.

We are safe, then, in affirming that our cause has a powerful backing;
since it has for its allies the great forces which are at work
everywhere striving to improve the world. Our success would greatly
strengthen all those forces: and they, by their increasing strength,
tend to accelerate our success: illustrating the truth, that
improvements aid one another; that all good causes are allied; that
whoever helps forward one great public object proves in the end to have
promoted many more. In the full assurance that it will be so with us,
our business is to go on doing what, as a Society, we have hitherto
done; to strive for the suffrage, and for the suffrage only. The
suffrage, while it is the road to other progress, commits no one as to
what other Edition: current; Page: [609] things progress consists in.
Let us gain that, and whatever is desirable for women will ultimately
follow, without its being necessary at present to define, or even
possibly to foresee, all that is desirable. The mere fact of claiming
the suffrage has given an impulse such as had never been given before,
to all proposals for doing away with any injustice to women. Since the
suffrage has been claimed, a bill for allowing married women to be the
owners of their own property, which had been laid on the shelf for ten
years with other uninteresting trifles, has been reintroduced into
Parliament with a good prospect of success: and the movement for the
higher education of women is spreading in all directions, with a
considerable diversity of means insomuch that women have now a chance of
obtaining a really good education almost as soon as men. We of this
Society shall best promote these important movements by taking no part
in them as a Society, whatever any of us may think it ought to do as
individuals; but pressing forward with all our strength what virtually
includes them all, the suffrage. With that, we shall in time obtain what
is needed, whatever that may be; but until the suffrage is obtained, we
have gained nothing which may not be resumed any day at the caprice of
our rulers. In these times, the great practical distinction—the line of
demarcation between those who can protect themselves and those who are
at the mercy of others—is the political franchise: all who have rights
to protect now look to that as the only effectual means for their
protection. Even in America it was found that to abolish Slavery was not
enough: the negroes were not really free until they had the suffrage:
representative assemblies in the election of which they had no voice,
inflicted or tolerated treatment which would speedily have brought them
back to a servitude almost worse than their previous state. In a
political age, such as this is, women will never be of equal account
with men, will never be felt to be entitled to equal consideration, so
long as men have votes and women have not. The wider extension of the
suffrage to others, so long as women are excluded from it, is a positive
injury to them, for it is rapidly making them the only excluded
class—the only people whom the law does not deem worthy of a voice in
choosing their rulers, or whom it does not sufficiently care for to
extend to them that protection. The suffrage is the turning point of
women’s cause; that alone would ensure them an equal hearing and fair
play. With it they cannot long be refused any just right, or excluded
from any fair advantage: without it, their interests and feelings will
always be a minor consideration, and it will be thought of little
consequence how much their sphere is circumscribed, or how many modes of
using their faculties are denied to them. Let us, then, continue to
concentrate all our efforts on the suffrage; inviting all who wish for
the higher education of women, all who desire justice to them, in the
matter of property and earnings, all who wish for their admission to
professions and careers now closed to them, to aid us in our enterprise
as the surest means of accelerating the particular improvement in which
they feel a special interest.

Edition: current; Page: [610]


IV.: Manuscript Draft of The Education Bill [1] (1870)

MS, Houghton Library, Harvard University, Autograph file A.MS.*49M-85,
full draft of No. 145.

the resolution which has been moved, relates to a defect which as the
Bill was originally framed, was its greatest blot: and even after the
large concessions—for they are large concessions—which we may now
consider to have been made by the Government, enough of evil is left to
call for a strong protest. Though there are many things in the Bill
which we wish altered, its other defects are of the nature of
shortcomings: what is done we approve, but we wish it were done more
thoroughly: the difference between what the Bill gives, and what we
desire, is the difference between good and better: but on the point now
before us, it is the difference between good and bad. The Bill does not
simply halt and hang back in the path of good: it does positive evil; it
introduces a new religious inequality. And even the promised
attenuations leave a great part of the evil untouched, for they leave
the whole of its principle. Teachers are still to be employed and paid
by the whole community to teach the religion of a part. True, this is
now to be done out of school hours; and I would by no means depreciate
the value of this concession. I should be glad to forget as soon as
possible what the Bill would have been without it. Though brought in by
a government which has gained such high distinction as the destroyer of
religious inequality in Ireland, a more effectual scheme could scarcely
have been devised by the greatest champion of ecclesiastical ascendancy
for enabling the clergy of the Church of England to educate the children
of the greater part of England and Wales in their own religion at the
expense of the public. Hitherto instruction has only been given to those
who asked for it, but we are now going (at least we hope so) to teach
every child: and the Bill gave up to the local bodies, which in the
rural districts means the squire and the parson, all the neglected
children—the children of all who care little about religion, of all who
are dependent, all who are under obligations for charitable offices, all
who are too timid to risk displeasing their superiors by sending in a
solemn refusal in writing to do what they are wanted to do and because
the Non Conformists would not stand this, they were told—though, I will
do the Government the justice to say, not by them—that their motive
could not be religious or political principle but could only be unworthy
sectarian jealousy. By the promised concessions this blot is in great
part—I wish I could even now say entirely—taken out of the Bill. But the
principle remains of teaching the religion of a part with funds levied
by taxation from the whole; and a measure infected by this bad principle
cannot give satisfaction to any persons but of the dominant creed, nor
to impartial persons of any creed.

Edition: current; Page: [611]
We may be told, indeed, that Dissenters may teach their own doctrines if
they please, and in the School buildings too. They may, if after
deducting the school hours and the extra hours for church teaching,
sufficient time remains. But they must pay the whole expense and their
share of the cost of the Church teaching besides. We are told, again,
that in places where the Dissenters are the strongest, it will be they
and not the church that are enabled to teach their own doctrines at
other people’s expense; as if an injustice in one place could be cured
by an injustice in another. But this permission to tyrannize in their
turn wherever they are strong enough, the Dissenters are so extremely
unreasonable as not to value. It is well known that they do not desire
their distinctive doctrines to be taught in schools, indeed there are
few places probably where any single denomination is sufficiently
numerous to make this practicable. The system deliberately chosen by the
Dissenters is that of the British schools, where religious teaching is
limited to reading the Bible without note or comment. Besides, we all
know that the practical strength of the Dissenters is in the large
towns, and districts similar to towns: if they happen to be in a
majority anywhere else, we see by the example of Wales how little it
avails them. But in the large towns, even where the Dissenters are the
strongest, the Church party is sure to be strong enough to reduce them
to a compromise, and make the Boards either subsidize existing Church
schools, or if they use the power given them by the Bill of founding
others, to found a Church school by the side of every unsectarian one.
So that the church party will not probably, in a single instance, be in
that position of victims, which it is supposed ought to be such a
consolation to the Dissenters for being victims in three fourths of the
Kingdom.

Another thing we are told: that what we complain of as a new grievance,
exists already: by the national grants in aid to denominational schools,
we are all of us taxed for teaching religions not our own. Well: there
are some of us perhaps who might have a good deal to say against this
too, as a permanent institution, and who live in hope of its ultimate
absorption into something of which they can more thoroughly approve. But
we are not going now to begin this system: it exists: When it was first
established nothing better could have been obtained: and it still does
good, though we may learn, if we do not know it, from Mr. Mundella’s
speech, how sadly the result falls short of the claims made for it. But
we do not desire to destroy what we have got until we have replaced it
by something better. The worst point in the system, the bigotted refusal
of grants in aid to secular schools, is to be abandoned: and the Bill
provides that if the Boards, instead of providing new schools, elect to
subsidize the old, they shall subsidize all denominations
impartially—secular schools, I hope, included. For this the framers of
the Bill deserve our cordial thanks; but it is puzzling to find such
opposite principles acted on in two different parts of the same Bill,
and such different measures meted out to the old schools and the new. It
looks like a compromise between two parties in the Edition: current;
Page: [612] Government, on the plan of giving something to each: the
sort of thing, in short, which makes our legislation the jumble of
inconsistencies that it is.

Some have the face to tell us that the ratepayer after all is not taxed
for the religious instruction: the rate is so limited by the Bill that
he will really pay only for the secular teaching. Indeed! then who does
pay for the religious teaching? Do the Church party mean to raise the
money by a voluntary subscription? The Times, of Monday, throws out such
a suggestion: if one could hope that it would be adopted, I should not
have another word to say; except that since, after Mr. Gladstone’s
concessions, the religious is no longer to be mixed up with the secular
teaching, it may as well be given by a different person altogether, when
the impartiality would be complete. But if the expense is not defrayed
by subscription, it must be paid by the Privy Council, that is to say by
the tax payer: and do not Dissenters pay taxes? Is there any conscience
clause against the tax gatherer?

There is one more thing said which might well amaze any one but those
who are past being astonished at any of the tricks which can be played
with words. We are told that in our care for the conscience of the
minority we violate that of the majority, who conscientiously disapprove
of schools in which religion is not taught. Now, if what their
conscience objects to is sending their own children to such schools,
there is no compulsion; they can found schools of their own. It is
necessary to say this; for the principal speakers in support of the Bill
do not seem to be aware of it; they appear never to have heard of such
an idea; they accuse us of expelling religion from the schools, aas if
there were no schools to be had but those paid for from the rates;a as
if we were attempting to propose to prohibit all schools except secular
ones, or to throw some great obstacle in their way: while all we demand
is, that those who make use of the religious teaching should pay for it
themselves instead of taxing others to do it. So that the conscientious
scruple which we are accused of violating, is not a scruple against
going without the religious instruction but against paying for it, and
their conscience requires them to get it paid for by other people. Is
not this a curious spectacle of the richest and most powerful part of
the nation, who with two thirds of their expenses sure to be paid by the
Privy Council and the School rate, cannot bear to do what the smallest
denomination of Dissenters cheerfully does: pay their own religious
teachers? But is not this exactly because they are the rich and
powerful? It is not the poor and the weak who dream of throwing their
personal pecuniary obligations upon the public. It is a privilege only
desired by those who do not need it but who think it their right,
because they have always had the power of exacting it.

It appears however some of these people have a conscience so extremely
delicate that it is wounded not if their own children, but if any other
people’s children attend a school in which religion is not taught. The
very existence of a secular school within the country at least with aid
from the State is a burden on their Edition: current; Page: [613]
consciences as the very existence of heretics was on the conscience of
the Grand Inquisitor. And we, because we decline to defer to this
remarkable conscientious scruple, disregard the rights of conscience.
But the rights of conscience do not extend to imposing one’s conscience
as a rule upon other people. I dare say we should be told, if it was any
one’s interest to do it, that we are no lovers of liberty because we
will not allow a king to take the liberty of hanging or guillotining
people at his pleasure. But the liberty we stand up for is the equal
liberty of all, not the greatest possible liberty of one and slavery of
all the rest. There ought to be room in the world for more than one
man’s liberty; and there ought to be room in the world for more than one
conscience. Let all parties have what religious teaching their
conscience approves and they are willing to pay for. But when a man
tells me his conscience requires that other people shall have religious
teaching whether they like it or not, and shall have it in schools
though they would prefer to have it elsewhere, and that they shall not
be helped like other people in their secular teaching unless they
consent to take religious teaching along with it, I tell him that he is
not asserting his own freedom of conscience, but trampling on that of
other people. If this is a right of conscience, it was prejudice and
bigotry to complain of the persecutions of the Vaudois or of the
Protestants. The case is less flagrant, but the principle is the same.

Edition: current; Page: [614]


Appendix E


Missing Speeches

Mill seems to have attended few public meetings at which he did not
speak. On only two occasions is it known that he made some remarks of
which no report has been discovered.

1. 9 July, 1870. The Land Tenure Reform Association met at the
Freemason’s Tavern. Reports appeared in The Times, 12 July, p. 12, and
in The Bee-Hive, 16 July, p. 342, the latter saying that Mill made “a
short address” from the chair.

2. 6 August, 1870. The Representative Reform Association met in their
offices, 9 Buckingham Street, Strand. The reports of 8 August in The
Times, p. 10, and the Pall Mall Gazette, p. 6, say that following the
paper read by the chairman, Thomas Hare, on the progress of proportional
voting in various counties, Mill was among those who took part in the
discussion.

Edition: current; Page: [615]


Appendix F


War and Peace, by Helen Taylor (1871)

MS fragment, Houghton Library, Harvard University, Autograph file
A.MS *49M-85; no full version is known, nor is the occasion for which it
was prepared. In Mill’s hand; on 2r is written in Helen Taylor’s hand,
“H T. Feby 1871.”

the contemplation of all the brutal horrors of war, as well as of the
extremely unsatisfactory way in which after all it settles disputes,
irresistibly arouses the question why the disputes of civilised nations
cannot be settled as those of private individuals are settled. The first
reply to this is unfortunately only too plain: and the difficulty of
obtaining any impartial judge or jury in international disputes has
hitherto been an insuperable bar to their pacific settlement. A second
reply, less obvious, but hitherto of not less practical weight, is the
difficulty of finding any one willing to put themselves in the position
of the tax payer who provides the policeman and the prison for the
individual evil doer. No nation will put itself forward to incur the
expense and the danger of war, without the prospect of gaining something
by it for itself. And there exists a party of no inconsiderable weight
in this country that even lays it down as an axiom that we ought never
to go to war but for our own interests. If this axiom is right, there is
either no parity at all between individuals and nations, or else those
who hold it right to carry out their principles by refusing to
appropriate any part of the national revenues to the public
administration of justice between one citizen and another: for what
business have we to pay a policeman to interfere in any case where he
himself is not personally concerned?

But in fact I believe that on examining the question we shall find that
there is not really any parity between the administration of justice at
least in the form in which it exists in a great measure in the most
highly civilised nations, and which it is constantly tending to assume
in the hands of the greatest thinkers and best law reformers and any of
those ideas of international arbitration which present themselves
spontaneously to the mind when we ask why the disputes of nations cannot
be settled by some such means as those which settle the disputes between
individuals. I believe that if ever the disputes between nations are so
settled, it will be by taking as our model, not courts of arbitration,
but courts of law; not courts of law as they existed in the early stages
of human society, but as they exist in their Edition: current; Page:
[616] most perfect forms: and that the narrow and technical view of his
duties held by the modern English common law judge will be found the
most effectual by whoever should attempt to avert the bloody
consequences of international quarrels.

To shew this clearly one must go back to the consideration not so much
of the fundamental causes which lead to war (for I believe that dwelling
too much upon these has led us into a wrong track in seeking to avoid
war altogether) but of the fundamental causes which lead to our
abhorrence of war.1

Perhaps it is in the ambiguity of the word Peace that we ought really to
seek for the explanation of the long persistence of war, as a phenomenon
among civilised nations. As long as we have but a confused knowledge of
what we desire, our success in obtaining it will depend not so much upon
the ardour with which we desire it, as upon the ardour and the frequency
of those desires which conflict with it. When man does not act with his
reason, he is a prey to instincts, and passions which are little removed
from instincts. The first step towards working with our reason towards
the attainment of any desirable aim, is to define clearly what it is
that is desired: the second, which portion of what we desire can most
readily be attained.

Now it is precisely this first step which does not appear to me to have
been ever systematically attempted for the attainment of Peace. I define
our object as the attainment of Peace, rather than the avoidance of war,
because I take it that the word peace is really, in all languages and in
the human mind, the correlative of war, and the attainment of peace
means the avoidance of that pain on account of which war is hateful. But
what I have to say will apply equally well whether we take it in a
negative or in a positive form: whether we consider it as our object to
avoid war or to obtain peace.

What, then, are the delights of peace, which make the word so sweet in
all its associations? I think we shall find that the idea is a
peculiarly complex one. We associate with it all the pleasures of
concord and harmony, benevolent emotions, sympathy with our fellow
creatures, facility of intercourse and consequently all the enjoyments
that arise from commerce. Besides these ideas, we are apt to associate
with the idea of peace things that more properly belong to the domain of
liberty; the undisturbed possession of wealth, freedom of expansion of
our energies etc., in all directions, personal safety for ourselves and
those who are dear to us, and security from insult. One reason why the
world has not hitherto abhorred war, and valued peace as much as we are
now beginning to think they deserve, is one which we are very apt to
lose sight of: namely, that it is only quite of late that any nations
have really possessed these blessings of liberty. For a man’s abhorrence
of war and love of peace are naturally not so intense when in a state of
peace he undergoes at the hands of his political masters all the most
serious sufferings of a state of war. The Edition: current; Page: [617]
enjoyment of security of life, honour, and property, freedom of
intercourse, liberty of commerce, and various kindred advantages of free
and civilised society, are therefore essential antecedents to that
horror of war among all classes of the community which is beginning to
be a characteristic feature of modern times; and when we consider this,
we shall see less cause to be surprised that greater progress has not
yet been made towards getting rid of war itself. The same considerations
will apply, although in a less marked degree, to the physical sufferings
and the great mortality among those actually engaged in war. The
progress of civilisation and of the medical art undoubtedly diminishes
the amount of physical suffering with which men are familiar. With every
improvement, therefore, in these things, war becomes more exceptional,
and stands out more strikingly from the general course of human life as
a cause of agony and death. As plague, pestilence, and famine cease to
be conspicuous among us, war stands out with ever increasing
distinctness as a cause of human suffering, and the main agent in
violent and premature death.

Edition: current; Page: [618]


Appendix G


Textual Emendations

in this list, following the page and line numbers, the reading of the
copy-text is given first, and then the amended reading in square
brackets, with an explanation if required. If there is no explanation,
it may be assumed that there is an obvious typographical error, or else
that the change is made for sense or for consistency within the item.
For a description of changes not here listed, see lxxi above.
Typographical errors in versions other than the copy-text are ignored.

6.12 of a [of such a] [as in C]

6.35 peeople [people]

7.18 100 [100,] [as in C]

7.20 persons [societies] [as in C]

7.31 distrustworthy [untrustworthy] [as in C]

9.12 to make [should make] [as in C]

11.8 carry [curry]

14.14 Wesminster [Westminster]

23.7 to [for] [as in all other versions]

24.15 subservience [subserviency] [as in manuscript]

26.6 party, [party] [as in manuscript]

29.26 I [it] [as in DT and for sense]

33.4-5 to that [from that] [as in MS]

33.30 watching after [watching over] [as in MS]

40.12 Mills [Mill]

48.7 other hand [one hand] [as in TT]

56.23 think. I [I think.]

58.10 few [free] [as in MS,DN]

62.4 consequences they [consequences-they] [as in PD]

62.27 classes, in [classes; on] [altered in SC]

63.38 this or [this and] [altered in SC; as in PD]

65.20 and most [and much] [altered in SC; as in PD]

67.1 interests [interest] [altered in SC; as in PD]

68.5 good and is honest [good and honest] [altered in SC; PD reads good,
honest]

68.11 -unless I am mistaken. And (it [.-Unless I am mistaken, (and it]
[altered in SC]

Edition: current; Page: [619]
71.10 It fact [In fact]

89.6 let [lest] [as in DT,MS]

94.29 Hislop [Heslop] [in fact]

94.29 Lake [Luke] [in fact]

98.12 hopefulness, [hopefulness] [as in DN, MP]

112.1 required [requires] [as in PD]

118.17 was utterly [utterly]

132.6 ta [to]

132.30 all in [in all]

133.32 trade’s [trades’] [as in pamphlet]

133.35 trades [trades’] [as in pamphlet]

156.35 sedulusly [sedulously]

163.27-8 circumstance [circumstances]

169.2 householder [householder’s] [as in DT]

173.12 common [the common] [as in DT]

173.21 hear [bear] [as in DT,MS,S]

192.11 inconsistent, [inconsistent-]

196.11 and [or]

198.11 composed. [composed?]

198.15 Why [Why,]

199.3 Why [Why,]

199.33 beloved [believed]

200.1 magistrates. [magistrates?]

201.1 and the honourable gentleman mentioned [such as] [to maintain
direct reporting]

206.6 only applied if [only if] [to fit main text]

206.13 Mr. J.S. Mill [He] [to fit main text]

206.13 recognised [recognized] [as in main text]

210.14 represention [representation]

211.8 case, [case.]

211.11 gentlemen [Gentlemen] [as in main text]

211.25 lead [led]

214.26 apportunity [opportunity]

215.9 regretable [regrettable]

216.27 constitional [constitutional]

216.30 will [will]

217.25 before-hand [beforehand] [as in SSC]

219.19 Most [most] [to conform to main text]

222.2 done its [done in its] [as in PD]

223.5 natural [national] [as in PD]

224.4 are [were] [as in PD]

224.7 flag [flags] [as in PD]

226.11 it [we] [as in PD]

226.29 professing [profess] [as in PD]

231.5 aldermen, [aldermen]

238.21 and the Artisans’ [and another was the Artisans’] [to fit main
text]

240.20 Althought [Although]

240.29 paln [plan]

242.8 laughter [laughter.]

252.3 and of our having been very slow [and very slow] [to fit main
text]

Edition: current; Page: [620]
259.4-5 their favour [its favour]

260.6 sublet [sub-let] [as in main text]

260.9 subletting [sub-letting] [as in main text]

262.15 at at [at]

263.22 enquiry [inquiry] [as elsewhere in speech]

265.14 provision, [provision] [for sense]

273.27 community; [community,] [to fit main text]

274.27 them. [them was] [to fit main text]

283.12 value. [value?] [as in TT]

287.15 poisen [poison]

288.18 Bil [Bill]

300.13 Gentlemen [Gentleman]

307.22 Gentleman [Gentlemen]

308.36 started [stated]

309.42 therefore [therefore,]

313.n3 even [Even] [to fit main text]

316.19 Gentlemen [Gentleman]

319.3 eight [eighteen] [in fact]

319.25 Parliamentary elections [Parliamentary Elections] [as elsewhere
in speech]

323.24 there s [there is]

323.39 that [that,] [as in DT]

324.17 Poor law [poor law] [as in MS]

330.8 tribunal [tribunal,] [as in DN]

330.17 effort . . . honourably [effort, . . . honourably,] [as in DN]

330.22 property, [property;] [as in DN]

330.29 who [who,] [as in DN]

330.31 jurisdiction [jurisdiction,] [as in DN]

330.37 session, [session-] [as in DN]

331.3 Schreiber’s [Schreiber] [as in DN]

331.5 party- [party,] [as in DN]

331.8 end- [end;] [as in DN]

331.24 better Bishops [the better Bishops]

336.35 advantages [advantage]

339.11 daresay [dare say]

340.23 partial [partially]

342.34 bread.” [bread.]

345.16 will [would]

352.28 Brighton [Brighton]

353.41 charities. [charities?]

357.22 and [which]

358.1 law; also as [law also; as] [in italics in this ed.]

362.6 tories [Tories] [as in DT]

362.22 tories [Tories] [as in DT]

366.23 wated [wanted]

368.13 anything [nothing]

372.8 Arles Defour [Arlès-Dufour]

372.10 State [city]

372.15 states [States]

372.22-3 discussions [discussion] [as in MS,DT,TT]

Edition: current; Page: [621]
372.26 is [are]

382.4 evil for [evil, for] [as in manuscript]

383.4 strongest [strongest,] [as in manuscript]

383.5 peoples’ [people’s] [as in manuscript]

383.17 compromise [compromise,] [as in manuscript]

383.20 probably [probably,] [as in manuscript]

383.22-3 [no paragraph] [paragraph] [as in manuscript]

383.27 something [something of] [as in manuscript]

384.7 measure [measures] [as in manuscript]

384.9 each; [each:] [as in manuscript]

384.9 thing in short [thing, in short,] [as in manuscript]

384.17 concessions [concessions,] [as in manuscript]

384.27 compulsion, [compulsion;] [as in manuscript]

384.30 schools [schools,] [as in manuscript]

385.18 daresay [dare say] [as in manuscript]

397.11 sesson [session]

399.9 mind [minds]

400.11 States. [States?]

400.29 also, [also]

414.15 in, [in;] [as in TT,DN]

414.21 extensive [expensive] [as in TT,DN]

417.3 beer. [beer!] [as in DT]

421.4 2,000 [2,000!] [as in TT]

421.5 30,000. [30,000!] [as in TT]

428.24 passions [passion] [as in DN,DT]

438.6 made which has been [which has been made] [for sense]

438.22 Buccleugh [Buccleuch] [as elsewhere]

438.25 Buccleugh [Buccleuch]

438.26 Buccleugh [Buccleuch]

446.6 licenseing [licensing]

446.27 1860 [1861]

447.1 roport [report]

448.15 interest [interests]

448.29 1860 [1861]

451.30 powers [powers;]

455.2 1860 [1861]

457.15 comprehend [comprehends]

463.40 poor-law [Poor-Law] [for consistency]

465.8 district [districts]

466.6 Jeffrey’s [Jeffreys’]

475.33 not to do so [not do so]

480.3 that it there [that there]

481.16 Rigsdag [Rigsraad] [as in fact]

481.16 Rigsdag [Rigsraad]

489.37 one half [one-half] [for consistency]

490.10 numerous to be in [numerous in]

491.35 ot [to]

492.25 a year [a-year] [for consistency]

495.39 meets [meet]

498.33 vestryman? There [vestryman?—There] [as elsewhere]

Edition: current; Page: [622]
503.19 municipal action [municipal election]

504.26 them, [them;]

507.13 guardians [guardians.]

514.13 up, [up]

516.3-4 they . . . men, receiving [there . . . men receiving]

519.6 same; [same”;]

520.40 organization [organization,]

522.1 a year [a-year]

523.12 a year [a-year]

525.9 chairman [chairmen]

526.18 States [State] [for sense]

526.30 vote [veto]

527.17 emigration [immigration] [for sense]

533.9 Louis Phillippe [Louis Philippe]

533.19 Louis Phillippe [Louis Philippe]

537.1 Boards [Board]

543.25 treaty [Treaty] [for consistency]

544.5 of of [of]

544.8 1866 [1865] [as in fact]

546.10 and has [has]

551.13 antèrieur [antérieur]

555.16 condemn who [condemn those who]

571.14 not not [not]

599.21 Reformers; [Reformers,] [incomplete revision]

601.22 reason why [reason] [incomplete revision]

602.17 lawyers— [lawyers,] [for sense]

602.39 When that [When] [incomplete revision]

603.1 reason are [reasons are] [incomplete revision]

610.26 least as [least] [incomplete revision]

Edition: current; Page: [623]


Appendix H


Index of Persons, and Works Cited, with Variants and Notes

like most nineteenth-century authors, Mill is cavalier in his approach
to sources, sometimes identifying them with insufficient care, and
occasionally quoting them inaccurately. This Appendix is intended to
help correct these deficiencies, and to serve as an index of names and
titles (which are consequently omitted in the Index proper). Included
here also are (at the end of the appendix and listed alphabetically by
country) references to parliamentary documents and to statute laws. The
material otherwise is arranged in alphabetical order, with an entry for
each person or work quoted or referred to in the text proper and in
Appendices B-D and F (the page numbers in the appendices are given in
italic type). Speeches, Questions, and Motions are listed in
chronological order in the speaker’s entry. Anonymous articles in
newspapers are entered in order of date under the title of the
particular newspaper. References to mythical and fictional characters
are excluded. The following abbreviations indicate our sources for
biographical information: ADB (Allgemeine deutsche Biographie), BP
(Burke’s Peerage and Baronetage), BU (Biographie universelle), DAB
(Dictionary of American Biography), DBF (Dictionnaire de biographie
française), DNB (Dictionary of National Biography), DPF (Dictionnaire
des parlementaires français), EB (Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed.),
GDU (Larousse, Grand dictionnaire universel du XIXe siècle), GE (Grande
encyclopédie), MEB (Boase, Modern English Biography), PD (Parliamentary
Debates), PP (Parliamentary Papers), SC (JSM’s library, Somerville
College, Oxford), WWBMP (Who’s Who of British Members of Parliament),
WWG (Who Was Who in the Greek World), WWR (Who Was Who in the Roman
World).

The entries take the following form:

1. Identification of persons: birth and death dates are followed by a
biographical source; if no source is indicated, available details are
given in a note.

2. Identification of works: author, title, etc. in the usual
bibliographic form.

3. Notes (if required) giving information about JSM’s use of the source,
indication if the work is in his library, Somerville College, Oxford,
and any other relevant information.

4. Lists of the pages where works are quoted and referred to, and people
questioned before Parliamentary Committees.

Edition: current; Page: [624]
5. In the case of quotations, a list of substantive variants between
Mill’s text and his source, in this form: Page and line reference to the
present text. Reading in the present text] Reading in the source (page
reference in the source).

The list of substantive variants also attempts to place quoted passages
in their contexts by giving the beginnings and endings of sentences. The
original wording is supplied where Mill has omitted two sentences or
less; only the length of other omissions is given. There being
uncertainty about the actual Classical texts used by Mill, the Loeb
editions are usually cited.

Acland, Thomas Dyke (1809-98; DNB). Speech on the Elective Franchise
Bill (30 May, 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 183, cols. 1542-3.

referred to: 84

— Speech on the Public Schools Bill (23 June, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1929-30.

referred to: 298

Adcock, Herbert Burroughs.

note: Lieutenant of 2nd Battalion of 6th Regiment of Foot, A.D.C.,
Assistant Commissary General to the troops.

referred to: 94

Adderley, Charles Bowyer (1814-1905; DNB). Referred to: 110, 123-4

— Speech on the Elective Franchise Bill (30 May, 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 183, cols. 1526-30.

referred to: 84

— Speech on the Disturbances in Jamaica (31 July, 1866; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 1785-97.

referred to: 106, 110, 123-4

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (5 July, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1082-5.

referred to: 208-9

— Speech on the Elementary Education Bill (18 Mar., 1870; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 200, cols. 227-36.

referred to: 383, 384

Addison, Joseph (1672-1719; DNB). The Spectator, No. 583 (20 Aug.,
1714).

quoted: 72

72.22-3 “Why should we sacrifice anything for posterity; what has
posterity done for us?”] Most People are of the Humour of an old Fellow
of a Colledge, who when he was pressed by the Society to come into
something that might redound to the good of their Successors, grew very
peevish, We are always doing, says he, something for Posterity, but I
would fain see Posterity do something for us. (2)

Address of the Land and Labour League to the Working Men and Women of
Great Britain and Ireland. London: printed Higginbottom, [1869].

referred to: 418-19

Allen, William Philip (1848-67).

note: a Fenian hanged for his part in the Manchester rescue.

referred to: 555

Amberley, Viscount. See John Russell, the younger.

Anderson, Elizabeth (née Garrett) (1836-1917; DNB). Referred to: 159

Edition: current; Page: [625]
Anderson, John.

note: flogged by Adcock, q.v.

referred to: 94

Anderson, John.

note: a runaway slave whose extradition was demanded by the United
States.

referred to: 543

Anson, Augustus Henry Archibald (1835-77; WWBMP). Motion on
Ireland—Petition on Fenianism (14 June, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 187, cols. 1886-90.

referred to: 188, 189

Argyll, Duke of. See George Campbell.

Arlès-Dufour, François Barthélemy (1797-1872; DBF). Referred to: 372

Arnott, Neil (1788-1874; DNB). Referred to: c.i.2396

Athenaeum. Review of The Coal Question, 27 May, 1865, 714-15.

referred to: 71

Avonmore, Barry (Viscount Yelverton) (1736-1805; DNB). Referred to: 111

Ayrton, Acton Smee (1816-86; DNB). Referred to: 230

— Speech on the Cattle Diseases Bill (16 Feb., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 181, cols. 608-9.

referred to: 50, 51

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (17 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 727-9.

referred to: 150

— Motion on the Representation of the People Bill (27 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, col. 1183.

referred to: 175-6

— Motion on the Representation of the People Bill (27 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, col. 1186.

referred to: 176

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (27 June, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 633-4.

referred to: 195

— Speech on the East India Revenue Accounts (12 Aug., 1867; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 1340-55.

referred to: 234

— Motion on Proceedings in the Committee of Supply (21 Apr., 1868;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 191, cols. 1025-9.

referred to: 266

— Speech on the Government of India Act Amendment Bill (15 June, 1868;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, col. 1598.

referred to: 288

— Speech on the Government of India Act Amendment Bill (8 July, 1868;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 859.

referred to: 305

— Motion on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (22 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1644-5.

referred to: 318

Edition: current; Page: [626]
Aytoun, Roger Sinclair (b. 1823; WWBMP). Motion on the Established
Church, Ireland (7 May, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 191, cols.
1902-5.

referred to: 277

Bacon, Francis (1561-1626; DNB). Referred to: 73

Bancroft, George (1800-91; EB). Referred to: 33

Barrett, Michael (1841-69).

note: a Fenian hanged for the Clerkenwell explosion.

referred to: 547, 554

Beadon, Cecil (1816-81; DNB). Referred to: 234

Beal, James (1829-91; MEB). Questioned: 444-59

Beales, Edmond (1803-81; DNB). Referred to: 101-2, 104, 114, 343, 346

— Letter to The Times, 2 Aug., 1866, 5.

referred to: 114

Beaufort, Duke of. See Henry Charles Fitzroy Somerset.

Beaumont, Wentworth Blackett (1829-1907; WWBMP). Motion on the Election
Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections Bill (23 July, 1868;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1681-2.

referred to: 326

Beggs, Thomas (1808-96; MEB). Questioned: 471-6

Bell, Andrew (1753-1832; DNB). Referred to: 362

Bentham, Jeremy (1748-1832; DNB). Letters to Lord Grenville on the
Proposed Reform in the Administration of Civil Justice in Scotland
(1807). In Works. Ed. John Bowring. 11 vols. Edinburgh: Tait; London:
Simpkin, Marshall; Dublin: Cumming, 1843, V, 1-53.

referred to: 233

Bentinck, George Augustus Frederick Cavendish (1821-91; MEB). Motion on
the Municipal Corporations (Metropolis) Bill (17 June, 1868; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1735-7.

referred to: 291, 301

Beresford-Hope, Alexander James Beresford (1820-87; WWBMP). Speech on
the Sunday Lectures Bill (19 June, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
188, cols. 97-9.

referred to: 290, 294

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (27 June, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 630-1.

referred to: 195

— Speech on the Elementary Education Bill (15 Mar., 1870; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 199, cols. 2021-6.

referred to: 384

Bible. The Holy Bible, Conteyning the Old Testament, and the New: Newly
Translated out of the Originall Tongues: and with the Former
Translations Diligently Compared and Revised by His Maiesties Speciall
Comandement. Appointed to Be Read in Churches. London: Barker, 1611.

referred to: 383

— New Testament. Referred to: 4

— Acts. Referred to: 352

— Ecclesiastes. Referred to: 37

— Exodus. Referred to: 38

Edition: current; Page: [627]
— Genesis. Referred to: 36, 354

— Isaiah.

note: the quotations are indirect.

quoted: 248, 260

— I Kings. Referred to: 428

— Luke.

note: for the reference at 321 see also Matthew, 8:9; for that at 352
see also Matthew, 5:11-12

referred to: 321, 352

— Matthew.

note: for the reference at 321 see also Luke 7:8; for that at 352 see
also Luke, 6:22-3.

quoted: 363

referred to: 321, 352, 356, 430

363.1 “Be ye perfect as your Father is perfect.”] Be ye therefore
perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. (5:48)

— Proverbs. Referred to: 328

— II Samuel. Referred to: 428

Bidgood, Henry.

note: member of Local Board of St. James, Westminster

questioned: 503

Birt, Daniel (d. 1878).

note: a draper and prominent vestryman in St.-George-the-Martyr parish.

questioned: 500-3

Black, William Henry (1808-72; DNB). Questioned: 490-1

Blackburn, Colin (1813-96; MEB). Charge to the Westminster Grand Jury in
the Case of Governor Eyre. In “Ex-Governor Eyre,” The Times, 3 June,
1868, 9-10.

referred to: 302

Blackstone, William (1723-80; DNB). Commentaries on the Laws of England:
4 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1765-69.

note: the 5th ed., 4 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1773) is in SC.

quoted: 271

271.22-3 “It . . . guilty should escape . . . innocent person should
suffer,”] [paragraph] Fourthly, all presumptive evidence of felony
should be admitted cautiously: for the law holds, that it . . . guilty
persons escape, . . . innocent suffer. (IV, 352)

Blackwood, Frederick Temple Hamilton-Temple (Lord Dufferin) (1826-1902;
DNB). Mr. Mill’s Plan for the Pacification of Ireland Examined. London:
Murray, 1868.

referred to: 258, 260

Bolingbroke. See Henry Saint-John.

The Booke of the Common Prayer and Administracion of the Sacramentes,
and Other Rites and Ceremonies of the Churche: after the Use of the
Churche of England. London: Whitchurche, 1549.

note: the quotation of the General Confession is indirect.

quoted: 49

Bourke, Richard Southwell (Earl of Mayo) (1822-72; DNB). Speech on the
State of Ireland (10 Mar., 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 190, cols.
1353-94.

referred to: 248, 250, 252, 254, 259-60, 310

Bourke, Thomas Francis (b. 1840).

note: a general in the Fenian army; JSM uses the spelling Burke.

referred to: 166, 167, 171, 172-3

Edition: current; Page: [628]
Bouverie, Edward Pleydell (1818-89; DNB). Speech on the Election
Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections Bill (21 May, 1868;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 682-5.

referred to: 300

— Speech on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (6 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 722-8.

referred to: 301, 302

Bowyer, George (1811-83; WWBMP). Referred to: 276

— Speech on the Alabama Claims (6 Mar., 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 190, cols. 1183-8.

referred to: 243, 246

Bradfield, John Edwin (1818-88; MEB). Questioned: 512-13

Brand, Herbert Charles Alexander (1839-1901; DNB). Referred to: 94

Brett, William Balliol (1817-99; DNB). Speech on the Representation of
the People Bill (9 May, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols.
273-80.

referred to: 148-9

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (17 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 737-8.

referred to: 150

— Speech on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (22 May, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, col. 690.

referred to: 280

— Speech on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (17 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 1373.

referred to: 312

— Speech on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (17 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1380.

referred to: 312

— Speech on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (22 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1622-3.

referred to: 316

Brewer, William (d. 1881; MEB). Referred to: 13, 14, 15

Bright, Jacob (1821-99; DNB). Speech on the State of Ireland (12 Mar.,
1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 190, cols. 1510-15.

referred to: 248

— Speech on the Married Women’s Property Bill (10 June, 1868; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1360-4.

referred to: 284

Bright, John (1811-89; DNB). Referred to: 201, 246

— Speech on the Cattle Diseases Bill (14 Feb., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 181, cols. 472-80.

referred to: 47

— Speech on the Habeas Corpus Suspension Bill, Ireland (17 Feb., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 181, cols. 685-95.

referred to: 52, 53

— Speech on Presenting a Petition on Fenianism (3 May, 1867; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 186, cols. 1929-31.

referred to: 188-9

Edition: current; Page: [629]
— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (5 July, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1090-7.

referred to: 207, 209, 210, 211

— Speech on Parliamentary Reform—Representation of the People Bill (15
July, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1550-4.

referred to: 213

Bright, Ursula (née Mellor).

note: wife of Jacob Bright.

referred to: 388-9

British Medical Journal. “Ladies Not Admitted,” 9 Mar., 1867, 269.

referred to: 160

Brodrick, George Charles (1831-1903; DNB).

note: the copy-text gives his name as Broderick.

referred to: 132, 133

Brooks, Preston Smith (1819-57; DAB). Referred to: 33

Brougham, Henry Peter (Lord) (1778-1868; DNB). Speech on the Business of
Parliament (5 June, 1837; Lords), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 38, cols. 1169-84.

referred to: 274

Buccleuch, Duke of. See Walter Francis Scott.

Buckmaster, John Charles (1823-1908; BP). Questioned: 513-21

Bulloch, James Dunwody (1823-1901; DAB). Referred to: 243

Bulwer-Lytton, Edward George Earle Lytton (1803-73; DNB). Speech on the
Representation of the People Bill (13 Apr., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 182, cols. 1237-53.

referred to: 59, 61, 62

Burdy, John (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica by Oxley, q.v.

referred to: 94

Burke, Edmund (1729-97; DNB). Referred to: 45

— Mr. Burke’s Speech on Presenting to the House of Commons (on the
Eleventh of February, 1780) a Plan for the Better Security of the
Independence of Parliament, and the Oeconomical Reformation of the Civil
and Other Establishments (1780). In Works. 8 vols. London: Dodsley
[Vols. I-III], Rivington [Vols. IV-VIII], 1792-1827, II, 175-267.

quoted: 45

5.4-5 “That system cannot be good which rests upon the heroic virtues.”]
I do not hesitate to say, that, that state which lays its foundation in
rare and heroic virtues, will be sure to have its superstructure in the
basest profligacy and corruption. (240)

— Reflections on the Revolution in France, and on the Proceedings in
Certain Societies in London Relative to That Event. In a Letter Intended
to Have Been Sent to a Gentleman in Paris (1790). In Works, III, 19-321.

referred to: 342

Burke, Richard O’Sullivan (1838-1922).

note: an Irish-American Fenian leader, who fought for the North in the
Civil War, and was imprisoned in Clerkenwell prison.

referred to: 547, 554, 555

Burke, Thomas Francis. See Bourke.

Edition: current; Page: [630]
Burns, Robert (1759-96; DNB). The Vision (1786). In Works. New ed. 2
pts. London: Tegg, et al.; Dublin: Milliken et al.; Glasgow: Griffin,
1824, II, 50-7.

note: in SC, as was formerly The Poetical Works, 2 vols. (London:
Pickering, 1830). The quotation is indirect.

quoted: 222

Butler, Josephine (1828-1906; DNB). Referred to: 388-9

Butler, Toby (d. 1865).

note: put to death in the Jamaica rebellion.

referred to: 95

Buxton, Charles (1823-71; DNB). Speech on International Maritime Law (2
Mar., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 181, cols. 1437-43.

referred to: 224

— Speech on the Disturbances in Jamaica (31 July, 1866; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 1763-85.

referred to: 105, 106, 107

Cairns, Hugh MacCalmont (Earl) (1819-85; DNB). Speech on the Extradition
Treaties Act Amendment Bill (3 Aug., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
184, cols. 2019-22.

referred to: 116

Cameron, Dugald Edward.

note: solicitor, member of St. Pancras vestry.

questioned: 505-9

Campbell, George Douglas (Duke of Argyll) (1823-1900; DNB). Referred to:
201, 371

Candlish, John (1816-74; WWBMP). Motion on Parliamentary
Reform—Representation of the People Bill (1 July, 1867; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 795-8.

referred to: 317

Cardwell, Edward (1813-86; DNB). “Despatch from the Right Hon. Edward
Cardwell, M.P., to Lieut.-Gen. Sir H.K. Storks, G.C.B., G.C.M.G.,” PP,
1866, LI, 137-43.

quoted: 110

110.4-5 “to entrust . . . troubles,”] It remains, therefore, to decide
whether the inauguration of the new Government shall be accomplished by
Mr. Eyre, or whether Her Majesty shall be advised to intrust . . .
troubles. (143)

110.6-8 “in new hands” . . . “taking . . . of”] They do not feel,
therefore, that they should discharge their duty by advising the Crown
to replace Mr. Eyre in his former Government; and they cannot doubt
that, by placing the new form of Government in new hands they are taking
. . . of Jamaica. (143)

Carpenter, Mary (1807-77; DNB). Referred to: 388-9

Carrel, Jean Baptiste Nicolas Armand (1800-36; DBF). Referred to: 570-1

— Extrait du dossier d’un prévenu de complicité morale dans l’attentat
du 28 juillet. Paris: Paulin, 1835.

referred to: 571

Casey, Joseph Theobald.

note: a Fenian, formerly a porter; assistant to Burke; later a friend of
James Joyce.

referred to: 547, 554, 555

Castle, William (b. ca. 1805).

note: of Melton Mowbray.

referred to: 314-15, 333

Cecil, Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne (Lord Cranborne, later Marquis of
Salisbury) (1830-1903; DNB). Referred to: 187

Edition: current; Page: [631]
— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (13 Mar., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, cols. 227-36.

referred to: 56

— Speech on Electoral Statistics (23 Mar., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 182, cols. 874-7.

referred to: 113

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (30 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 1357-9.

referred to: 186-7

— Speech on the East India Revenue Accounts (12 Aug., 1867; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 1378-82.

referred to: 235

Chadwick, Edwin (1800-90; DNB).

questioned: 529-35

referred to: 139, 391, 394-5

— “On the New Education Bill,” Sessional Proceedings of the National
Association for the Promotion of Social Science, III (10 Mar., 1870),
261-84.

referred to: 391-2, 393

— “On the Suggestions Afforded by the Application of the Cumulative
Vote, and by the Other Incidents of the School Board Elections, for
Improvement in the Constitution of Municipal and Local Governing
Bodies,” Sessional Proceedings of the National Association for the
Promotion of Social Science, IV (1870-71), 227-8.

referred to: 410-11

— “Report on the Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population of Great
Britain; a Supplementary Report on the Results of a Special Inquiry into
the Practice of Interment in Towns,” PP, 1843, XII, 395-681.

referred to: 139, 140, 529-30

Chamberlain, William Tankerville (1751-1802).

note: an Irish judge; the quotation is from Howell, State Trials, q.v.
for the collation.

quoted: 111

Channing, William Henry (1810-84; EB). Referred to: 33

Chapman, Henry Samuel (1803-81; DNB). Referred to: 10

Charles II (of England) (1630-85; DNB). Referred to: 417

Chelmsford, Lord. See Frederick Thesiger.

Chevalier, Michel (1806-79; DBF). Referred to: 371-2

Childers, Hugh Culling Eardley (1827-96; DNB). Referred to: 175

Christ. See Jesus.

Christie, William Dougal (1816-74; DNB). Electoral Corruption and Its
Remedies. London: National Association for the Promotion of Social
Science, 1864.

note: reprinted in The Ballot, and Corruption and Expenditure at
Elections (London: Macmillan, 1872), 75-103, with note saying that it
was originally published in a pamphlet (2 eds.) in 1864. He there
mentions JSM’s approval in No. 89.

referred to: 263, 265

— Suggestions for an Organization for the Restraint of Corruption at
Elections. London: National Association for the Promotion of Social
Science, 1864.

referred to: 10, 11

Churchward, Joseph George.

note: magistrate for Dover.

referred to: 232

Edition: current; Page: [632]
Cicero, Marcus Tullius (106-43 bc; WWR). De natura deorum. In De natura
deorum, Academica (Latin and English). Trans. H. Rackham. London:
Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1933.

referred to: 229

— Letters to Atticus (Latin and English). Trans. E.O. Winstedt. 3 vols.
London: Heinemann; New York: Macmillan, 1912.

note: in SC is Epistolarum ad T. Pomponicum Atticum libri xvi, in Opera,
VI, 1-517.

quoted: 158

158.28 in faece Romuli] Nam Catonem nostrum non tu amas plus quam ego;
sed tamen ille optimo animo utens et summa fide nocet interdum rei
publicae; dicit enim tamquam in Platonis Polyteia, non tamquam in Romuli
faece sententiam. (I, 108; II, i)

Clarendon, Lord. See George William Frederick Villiers.

Clark, Richard.

note: sometimes Clarke; flogged without trial in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Clark, William.

note: member of the vestry of St. George’s in the East.

questioned: 498-9

Clarke, Edward George (1841-1931; DNB). A Treatise on the Law of
Extradition. With the Conventions upon the Subject Existing between
England and Foreign Nations, and the Cases Decided Thereon. London:
Stevens and Haynes, 1867 [1866].

quoted: 121

121.9-10 “Any . . . course or in furtherance of any civil . . .
political movement.”] On the same occasion Mr. J.S. Mill suggested that
the political offences excluded from the operation of the law should be
defined as, “Any . . . course of or furthering of civil . . . political
commotions.” (179)

Clarke, Samuel (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Clay, James (1804-73; MEB). Referred to: 84

Cobden, Richard (1804-65; DNB). Referred to: 3, 4, 97, 371-3 passim

— Speech at Rochdale (18 Aug., 1859), The Times, 19 Aug., 1859, 7.

referred to: 240

— Speech at Rochdale (23 Nov., 1864). In Speeches on Questions of Public
Policy. Ed. John Bright and James E. Thorold Rogers. 2 vols. London:
Macmillan, 1870, II, 339-74.

referred to: 418

Cockburn, Alexander James Edmund (1802-80). Charge of the Lord Chief
Justice of England to the Grand Jury at the Central Criminal Court, in
the Case of the Queen against Nelson and Brand. Ed. Frederick Cockburn.
London: Ridgway, 1867.

referred to: 203-4

Coke, Edward (1552-1634; DNB).

note: the indirect quotation has not been located.

quoted: 276

Coleridge, Samuel Taylor (1772-1834; DNB). Second Lay Sermon [“Blessed
are ye that sow beside all waters”] (1817). 2nd ed. In On the
Constitution of Church and State, and Lay Sermons. Ed. Henry Nelson
Coleridge. London: Pickering, 1839, 303-430.

note: in SC.

referred to: 82

Edition: current; Page: [633]
Colliery Guardian. “Our Supply of Coal,” 27 May, 1865, 380.

note: a review of Jevons, The Coal Question, q.v.

referred to: 71

Collins, John Richard.

note: a chemist; member of St. Pancras vestry.

questioned: 497-8

Comte, Isidore Auguste Marie François Xavier (1798-1857; DBF). Cours de
philosophie positive. 6 vols. Paris: Bachelier, 1830-42.

note: in SC.

referred to: 222

Coningham, William (1815-84; WWBMP). Referred to: 350-1, 352, 353, 355

Corrance, Frederick Snowdon (1822-1906; WWBMP). Speech on the State of
Ireland (12 Mar., 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 190, cols. 1477-83.

referred to: 256, 257

— Speech on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (18 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1445-6.

referred to: 313

— Speech on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (24 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1730-2.

referred to: 330

Corrie, William (1806-81; MEB). Questioned: 443

Costello, Augustine F. (d. 1909).

note: a Fenian rebel.

referred to: 310, 315

Cowell, Scipio (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Cowley, Lord. See Henry Richard Wellesley.

Cowper-Temple, William Francis (1811-88; DNB). Speech on the Elementary
Education Bill (18 Mar., 1870; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 200, cols.
287-9.

referred to: 382

Cranborne, Lord. See Robert Cecil.

Craufurd, Edward Henry John (1816-87; WWBMP). Motion on the Election
Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections Bill (25 June, 1868;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, col. 2173.

referred to: 300

Cromwell, Oliver (1599-1658; DNB). Referred to: 338

Cullen, Francis James.

note: Ensign, 1st West India Regiment.

referred to: 94, 218

Dangerfield, John.

note: vestry clerk and solicitor for St. Martin-in-the-Fields.

questioned: 486-9

Dante Alighieri (1265-1321; EB). Dante’s Divine Comedy: The Inferno. A
Literal Prose Translation, with the Text of the Original. Trans. John A.
Carlyle. London: Chapman and Hall, 1849.

Edition: current; Page: [634]
quoted: 280

280.11-12 “neither for God nor the enemies of God, but for themselves
only.”] They are mingled with that abject choir of angels, who were not
rebellious, nor were faithful to God; but were for themselves. (28;
Canto III, ll. 37-9)

280.13 “Speak not of them, but look and pass on!”] Let us not speak of
them; but look, and pass. (29; Canto III, l. 51)

Darling, Charles Henry (1809-70; DNB). Referred to: 109

Davies, Sarah Emily (1830-1921; DNB). Referred to: 159

— On the Application of Funds to the Education of Girls. London:
Longmans, et al., 1865.

referred to: 159

Dawkins, Ellen (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Deasy, Timothy (ca. 1838-88).

note: an Irish-American Fenian, Civil War hero, arrested in 1867 but
freed by his colleagues; escaped to United States.

referred to: 555

Deer, Stephen.

note: self-confessed poacher.

referred to: 199, 212

Denman, George (1819-96; DNB). Speech on the Election Petitions and
Corrupt Practices at Elections Bill (6 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 193, col. 745.

referred to: 303

Derby, 14th Earl of. See Edward George Stanley.

Derby, 15th Earl of. See Edward Henry Stanley.

Disraeli, Benjamin (Lord Beaconsfield) (1804-81; DNB). Referred to: 10,
93, 94, 108, 109, 147, 148, 149, 151, 170, 171, 175, 187, 197, 198, 237,
265, 279-80, 336n, 338-9, 345-6, 355-6, 365

— Coningsby; or, The New Generation. 3 vols. London: Colburn, 1844.

referred to: 20, 57

— Speech on the State of Ireland (16 Feb., 1844; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 72, cols. 1007-17.

referred to: 247-8

— Speech on the Customs and Inland Revenue Bill (8 May, 1862; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 166, cols. 1403-28.

quoted: 220

220.27 “bloated armaments”] Commerce, economy, and peace constitute the
natural and normal policy of England, and I say this is an opportunity
for the noble Lord possessing the confidence of this House, and armed
with the resources of this country, to appeal to one who still in
official parlance is our ally, and who might, under the noble Lord’s
influence, still become our friend—it is, I say, in the noble Lord’s
power to come to some really cordial understanding, sensible as well as
cordial, between this country and France—the only two nations at present
forming the councils of Europe, and to put an end to these bloated
armaments which only involve States in financial embarrassment. (cols.
1425-6)

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (27 Apr., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 183, cols. 74-113.

referred to: 93

— Speech on the Redistribution of Seats Bill (14 May, 1866; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 183, cols. 874-901.

referred to: 76

Edition: current; Page: [635]
— Speech on the Outbreak in Jamaica (19 July, 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 184, cols. 1066-9.

referred to: 108, 110, 113

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (6 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 15-19.

referred to: 146, 150

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (6 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 43-5.

referred to: 147

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (17 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 720-6.

quoted: 170

referred to: 150, 168, 170-1

170.34 “blundering hands,”] I have no doubt there are individuals who,
having long tried with what I may call blundering hands to settle this
question, may be exceedingly annoyed that those who have been their
rivals in the enterprize have been more successful. (col. 726)

— Answer to Question on Business of the House (23 May, 1867; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 941-2.

referred to: 169

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (27 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 1135-42.

referred to: 175

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (30 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, col. 1362.

referred to: 187

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (31 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 1416-22.

referred to: 210

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (24 June, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 466-9.

referred to: 197-8

— Speech on the State of Ireland (26 July, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 189, cols. 201-9.

referred to: 247-8

— Speech on the Parks Regulation Bill (29 July, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 189, cols. 396-8.

referred to: 237, 238

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (8 Aug., 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 1108-13.

referred to: 232

— Speech at the Corn Exchange, Edinburgh (29 Oct., 1867), The Times, 30
Oct., 1867, 5.

referred to: 345, 356

— Motion on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (13 Feb., 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 190, cols. 693-702.

referred to: 265

— Reply to Question on Public Business (20 July, 1868; Commons), The
Times, 21 July, 1868, 7.

note: not in PD.

referred to: 316, 327

Edition: current; Page: [636]
— Vindication of the English Constitution, in a Letter to a Noble and
Learned Lord. London: Saunders and Otley, 1835.

referred to: 10

Dodson, John George (1825-97; WWBMP). Statement on Motion on the
Established Church, Ireland (7 May, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
191, col. 1924.

referred to: 277

— Statement on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (14 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1168, 1169.

referred to: 308, 309

Donaldson.

note: hanged without trial in Jamaica.

referred to: 94

Drew, George Henry (1817-1906).

note: see Cambridge Alumni; vestry clerk, Bermondsey.

questioned: 504-5

Dufferin, Lord. See Frederick Blackwood.

Duffy, Charles Gavan (1816-1903; DNB).

note: the reference is inferred.

referred to: 10

Dupoty, Michel Auguste (1797-1864; DBF). Referred to: 570

Dyott, Richard (1808-91; WWBMP). Speech on the Representation of the
People Bill (25 June, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, col. 532.

referred to: 200

East London Observer. Referred to: 492

Edward VII (of England) (1841-1910; DNB). Referred to: 346

Edwardes, Judy (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Elton, Charles Isaac (1839-1900; MEB). A Treatise on Commons and Waste
Lands, with Special Reference to the Law of Improvement. London: Wildy,
1868 [1867].

referred to: 427

Emerson, Ralph Waldo (1803-82; DAB). Referred to: 33

Emmett, Robert (1778-1803; DNB). Referred to: 166, 189

Eyre, Edward John (1815-1901; DNB). Referred to: 91, 95, 109, 110n,
113n, 118, 343

— “Despatch to the Rt. Hon. Edward Cardwell, M.P.” (20 Oct., 1865), PP,
1866, LI, 151-60.

referred to: 118

Farr, William (1807-83; DNB). Questioned: 459-67

Fawcett, Henry (1833-84; DNB). Referred to: 65, 350-5 passim, 427

— Speech on Agricultural Women and Children (2 Apr., 1867; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 186, cols. 1011-14.

referred to: 352

— Motion on the Tests Abolition (Oxford) Bill (10 Apr., 1867; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 186, cols. 1431-2.

referred to: 352

Edition: current; Page: [637]
— Motion on the Agricultural Children’s Education Bill (14 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 559-61.

referred to: 352

— Speech on the Oxford and Cambridge Universities Education Bill (5
June, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 1630-2.

referred to: 352

— Motion on Ireland—Trinity College Dublin (18 June, 1867; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 55-8.

referred to: 352

— Motion on University Education in Ireland (10 July, 1868; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1054-8.

referred to: 352

— Motion on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (18 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1443-4.

referred to: 313-14, 316, 326, 327, 328, 333, 343, 352, 354

— Motion on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (24 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 1716.

referred to: 327-8

— Motion for a Select Committee on the Inclosure Act (20 Apr., 1869;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 195, cols. 1286-7.

referred to: 427

— “What Can Be Done for the Agricultural Labourers?” Macmillan’s
Magazine, XVIII (Oct. 1868), 515-25.

referred to: 352

Fergusson, James (1832-1907; DNB). Speech on the Representation of the
People Bill, Scotland (8 June, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192,
col. 1252.

referred to: 283

Field, Spencer.

note: Captain in the 2nd Battalion of the 6th Regiment of Foot (Royal
1st Warwickshire); Lieutenant-Colonel 1886-88.

referred to: 94

Fieschi, Giuseppe Marco (1790-1836; EB). Referred to: 571

Fitzgerald, Edward (Lord) (1763-98; DNB). Referred to: 166, 189

Fitzgerald, Thomas. See Thomas Judkin-Fitzgerald.

Fleming, Edward (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Floyer, John (1811-87; WWBMP). Speech on the Election Petitions and
Corrupt Practices at Elections Bill (24 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1723-4.

referred to: 328

Ford, Henry.

note: authorized by Adcock to flog men and women without trial.

referred to: 94

Forster, Charles (1815-91; WWBMP). Statement on Ireland—Petition on
Fenianism (14 June, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols.
1893-4.

referred to: 188

Edition: current; Page: [638]
Forster, William Edward (1818-86; DNB). Referred to: 392

— Speech on Ireland—Petition on Fenianism (14 June, 1867; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 1891-2.

referred to: 189

— Speech on the Alabama Claims (6 Mar., 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 190, cols. 1178-83.

referred to: 245, 245-6

— Question on Public Business (20 July, 1868; Commons), The Times, 21
July, 1868, 7.

note: not in PD.

referred to: 316, 327

— Speech on the Elementary Education Bill (14 Mar., 1870; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 199, cols. 1939-51.

referred to: 383, 384

— Answer to Question Regarding Women on Educational Boards (16 June,
1870; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 202, col. 259.

referred to: 401

Fouquier-Tinville, Antoine Quentin (1747-95; DBF). Referred to: 109, 110

Francis, Mary Ann (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Franklin, Benjamin (1705-90; DAB). Letter to Benjamin Webb (22 Apr.,
1784). In The Private Correspondence of Benjamin Franklin. London:
Colburn, 1817, 54.

quoted: 73

73.8-12 “I only lend you this; if you are ever able, I expect you to
repay it; but not to me: repay it to some other necessitous person, and
do it under the same stipulation, that so the stream of benefits may
still flow on, as long and as far as human honesty can keep it
flowing.”] I send you herewith a bill for ten Louis d’ors. I do not
pretend to give such a sum; I only lend it to you. When you shall return
to your country with a good character, you cannot fail of getting into
some business that will in time enable you to pay all your debts: in
that case, when you meet with another honest man in similar distress,
you must pay me by lending this sum to him; enjoining him to discharge
the debt by a like operation when he shall be able, and shall meet with
such another opportunity. I hope it may thus go through many hands
before it meets with a knave that will stop its progress. (54)

Fraser, James (1818-85; DNB). Referred to: 392, 397, 400

Fraser, William Augustus (1826-98; DNB). London Self-Governed. London:
Harvey, 1866.

referred to: 491

— “On the Suggestions Afforded by the Application of the Cumulative
Vote, and by the Other Incidents of the School Board Elections, for
Improvement in the Constitution of Municipal and Local Governing
Bodies,” Sessional Proceedings of the National Association for the
Promotion of Social Science, IV (1870-71), 228-9.

referred to: 410

Freeman, Robert.

note: member of vestry of Kensington.

questioned: 493-4

Fry, Thomas Henry.

note: chairman of Holborn Valley Improvement Committee.

questioned: 443

Fulford, Henry.

note: an alleged poacher.

referred to: 199, 200, 212

Edition: current; Page: [639]
Fuller, John.

note: member of vestry in Islington.

questioned: 521-2

Fyfe, Alexander Gordon.

note: a magistrate in Jamaica.

referred to: 94

Galway, Viscount. See George Monckton-Arundell.

Garrett, Elizabeth. See Elizabeth Anderson.

Garrison, William Lloyd (1805-79; DAB). Referred to: 201-3

Gathorne-Hardy, Gathorne (Earl of Cranbrook) (1814-1906; DNB). Referred
to: 134, 136, 137, 140, 141, 142, 143, 200, 333

— Speech on the Metropolitan Poor Bill (8 Mar., 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 185, cols. 1610-11.

referred to: 139, 142

— Speech on the Metropolitan Poor Bill (11 Mar., 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 185, cols. 1679-80.

referred to: 140

— Speech on the Metropolitan Poor Bill (11 Mar., 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 185, cols. 1685-6.

referred to: 141

— Speech on the Metropolitan Poor Bill (14 Mar., 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 185, cols. 1864-5.

referred to: 143

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (27 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 1184-5.

referred to: 176

— Speech on the Uniformity Act Amendment Bill (29 May, 1867; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 1272-5.

quoted: 192

192.23 “miserable philosophers”] That which had been bestowed from the
deep feeling of religion in the human heart was seized on for their own
purposes by these miserable philosophers, who appear to him never to
give anything out of their own pockets for the furtherance of their
views. (col. 1275)

— Speech on Martial Law—Charge of the Lord Chief Justice (2 July, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 908-12.

referred to: 203-4, 205

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (4 July, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1025-6.

referred to: 205-6

— Speech on the Case of Fulford and Wellstead (5 July, 1867; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1153-7.

referred to: 212

— Statement on Imprisonment for Costs on a Dismissed Charge (21 July,
1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 1554.

referred to: 314-15

Geoghan, Letitia (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Edition: current; Page: [640]
Gibson, Thomas Milner (1806-84; DNB). Speech on Registration of
Publications (12 June; 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols.
1512-14.

referred to: 287

Gilpin, Charles (1815-74; WWBMP). Referred to: 171, 272

— Motion on the Capital Punishment within Prisons Bill (21 Apr., 1868;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 191, cols. 1033-41.

referred to: 266, 268, 269, 271, 272

Gladding, Robert.

note: bookseller resident in Whitechapel.

questioned: 489-90

referred to: 493

Gladstone, William Ewart (1809-98; DNB). Referred to: 42, 56, 57-8, 71,
89, 97, 98, 170, 171, 323, 336, 338, 345, 346, 349, 354, 355, 356,
360-1, 363, 363-7, 368, 369

— Speech on the Borough Franchise Bill (11 May, 1864; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 175, cols. 312-27.

referred to: 58, 152, 356, 360, 365

— Speech on the Church Establishment (Ireland) (28 Mar., 1865; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 178, cols. 420-34.

referred to: 360, 366

— Speech at Chester (1 June, 1865), The Times, 2 June, 1865, 5.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 22

— Speech on the Habeas Corpus Suspension Bill, Ireland (17 Feb., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 181, cols. 716-24.

referred to: 75

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (12 Apr., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, cols. 1124-49.

referred to: 56

— Speech on Foreign Policy (20 July, 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
184, cols. 1241-52.

referred to: 98

— Motion on the Representation of the People Bill (11 Apr., 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 186, cols. 1509-25.

referred to: 145

— Speech on the Established Church (Ireland) (7 May, 1867; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 121-31.

referred to: 360, 366

— Speech on the Irish Church Establishment (23 Mar., 1868; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 191, cols. 32-3.

referred to: 356, 366

— Speech on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (18 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1447-8.

referred to: 354

— Speech on the Elementary Education Bill (18 Mar., 1870; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 200, cols. 292-303.

referred to: 382, 384

— Speech on Real Estate Intestacy (16 Feb., 1871; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 204, col. 322.

referred to: 418

Edition: current; Page: [641]
Godwin, William (1756-1836; DNB). Things as They Are; or, The Adventures
of Caleb Williams (1794). 4th ed. 3 vols. London: Simpkin and Marshall,
1816.

note: in SC; the quotations are indirect.

quoted: 34

Goldney, Gabriel (1813-1900; WWBMP). Speech on the Representation of the
People Bill (4 July, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, col. 1024.

referred to: 205

Goldsmid, Francis Henry (1808-78; DNB). Motion on the Extradition
Treaties Act Amendment Bill (6 Aug., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
184, cols. 2108-12.

referred to: 119

Goldsmith, Oliver (1728-74; DNB). Retaliation: A Poem. Including
Epitaphs on the Most Distinguished Wits of This Metropolis. London:
Kearsly, 1774.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 73

Gordon, Edward Strathearn (1814-79; WWBMP). Speech on the Representation
of the People, Scotland (8 June, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192,
col. 1241.

referred to: 282

Gordon, George William (1818-65).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95, 118

Goschen, George Joachim (Viscount) (1831-1907; DNB). Speech on the
Representation of the People Bill, and the Redistribution of Seats Bill
(31 May, 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 183, cols. 1560-72.

referred to: 86

Gouger, Robert (1802-46).

note: a leading force behind the establishment of South Australia in
1836; see also Wakefield, A Letter from Sydney.

referred to: 16

Graham, William (1817-85; WWBMP). Motion on the Representation of the
People Bill (Scotland) (28 May, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192,
cols. 956-9.

referred to: 281

Grant, John Peter (1807-93; DNB). Referred to: 234

Grant, William (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Grant Duff, Mountstuart Elphinstone (1829-1906; DNB). Speech on the
Representation of the People Bill (30 May, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 187, cols. 1361-2.

referred to: 186

Gray, William (d. 1865).

note: shot in Jamaica by Dr. Morris, q.v.

referred to: 94

Gregory, William Henry (1817-92; DNB). Speech on International Maritime
Law (2 Mar., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 181, cols. 1407-20.

referred to: 224

Grey, George (1799-1882; DNB). Statement on the Inclosure of Hainault
Forest (25 Apr., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, col. 2012.

referred to: 74

Edition: current; Page: [642]
Griffith, Richard John (1784-1878; DNB). “Return of the Probable Extent
of Waste Lands in Each County in Ireland.” In “Report from H.M.
Commissioners of Inquiry into the State of the Law and Practice in
Respect to the Occupation of Land in Ireland,” PP, 1845, XIX, 48-52.

referred to: 253

Grosvenor, Hugh Lupus (Marquis, later Duke of Westminster; called Earl
Grosvenor) (1825-99; DNB). Referred to: 145

— Motion on the Representation of the People Bill (12 Apr., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, cols. 1152-63.

referred to: 56, 57, 59, 60

Grosvenor, Robert Wellesley (1834-1918; WWBMP). Referred to: 40, 54, 90,
320, 324, 325, 329, 340, 344, 347

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (12 Mar., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, cols. 87-90.

referred to: 54-5

Gurney, Russell (1804-78; DNB). Referred to: 284-5

— Speech on the Disturbances in Jamaica (31 July, 1866; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 1833-6.

referred to: 118

Hall, Benjamin (Baron Llanover) (1802-67; DNB). Referred to: 444, 461,
531

Hall, Dick (d. 1865).

note: hanged in Jamaica by Adcock, q.v.

referred to: 94

Hall, Thomas James (1788-1876; MEB). Referred to: 116

Halliday, Frederick James (1806-91; DNB). Referred to: 234

Hammond, Edmund (Lord) (1802-90; DNB). Questioned: 542-8, 561-3

Hare, Thomas (1806-91; DNB).

questioned: 477-85

referred to: 181, 186, 409-11 passim

— Evidence Given before the Select Committee on Metropolitan Local
Government, PP, 1866, XIII, 378-91.

referred to: 422

— “Ideal of a Local Government for the Metropolis,” MacMillan’s
Magazine, VII (Apr. 1863), 441-7.

referred to: 477-8, 483-4

— “Corrupt and Perniscious Influences at Elections,” Morning Star, 11
Apr., 1865, 3.

referred to: 12-13, 477-8

— “On the Suggestions Afforded by the Application of the Cumulative
Vote, and by the Other Incidents of the School Board Elections, for
Improvement in the Constitution of Municipal and Local Governing
Bodies,” Sessional Proceedings of the National Association for the
Promotion of Social Science, IV (1870-71), 215-26.

referred to: 409-11 passim

— A Treatise on the Election of Representatives, Parliamentary and
Municipal. London: Longman, et al., 1859.

note: the 3rd ed., 1865, inscribed “From the Author,” is in SC.

referred to: 37, 181, 207-8, 239-42

— Usque ad coelum: Thoughts on the Dwellings of the People, Charitable
Estates, Improvements and Local Government in the Metropolis. London:
Low, 1862.

referred to: 477

Edition: current; Page: [643]
Harrison, Frederic (1831-1923; DNB). Referred to: 134

Hay, William Montagu (1826-1911; WWBMP). Speech on the Government of
India Act Amendment Bill (22 June, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
192, cols. 1870-6.

referred to: 296-7

Heilbronn, Alexander.

note: extradited from United States on a charge of forgery; tried and
acquitted.

referred to: 563

Henley, Joseph Warner (1793-1884; DNB). Speech on the Representation of
the People Bill (27 June, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols.
634-5.

referred to: 194, 196

— Motion on the Representation of the People Bill (4 July, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1023-4.

referred to: 205

— Speech on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (13 Feb., 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 190, cols. 714-15.

referred to: 302

— Speech on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (24 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1727-8.

referred to: 327

Henry, Thomas (1807-76; DNB).

questioned: 548-58

referred to: 560, 561, 562

Heslop, Alexander (1817-79; MEB).

note: PD spells his name Hislop.

referred to: 94

Hibbert, John Tomlinson (1824-1908; DNB). Speech on the Representation
of the People Bill (9 May, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols.
267-73.

referred to: 146

Hickson, William Edward (1803-70; DNB). Questioned: 538-40

— “Hand-Loom Weavers. Copy of Report by Mr. Hickson, on the Condition of
the Hand-Loom Weavers (11 Aug., 1840), PP, 1840, XXIV, 659-717.

referred to: 539

Hieron I (of Syracuse) (Tyrant: 478-467/6 bc; WWG).

note: JSM calls him Hiero.

referred to: 229

Hill, Frederic (1803-96; MEB). Referred to: 411

Hill, William (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 94

Hinxman, Edward (b. 1810).

note: a magistrate.

referred to: 199, 200, 212-13

Hoare, Henry (1807-66; MEB). Referred to: 486

Hodgkinson, Grosvenor (1818-81; WWBMP). Motion on the Representation of
the People Bill (17 May, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols.
708-12.

referred to: 150, 151, 168, 170, 175

Hogg, James Macnaughten McGarel (1823-90; DNB). Speech on the Municipal
Corporations (Metropolis) Bill (17 June, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 192, cols. 1738-9.

referred to: 30

Edition: current; Page: [644]
Holdsworth, Joseph. On the Extension of the English Coal-fields beneath
the Secondary Formations of the Midland Counties. Also, Does Coal Exist
near London? Geologically Considered. London: Middleton, 1866.

referred to: 71

Hole, Lewis Blyth (1836-91).

note: a soldier who helped quell the Jamaica Rebellion.

referred to: 94

Holland, Henry Thurston (Viscount Knutsford) (1825-1914; DNB).
Questioned: 558-61, 571

Hope, Alexander Beresford. See Alexander Beresford-Hope.

Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) (65-8 bc; WWR). Epistles. In Satires,
Epistles, Ars poetica (Latin and English). Trans. H. Rushton Fairclough.
London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1929, 248-440.

quoted: 67

67.10 habes . . . ureris] “nec furtum feci nec fugi,” si mihi dicat /
servus, “habes . . . ureris,” aio (354; I, xvi, 46-7)

Horsman, Edward (1807-76; DNB). Referred to: 56

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (12 Mar., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, cols. 90-114.

referred to: 56

— Speech on the State of Ireland (12 Mar., 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 190, cols. 1466-77.

referred to: 258

Horton, George.

note: a clerk in the General Register Office.

questioned: 467-71

referred to: 462

— The Municipal Government of the Metropolis. By a Londoner. London:
Hardwicke, 1865.

referred to: 460-2, 467-9

Hotham, Beaumont (1794-1870; WWBMP). Speech on the Representation of the
People Bill (27 June, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, col. 632.

referred to: 196

Howard, Henry FitzAlan- (Duke of Norfolk) (1847-1917; DNB). Referred to:
438-9

Howell, Thomas Bayly (1768-1815; DNB), and Thomas Jones Howell (d. 1858;
DNB), comps. A Complete Collection of State Trials and Proceedings for
High Treason. 34 vols. London: Longman, et al., 1809-28.

quoted: 111

111.15-16 In summing-up, Justice Chamberlain, with whom Lord Yelverton
agreed, said:—“The jury] His lordship said, that the jury (XXVII, col.
765)

111.19 They expected] No; it expected (XXVII, col. 765)

111.22 now] then (XXVII, col. 765)

111.23 and existing] and the existing (XXVII, col. 765)

111.25 provides] proved (XXVII, col. 765)

Hubbard, John Gellibrand (1805-89; DNB). “Draft Report Proposed by the
Chairman” and “Memorandum Submitted by the Chairman,” Appendix 1 to the
“Report from the Select Committee on Income and Property Tax,” PP, 1861,
VII, 303-18.

referred to: 43

Edition: current; Page: [645]
Hume, Joseph (1777-1855; DNB). Referred to: 220

— Speech on Spain—Report on the Address (5 Feb., 1836; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 31, cols. 126-9.

referred to: 220

Hunt, George Ward (1825-77; DNB). Speech on Supply—Post Office Service
Estimates (7 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 834.

referred to: 304-5

Huskisson, William (1770-1830; DNB). Referred to: 97

Hyde, Edward (1609-74; DNB) (Earl of Clarendon). The Life of Edward,
Earl of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor of England, and Chancellor of
the University of Oxford. 2 vols. in 1. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1759.

referred to: 362

Iliff, William Tiffin.

note: medical officer of health to Newington vestry.

questioned: 499-500

Im-Thurn, Eduard (1813-77). Der Kanton Schaffhausen. Vol. XII of
Historisch-geographisch-statistisches Gemälde der Schweiz. 18 vols. St.
Gallen and Berne: Huber, 1834-46.

note: see Dictionnaire historique et biographique de la Suisse. The
quotation is taken from JSM’s Principles of Political Economy, q.v.

quoted: 259

259.27 “superhuman”] [translated from:] [paragraph] Ausser dem fast
übermenschlichen Fleisse der Landbauer war bis zu Ende des vorigen
Jahrhunderts an den ganzen Landwirthschaft nichts zu rühmen. (53)

The Irishman: “George Francis Train’s Levees,” 18 July, 1868, 37.

referred to: 315

James, Edward (1807-67; DNB).

note: see also The Times, 16 Jan., 1866.

referred to: 111

Jebb, William Francis (1828-90; MEB). Questioned: 499

Jeffreys, Julius (1801-77; DNB). Referred to: 466

Jervis, John (1802-56; DNB). Referred to: 333

Jesus. Referred to: 362-3

Jevons, William Stanley (1835-82; DNB). The Coal Question: An Enquiry
Concerning the Progress of the Nation, and the Probable Exhaustion of
Our Coal Mines. London and Cambridge: Macmillan, 1865.

referred to: 70-1

Joliffe, William George Hylton (1800-76; DNB). Speech on the Cattle
Diseases Bill (16 Feb., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 181, cols.
611-12.

note: JSM is mistaken in attributing the argument to “the Member for
Droitwich,” Sir John Pakington, although he did participate in the
debate; it was Joliffe (M.P. for Petersfield), however, who referred to
the “article of milk,” saying “A man who now proposed to invest capital
in a dairy farm would be regarded as mad.”

referred to: 51

Jones, J. “Our Future Coal-fields,” Intellectual Observer, VIII (Jan.
1866), 435-9.

referred to: 71

Edition: current; Page: [646]
Jones, Lloyd (1811-86; DNB). Referred to: 9

— Speech at the Meeting of the London Association for the Promotion of
Cooperation (28 Mar., 1864), The Reasoner, XXVIII (1 May, 1864), 116.

referred to: 9

Jones, Thomas Mason.

note: middle-class Irish reformer who served on the Committee of the
Reform League as well as with the Reform Union.

referred to: 174

Judkin-Fitzgerald, Thomas (d. 1810; DNB).

note: JSM refers to him as Fitzgerald.

referred to: 111

Karslake, Edward Kent (1820-92; MEB). Speech on the Married Women’s
Property Bill (10 June, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols.
1355-8.

referred to: 284, 286

Karslake, John Burgess (1821-81; DNB). Referred to: 218, 285

— Speech on Parliamentary Reform—Representation of the People Bill (20
May, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 829-33.

referred to: 162

— Speech on the Married Women’s Property Bill (10 June, 1868; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1367-70.

referred to: 285, 286

— Speech on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (14 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 1177.

referred to: 310

Kelland, Philip (1808-79; DNB). Referred to: 407, 408

Kelly, Fitzroy (1796-1880; DNB). Referred to: 124

— Resolution on the Malt Duty (17 Apr., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 182, cols. 1509-19.

referred to: 72

Kelly, Thomas J. (1833-1907).

note: an Irish-American Fenian; arrested, then freed by his fellow
Fenians, he escaped to New York.

referred to: 555

Kinnaird, Arthur Fitzgerald (1814-87; DNB). Speech on the Sunday
Lectures Bill (19 June, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols.
95-7.

quoted: 193

referred to: 192-3

193.1 “paid singers”] He himself went, and he found paid singers dressed
in evening costume, the proceedings having much more of the character of
a theatrical representation than of a scientific lecture. (96)

Kinnear, John Boyd (1828-1920; WWBMP). Speech on Proportional
Representation (29 Feb., 1868), Morning Star, 2 Mar., 1868, 2.

referred to: 239, 240, 241

Knightley, Rainald (1819-95; MEB). Speech on the Representation of the
People Bill (28 May, 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 183, cols.
1320-1.

referred to: 90

Knonau. See Meyer von Knonau.

Edition: current; Page: [647]
Knox, William Stuart (1826-1900; MEB). Question on the Riots in Hyde
Park (2 Aug., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, col. 1905.

referred to: 114

— Question on the Meeting in the Tea-Room (2 Aug., 1867; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 189, col. 769.

referred to: 219

Labouchere, Henry Du Pré (1831-1912; DNB). Motion on the Public Schools
Bill (16 June, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, col. 1654.

referred to: 290

Lafayette, Marie Joseph Gilbert du Motier, marquis de (1757-1834; GDU).
Referred to: 132

Laing, Samuel (1812-97; DNB). Speech on International Maritime Law (2
Mar., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 181, cols. 1448-55.

referred to: 224

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (13 Apr., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, cols. 1306-21.

referred to: 208

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (20 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 838-40.

referred to: 161

— Speech on the East India Revenue Accounts (12 Aug., 1867; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 1363-72.

referred to: 233

Lamirande, Sureau.

note: extradited from England September 1866.

referred to: 228, 562

Lancaster, Joseph (1778-1838; DNB).

note: the reference is to his system of education.

referred to: 362

Landran, John (d. 1865).

note: hanged by Adcock.

referred to: 94

Lankester, Edwin (1814-74; MEB). Referred to: 451, 489

Larkin, Michael (d. 1867).

note: Fenian hanged for the Manchester affair.

referred to: 555

La Tour d’Auvergne-Lauraguais, Henri Godfroi Bernard Alphonse, prince de
(1823-71; GDU). Letter to the Earl of Clarendon (14 Dec., 1865). In
“Correspondence Respecting the Extradition Treaty with France,” PP,
1866, LXXVI, 373-4.

referred to: 544

Lavergne, Louis Gabriel Léonce Guilhaud de (1809-80; GDU). Economie
rurale de la France depuis 1789 (1860). 2nd ed. Paris: Guillaumin, 1861.

referred to: 259-60

Lawrence, Henry (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Lawrence, John (d. 1865).

note: hanged by Adcock.

referred to: 94

Edition: current; Page: [648]
Layard, Austen Henry (1817-94; DNB). Speech on the Expiring Laws
Continuance Bill (6 Aug., 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols.
976-8.

referred to: 228

Layton, John.

note: vestry clerk of Islington.

questioned: 509-12

referred to: 513

Ledru Rollin, Alexandre Auguste (1807-74; GDU). Referred to: 570

Leeman, George (1809-82; WWBMP). Motion on the Election Petitions and
Corrupt Practices at Elections Bill (23 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1684-5.

referred to: 326

Lewis, George Cornewall (1806-63; DNB). Referred to: 275

Lewis, John Harvey (1814-88; WWBMP). Speech on the Artizans’ and
Labourers’ Dwellings Bill (27 Mar., 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
186, cols. 697-8.

referred to: 294

— Speech on the Municipal Corporations (Metropolis) Bill (17 June, 1868;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1737-8.

referred to: 301

— Motion on the Poor Relief Bill (27 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 193, col. 1885.

referred to: 334

Lincoln, Abraham (1809-65; DAB). Emancipation Proclamation. Washington:
n.p., 1863.

note: in effect 1 January, 1863.

referred to: 202

Livingston, Jasper Hall (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Llanover, Lord. See Benjamin Hall.

Locke, John (1632-1704; DNB). Referred to: 73

Locke, John (1805-80; WWBMP). Speech on the Metropolis Local Management
Acts Amendment Bill (26 Feb., 1862; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 165,
cols. 747-9.

referred to: 230

— Speech on the Elective Franchise Bill (30 May, 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 183, cols. 1530-3.

referred to: 84

Lopes, Lopes Massey (1818-1908; DNB). Motion on Local Charges on Real
Property (12 May, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 136-45.

referred to: 277, 279

Louis Philippe (of France) (1773-1850; GDU). Referred to: 533

Lowe, Robert (1811-92; DNB). Referred to: 56, 63, 67-8, 74, 87, 249

— Speech of Resignation (18 Apr., 1864), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 174, cols.
1203-11.

referred to: 68

— Speech on the Cattle Diseases Bill (14 Feb., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 181, cols. 483-8.

referred to: 47, 48

Edition: current; Page: [649]
— Speech on the Cattle Diseases Bill (16 Feb., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 181, cols. 618-20.

quoted: 52

referred to: 51-2

52.4-6 “Is it not absurd that because a man or any of his family is not
mad, he should object to being taxed for a lunatic asylum?”] If you
claim exemption, you might as well say that because a gentleman and his
family are free from madness, he ought not to be taxed to pay for a
lunatic asylum. (col. 620)

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (13 Mar., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, cols. 141-64.

referred to: 56, 63, 67, 87

— Speech on the Tenure and Improvement of Land Bill, Ireland (17 May,
1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 183, cols. 1077-87.

referred to: 79, 80

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill, and the
Redistribution of Seats Bill (31 May, 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
183, cols. 1625-50.

referred to: 87

— Motion on the Representation of the People Bill (4 July, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1036-42.

referred to: 207, 208, 211

— Speech on the State of Ireland (12 Mar., 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 190, cols. 1483-1503.

referred to: 247, 249, 255-6, 257, 258, 259

— Speech on the Married Women’s Property Bill (10 June, 1868; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1364-7.

referred to: 284

Lowell, James Russell (1819-91; DAB). Referred to: 33

Lowther, James (1840-1904; DNB). Motion on the Public Schools Bill (23
June, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, col. 1926.

referred to: 298

Loyd, Samuel Jones (Baron Overstone) (1796-1883; DNB). Referred to: 486

Lucas, Margaret (née Bright) (1818-90; DNB). Referred to: 388-9

Lucas, Samuel (1811-65; DNB). Referred to: 5

Luke, Henry Francis.

note: Captain in 1st West India Regiment; participated in court-martial
in Jamaica (1865). PD calls him Lake.

referred to: 94

McCafferty, John (b. 1838).

note: a Fenian from Ohio, fought for the South in the Civil War, and led
the Fenian attack on Chester Castle.

referred to: 166, 167, 171, 172-3

McCall, John (alias George McQuarry McCall).

note: put to death in Jamaica by Culler and Morris without trial.

referred to: 94

McClure, John.

note: a Fenian whose death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment.

referred to: 166, 167, 171, 172-3

Edition: current; Page: [650]
Macintosh, George (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

McKenzie, James (d. 1865).

note: hanged by Adcock.

referred to: 94

McKerrow, William (1803-78; DNB). Referred to: 5

McLaren, Agnes (1837-1913).

note: daughter of Duncan McLaren.

referred to: 408-9

McLaren, Duncan (1800-86; DNB). Referred to: 408-9

— Speech on Local Charges on Real Property (12 May, 1868; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 145-7.

referred to: 279

— Speech on Supply—Post Office (7 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 193, cols. 832-3.

referred to: 304

McLaren, Priscilla (née Bright) (1814-1906).

note: sister of John and Jacob Bright.

referred to: 388-9, 408-9

Maine, Henry James Sumner (1822-88; DNB). Village-Communities in the
East and West. Six Lectures Delivered at Oxford. London: Murray, 1871.

referred to: 427

Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (121-180 ad; WWR). Communings with Himself
[Meditations] (Greek and English). Trans. C.R. Haines. London:
Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1930.

note: a Greek and Latin ed. (Glasgow: Foulis, 1744) is in SC.

referred to: 251

Martin du Nord, Nicolas Ferdinand Marie Louis Joseph (1790-1847; GDU).
Referred to: 568

Martineau, Frances Bailey.

note: concerned with repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts.

referred to: 388-9

Martineau, Harriet (1802-76; DNB). Referred to: 388-9

Masson, David (1822-1907; DNB). Referred to: 407

May, Thomas Erskine. A Treatise on the Law, Privileges, Proceedings and
Usage of Parliament (1844). Ed. Gilbert Campion. 14th ed. London:
Butterworth, [1946].

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

referred to: 108

Mayne, Richard (1796-1868; DNB). Referred to: 114

Medical Times and Gazette: “Female Candidates at Apothecaries’ Hall,” 2
Mar., 1867, 229.

referred to: 160

Meyer von Knonau, Gerold (1804-58).

note: historian and geographer.

referred to: 259

Miles, Tommy (alias Tom Bell).

note: put to death in Jamaica by Cullen and Morris without trial.

referred to: 94

Edition: current; Page: [651]
Mill, James (1773-1836; DNB). Referred to: 15

Mill, John Stuart. “The Admission of Women to the Electoral Franchise.”

note: No. 55; the references are prospective.

referred to: 143, 145

— “The Cattle Diseases Bill [1].”

note: No. 12.

referred to: 50, 51-2

— Considerations on Representative Government. London: Longman, et al.,
1861. In CW, XIX, 371-577.

note: the People’s Ed. (London: Longman, et al., 1865) is in SC.

referred to: 30, 84, 85, 331, 492

— “The Disturbances in Jamaica [1].”

note: No. 26.

referred to: 108

— “Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [7].”

note: No. 116.

referred to: 307, 317

— “Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [10].”

note: No. 123.

referred to: 308

— England and Ireland. London: Longmans, et al., 1868. In CW, VI,
505-32.

referred to: 254-61 passim

— “A Few Words on Non-Intervention,” Fraser’s Magazine, LX (Dec. 1859),
766-76. In CW, XXI, 109-24.

referred to: 17

— Letter to James Beal (7 Mar., 1865), Daily News, 23 Mar., 1865, 1. In
CW, XVI, 1005-7.

referred to: 19

— “Local Charges on Real Property.”

note: No. 95.

referred to: 313

— “The Metropolitan Poor Bill [2].”

note: No. 47.

referred to: 139

— “The Municipal Corporations Bill.”

note: No. 56.

referred to: 230

— “Personal Representation.”

note: No. 60.

referred to: 207

— Principles of Political Economy, with Some of Their Applications to
Social Philosophy. 2 vols. London: Parker, 1848. In CW, II-III.

note: the quotations at 81, 418, and 425 are indirect; that at 259 is a
translation of words of Edward Im-Thurn, q.v.

quoted: 30, 81, 259, 418, 425

referred to: 36, 259

30.26 “ ‘The] This (II, 109)

259.27 “superhuman”] [paragraph] The reader new to the subject must have
been struck with the powerful impression made upon all the witnesses to
whom I have referred, by what a Swiss statistical writer calls the
“almost superhuman industry” of peasant proprietors.* [footnote omitted]
(CW, II, 278)

Edition: current; Page: [652]
— Programme of the Land Tenure Reform Association, with an Explanatory
Statement by John Stuart Mill. London: Longmans, et al., 1871. In CW, V,
687-95.

referred to: 416-31 passim

— “Reform of Parliament.”

note: No. 58.

referred to: 59

— “Reorganization of the Reform Party,” London and Westminster Review,
XXXII (Apr. 1839), 475-508. In CW, VI, 465-95.

referred to: 29

— “Representation of the People [2].”

note: No. 16.

referred to: 69, 70

— Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform. London: Parker, 1859. In CW, XIX,
311-39.

referred to: 35, 84

— “The Westminster Election of 1865 [2].”

note: No. 6.

referred to: 28

Milton, John (1608-74; DNB). Referred to: 73

Mitchel, John (1815-75; DNB). The History of Ireland, from the Treaty of
Limerick to the Present Time; Being a Continuation of the History of the
Abbé Macgeoghegan. New York: Sadlier, 1868.

referred to: 249

Mitchell, Alexander (1831-73; MEB). Motion on the Election Petitions and
Corrupt Practices at Elections Bill (26 Mar., 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 191, cols. 296-8.

referred to: 262

Mitchell, Charles (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica by Lieutenant Adcock.

referred to: 94

Mitchell, Henry Sadler.

note: vestry clerk of Whitechapel.

questioned: 491-3

Monckton-Arundell, George Edward Arundell (Viscount Galway) (1805-76;
WWBMP). Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (20 May, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 841-2.

referred to: 161

Montagu, Robert (Lord) (1825-1902; DNB). Referred to: 206, 332

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (13 Apr., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, cols. 1282-93.

referred to: 208

— Speech on the Elective Franchise Bill (30 May, 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 183, cols. 1488-93.

referred to: 84

— Speech on Supply—Civil Service Estimates (29 July, 1867; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 353-61.

referred to: 217-18

Moody, Charles.

note: a confessed poacher.

referred to: 199, 212

Edition: current; Page: [653]
Morris, Henry (b. 1837).

note: staff assistant surgeon to 1st West India Regiment.

referred to: 94, 218

Morrison, Walter (1836-1921; WWBMP). Speech on Proportional
Representation (29 Feb., 1868), Morning Star, 2 Mar., 1868, 2.

referred to: 242

Motley, John Lothrop (1814-77; EB). Referred to: 33

Mouravief, Mikhail Nikolaevich (1796-1866).

note: Russian general; his name now transliterated as Murav’ev.

referred to: 173

Mullens, Richard.

note: solicitor to the Association of Bankers.

questioned: 563

Müller, Franz (1840-64).

note: a German tailor living in London; tried and convicted for murder.

referred to: 556

Mullins, John (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 94

Mundella, Anthony John (1825-97; DNB). Speech on the Elementary
Education Bill (18 Mar., 1870; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 200, cols.
236-44.

referred to: 383

Napoleon I (1768-1821; GDU). Referred to: 225

— Décret impérial, en notre palais royal de Milan, le 17 décembre, 1807,
Gazette Nationale, ou Le Moniteur Universel, 25 Dec., 1807, 1387.

referred to: 225

Napoleon III (of France) (1808-73; GDU). Referred to: 117, 216, 546,
551, 568

Narvaez, Ramon Maria (1800-68; EB). Referred to: 173

Nasse, Erwin (1829-90). On the Agricultural Community of the Middle
Ages, and Inclosures of the Sixteenth Century in England (in German,
1869). Trans. H.A. Ouvry. London: Macmillan, 1871.

referred to: 427

Naville, Jules Ernest (1816-1909; GE). Referred to: 186

Neate, Charles (1806-79; DNB). Motion on the Malt Duty—Resolution (17
Apr., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, cols. 1521-4.

referred to: 70

— Speech on the Meetings in Royal Parks Bill (22 July, 1867; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1882-4.

referred to: 215

— Speech on the Expiring Laws Continuance Bill (6 Aug., 1867; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 978-80.

referred to: 228

— Motion on the State of Ireland (10 Mar., 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 190, cols. 1314-23.

referred to: 248, 261

— Speech on the Capital Punishment within Prisons Bill (21 Apr., 1868;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 191, cols. 1046-7.

referred to: 272

Edition: current; Page: [654]
Nelson, Alexander Abercromby (1816-93; DNB). Referred to: 94-5

“Nevin, Mr.”

note: a fictitious character, invented by George Francis Train, q.v.

referred to: 315

Newdegate, Charles Newdigate (1816-87; DNB). Speech on the Established
Church, Ireland (7 May, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 191, col.
1928.

referred to: 277

Newton, Isaac (1642-1727; DNB). Referred to: 73

Nightingale, Florence (1820-1910; DNB). Referred to: 388-9

Norfolk, Duke of. See Henry FitzAlan-Howard.

Northcote, Stafford Henry (Earl of Iddesleigh) (1818-87; DNB).

note: see also, under PP, “Report on the Organisation of the Permanent
Civil Service,” 1854.

referred to: 35, 88, 233, 300

— Motion on the Representation of the People Bill (14 June, 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, col. 449.

referred to: 88

— Speech on the Elective Franchise Bill (30 May, 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 183, cols. 1533-42.

referred to: 84

— Speech on the East India Revenue Accounts (12 Aug., 1867; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 1357-63.

referred to: 233

— Motion on the Municipal Corporations (Metropolis) Bill (17 June, 1868;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, col. 1740.

referred to: 300-1

Northumberland, Duke of. See George Percy.

Nugent, Fulke Southwell Greville (1821-83; WWBMP). Speech on the Tenure
and Improvement of Land Bill, Ireland (30 Apr., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 183, cols. 225-6.

referred to: 82

O’Brien, Michael (d. 1867).

note: an Irish-American Fenian hanged for his part in the Manchester
rescue.

referred to: 555

O’Connor, Luke Smythe (1806-73; DNB). Referred to: 94

Odger, George (1820-77; DNB). Referred to: 335, 343

O’Donoghue, Daniel (d. 1889; WWBMP). Speech on the Representation of the
People Bill (27 Apr., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 183, cols.
34-42.

referred to: 82-3

Osborne, Ralph Bernal (1811-82; WWBMP). Speech on the Representation of
the People Bill, Scotland (28 May, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
192, col. 964.

referred to: 281

Overstone, Lord. See Samuel Loyd.

Oxley, Charles Lysten.

note: naval officer, Lieutenant of the “Wolverine.”

referred to: 94

Paget, Clarence Edward (1811-95; WWBMP). Speech on Supply—Navy Estimates
(1 Mar., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 181, col. 1366.

referred to: 120

Edition: current; Page: [655]
Pakington, John Somerset (1799-1880; DNB).

note: the reference at 51 is mistaken; see William Joliffe.

referred to: 35, 51, 84, 85, 284

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (31 May, 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 183, cols. 1572-90.

referred to: 84, 85

Palfrey, John Gorham (1796-1881; EB). Referred to: 33

Palmerston, Lord. See Henry John Temple.

Parker, Theodore (1810-60; EB). Referred to: 33

Parry, Clive, ed. The Consolidated Treaty Series. 231 vols. Dobbs Ferry,
N.Y.: Oceana Publications, 1969.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference to miscellaneous treaties.

referred to: 371, 543, 545, 551, 552, 553, 555, 557

Patterson, Henry (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 94

Payne, Richard (1810-90).

note: Vicar of Downton.

referred to: 199, 200

Pears, Edwin (1835-1919; DNB). “The Elementary Education Bill,”
Sessional Proceedings of the National Association for the Promotion of
Social Science, III (7 Apr., 1870), 345-6.

referred to: 393

Peel, Lawrence (1799-1884; DNB). Referred to: 284

Peel, Robert (1788-1850; DNB). Referred to: 97, 345

Percy, George (Duke of Northumberland) (1778-1867; BP). Referred to:
438-9

Perry, Thomas Erskine (1806-82; DNB). Speech on the Married Women’s
Property Bill (14 May, 1857; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 145, cols.
266-74.

referred to: 284

Phillips, Alexander.

note: flogged without trial in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Picard, Adolph.

note: a French clerk of Guibillier, France, assignee in the bankruptcy
of Victor Widermann.

referred to: 548

Pilgrim, George.

note: a gamekeeper.

referred to: 199, 200, 212

Pilkington, James (1804-90; MEB). Referred to: 272

Plato (427-347 bc; WWG). Apology. In Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phaedo,
Phaedrus (Greek and English). Trans. H.N. Fowler. London: Heinemann;
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1914, 60-145.

referred to: 76

— Protagoras. In Laches, Protagoras, Meno, Euthydemus (Greek and
English). Trans. W.R.M. Lamb. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1914, 92-256.

referred to: 76

— Republic (Greek and English). Trans. Paul Shorey. 2 vols. London:
Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1946.

referred to: 34

Edition: current; Page: [656]
Pliny (the Elder) (ca. 23-79 ad; WWR). Natural History (Latin and
English). Trans. H. Rackham, et al., 10 vols. London: Heinemann;
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1938-52.

quoted: 160, 269

160.1 instar omnium] hi mercantes id a conterminis vehunt per maria
vasta ratibus quas neque gubernacula regant neque remi impellant vel
trahant vela, non ratio ulla adiuvet: omnium instar ibi sunt homo tantum
et audacia. (IV, 62-4; XII, xli, 87)

269.30-1 brutum fulmen] sed haec omnia esse fortuita; hinc bruta fulmina
et vana, ut quae nulla veniant ratione naturae, his percuti montes, his
maria, omnesque alios inritos iactus; illa vero fatidica ex alto,
statisque de causis et ex suis venire sideribus. (I, 254; II, xliii,
113)

Potter, Thomas Bayley (1817-98; MEB). Referred to: 128

Powell, Francis Sharp (1827-1911; WWBMP). Speech on the Representation
of the People Bill (17 May, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187,
cols. 730-2.

referred to: 150

Programme of the Land Tenure Reform Association. See under John Stuart
Mill.

Pulling, Alexander (1813-95; DNB). Referred to: 300

Read, Clare Sewell (1826-1905; DNB). Speech on the Election Petitions
and Corrupt Practices at Elections Bill (24 July, 1868; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 1729.

referred to: 327

Rendle, William (1811-93; DNB). Questioned: 540-2

— Fever in London: Its Social and Sanitary Lessons. London: Metropolitan
Sanitary Association, 1866.

referred to: 540, 541-2

— London Vestries, and Their Sanitary Work: Are They Willing and Able to
Do It? London: Churchill, 1865.

referred to: 540, 541

Robespierre, Maximilien François Marie Isidore de (1758-94; GDU).
Referred to: 109-10

Roebuck, John Arthur (1801-79; DNB). Referred to: 16

— Speech on the Habeas Corpus Suspension Bill, Ireland (17 Feb., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 181, cols. 695-8.

referred to: 54

Rolt, John (1804-71; DNB). Speech on the Representation of the People
Bill (17 May, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 735-6.

referred to: 150

Rose, James Anderson (1819-90; MEB). Referred to: 343

Rose, Philip (1816-83; MEB).

note: mistakenly referred to in No. 134, where James Anderson Rose
(q.v.) is intended.

referred to: 264, 307

— “Evidence.” In “Report from the Select Committee of the House of
Lords, Appointed to Inquire What Would Be the Probable Increase of the
Number of Electors in the Counties and Boroughs of England and Wales
from a Reduction of the Franchise,” Sessional Papers of the House of
Lords, 1860, I, 115-40.

quoted: 264

referred to: 264, 343

264.19-20 “We . . . return our municipal candidate, and we shall
therefore be] [paragraph] It is almost laid down as an axiom by local
agents who say, “We . . . return our man for the municipal council, and
we shall be (130)

Edition: current; Page: [657]
— “Evidence Taken before the Select Committee on the Corrupt Practices
Prevention Act,” PP, 1860, X, 111-33.

quoted: 307

referred to: 343

307.27 is the] is in the (112)

Roundell, Charles Saville (1827-1906; WWBMP). Referred to: 132-3

Russell, John (Lord) (1792-1878; DNB). Referred to: 57, 201

— Speech on the Address in Answer to the Queen’s Speech (20 Nov., 1837;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 39, cols. 65-73.

referred to: 57

Russell, John (Lord Amberley) (1842-76; DNB). Motion on the Sunday
Lectures Bill (19 June, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols.
89-95.

referred to: 190-1

— Motion on the Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections
Bill (17 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 1370.

referred to: 311

Salisbury, Marquis of. See Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne Cecil.

Salomons, David (1797-1873; DNB). Referred to: 367

Salter, Jonathan.

note: Chairman of Public Works Committee, St. Pancras vestry.

questioned: 494-7

Sandford, George Montagu Warren (1821-79; MEB). Speech on the Alabama
Claims (6 Mar., 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 190, cols. 1188-90.

referred to: 243, 244, 246

Savage, John (d. 1875; MEB). Questioned: 535-8

Schreiber, Charles (1826-84; WWBMP). Speech on the Election Petitions
and Corrupt Practices at Elections Bill (22 July, 1868; Commons), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols 1649-50.

referred to: 331, 343

Scott, Benjamin (1814-92; DNB). Questioned: 443-4

Scott, Walter Francis (Duke of Buccleuch) (1806-84; BP). Referred to:
438, 459

Seely, Charles (1803-87; WWBMP). Speech on Supply—Navy Estimates (1
Mar., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 181, cols. 1361-2.

referred to: 119-20

Selwyn, Charles Jasper (1813-69; DNB). Speech on the Bankruptcy Acts
Repeal Bill (4 June, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols.
1565-6.

referred to: 187

Seward, William Henry (1801-72; DAB). “Despatch to Mr. Adams” (27 Aug.,
1866). In “Correspondence Respecting British and American Claims Arising
out of the Late Civil War in the United States,” PP, 1867, LXXIV, 3-6.

referred to: 245, 246

Shakespeare, William (1564-1616; DNB). Referred to: 73

— I Henry IV. In The Riverside Shakespeare. Ed. G. Blakemore Evans.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1974, 847-85.

referred to: 89

— Julius Caesar. In The Riverside Shakespeare, 1105-34.

quoted: 251

Edition: current; Page: [658]
251.2-3 “the evil . . . them.”] The evil that men do lives after them, /
The good is oft interred with their bones; / So let it be with Caesar.
(1121; III, ii, 75-7)

— Othello. In The Riverside Shakespeare, 1198-1248.

note: the quotation at 147 is indirect.

quoted: 147, 378

378.21 “suckle] To suckle (1213; II, i, 160)

— Romeo and Juliet. In The Riverside Shakespeare, 1058-99.

referred to: 245

Shaw-Lefevre, George John (1831-1928; DNB). Motion on the Alabama Claims
(6 Mar., 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 190, cols. 1150-67.

referred to: 245

— Motion on the Married Women’s Property Bill (10 June, 1868; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1373-6.

referred to: 284

— Speech on the Sea Fisheries Bill, Ireland (25 June, 1868; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, col. 2021.

referred to: 299

Simonides (of Ceos) (ca. 557-468/7 bc; WWG). Referred to: 229

Smiles, Samuel (1812-1904; DNB). “Workmen’s Benefit Societies,”
Quarterly Review, CXVI (Oct. 1864), 318-50.

referred to: 29

Smith, Goldwin (1823-1910; DNB). Referred to: 130-3 passim

— “England and America,” Daily News, 27 Nov., 1862, 5.

referred to: 130

Smith, John Abel (1801-71; DNB). Motion on the Sale of Liquors on Sunday
Bill (27 Mar., 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 186, col. 666.

referred to: 191

Smith, William Henry (1825-91; DNB). Referred to: 15, 25, 26, 40, 41,
44, 45, 336, 339, 348, 369

Socrates (469-399 bc; WWG). Referred to: 76

Somerset, Henry Charles Fitzroy (Duke of Beaufort) (1824-99; MEB).
Referred to: 362

South, Robert (1634-1716; DNB). A Sermon Preached at the Cathedral
Church of St. Paul, Nov. 9, 1662. Oxford: Robinson, 1663.

quoted: 230

Spofforth, Markham (1825-1907).

note: a lawyer who assisted Philip Rose as Conservative parliamentary
agent 1853-59, replacing him 1859-69; in 1875 he became a Taxing Master
in Chancery.

referred to: 307, 331

Stanley, Edward George Geoffrey Smith (14th Earl of Derby) (1799-1869;
DNB). Referred to: 165-6, 167, 171-2, 173, 356, 366

— Speech on the Treaty of Paris (22 May, 1856; Lords), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 142, cols. 521-39.

referred to: 222

Stanley, Edward Henry (15th Earl of Derby) (1826-93; DNB). Referred to:
25, 35, 59, 60, 117, 121, 122, 123, 213, 214, 225, 229, 284

— Speech on the Representation of the People Bill (12 Apr., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, cols. 1163-76.

referred to: 59

Edition: current; Page: [659]
— Motion on the Extradition Treaties Act Amendment Bill (3 Aug., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 2004-8.

referred to: 117

— Speech on the Extradition Treaties Act Amendment Bill (6 Aug., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 2113-15.

referred to: 120, 122-3

— Speech on the Extradition Treaties Act Amendment Bill (6 Aug., 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, col. 2124.

referred to: 229

— Speech on Turkey and Crete (28 Mar., 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 186, cols. 718-25.

referred to: 214

— Statements on the Navy—Commodore Wiseman and the Turkish Navy (16
July, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, col. 1622.

referred to: 214

— Speech on the Expiring Laws Continuance Bill (6 Aug., 1867; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 986-9.

referred to: 229-30

— Speech on the Alabama Claims (6 Mar., 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 190, cols. 1168-78.

referred to: 244, 245-6, 246

Stephen, James Fitzjames (1829-94; DNB).

note: see also The Times, 16 Jan., 1866.

referred to: 111

Sumner, Charles (1811-74; DAB). Referred to: 33

Symmons, Edward (fl. 1648). The First Sermon [on Phil. 2:21], Entitled
“The Ecclesiasticall Selfe-seeking,” Preached . . . 1632. In Four
Sermons. London: Crooke, 1642, 1-44.

referred to: 338

Taylor, Alexander (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Taylor, Clementia (née Doughty; d. 1908).

note: wife of Peter Alfred Taylor.

referred to: 381

Taylor, Justina (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Taylor, Peter Alfred (1819-91; DNB). Motion for an Address on the Case
of Fulford and Wellstead (5 July, 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
188, cols. 1147-53.

referred to: 212

— Motion on the Poor Relief Bill (17 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser.,
Vol. 193, col. 1421.

referred to: 312

Temple, Henry John (Lord Palmerston) (1784-1865; DNB). Referred to: 89,
351, 353, 356, 359-60, 361, 365

Thesiger, Frederick (Baron Chelmsford) (1794-1878; DNB). Speech on the
Extradition Treaties Act Amendment Bill (19 July, 1866; Lords), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 184, cols. 1054-8.

referred to: 116

Edition: current; Page: [660]
Thompson, Thomas Perronet (1783-1869; DNB). Speech on India—the
Annexation of Oude (16 Feb., 1858; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 148,
cols. 1539-42.

referred to: 189

Thwaites, John (1815-70; MEB).

questioned: 437-43

referred to: 231, 537

Tibaldi.

note: an Italian worker resident in Paris, accused of attempting to
assassinate Napoleon III.

referred to: c.i.1318, 1415

The Times.

note: anonymous articles follow in chronological order.

— Leading article on the Anti-Corn-Law League, 19 Dec., 1845, 4.

referred to: 3

— “Conference at the Mechanics’ Institution on Secular Education,” 31
Oct., 1850, 5.

referred to: 3-5 passim

— Leading article on the Education Question, 4 Nov., 1850, 4.

referred to: 3

— Unheaded leader, 29 Mar., 1854, 9.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 43

— “Murderous Assault,” 18 July, 1862, 5.

referred to: 272

— “Proposed Market at Leicester Square,” 27, 28, and 30 Apr., 1863, 6,
10, 14.

referred to: 487

— “The Jamaica Committee,” 16 Jan., 1866, 3.

note: the legal opinion of James and Stephen.

quoted: 111

111.11 Fitzgerald.] Fitzgerald” (27 St. Ni., p. 65). (3)

— “Parliamentary Intelligence. House of Commons, Friday, June 8,” 9
June, 1866, 6.

referred to: 91

— “Extraordinary Case of Extradition,” 17 Sept., 1866, 10.

referred to: 228

— “Mr. Goldwin Smith on the Political History of England,” 16 Jan.,
1867, 12.

referred to: 130

— “The Distress of East London,” 21 Jan., 1867, 4.

referred to: 142

— “Mr. Goldwin Smith on Cromwell,” 22 Jan., 1867, 9.

referred to: 130

— “Mr. Goldwin Smith upon Pitt,” 29 Jan., 1867, 7.

referred to: 130

— “Mr. Goldwin Smith upon Pitt (Concluded),” 5 Feb., 1867, 6.

referred to: 130

— Announcement for 5 Feb., 6 Feb., 1867, 8.

note: taken from the London Gazette.

referred to: 136

— “The Metropolitan Poor Bill,” 7 Mar., 1867, 6.

referred to: 141

Edition: current; Page: [661]
— “The Duke of Beaufort and the West Gloucester Election,” 4 Nov., 1868,
4.

referred to: 362

— Unheaded leader on the Education Bill, 21 Mar., 1870, 8-9.

referred to: 384

Tocqueville, Charles Alexis Henri Clérel de (1805-59; GDU). De la
démocratie en Amérique. [1st pt.] 2 vols. Paris: Gosselin, 1835.

note: autographed copy in SC.

referred to: 66-7

Tone, Theobald Wolfe (1763-98; DNB). Referred to: 189

Torrens, William Torrens McCullagh (1813-94; DNB). Referred to: 274

— Speech on International Maritime Law (2 Mar., 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 181, cols. 1433-7.

referred to: 224

— Speech on the Metropolitan Poor Bill (8 Mar., 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 185, cols. 1615-16.

referred to: 138

— Motion on the Artizans’ and Labourers’ Dwellings Bill (20 Nov., 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 190, col. 103.

referred to: 294

Train, George Francis (1829-1904).

note: an American merchant working for the imprisoned Fenians.

referred to: 315

Treitt, Nestor.

note: a French lawyer in Paris, counsel to the English Embassy.

questioned: 566-71

Trevelyan, Charles Edward (1807-86; DNB).

note: see also, under PP, “Report on the Organisation of the Permanent
Civil Service,” 1854.

referred to: 88

Vance, John (d. 1875; WWBMP). Question on Ireland—Convicts Warren and
Costello (21 July, 1868; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 1556.

referred to: 315

Victoria (of England) (1819-1901; DNB). Referred to: 87, 93, 100, 172,
215, 216

Villiers, George William Frederick (Earl of Clarendon, Baron Hyde)
(1800-70; DNB). Referred to: 412

— “The Earl of Clarendon to Earl Cowley” (10 Jan., 1866). In
“Correspondence Respecting the Extradition Treaty with France,” PP,
1866, LXXVI, 375-8.

referred to: 121

— Letter to Lord Palmerston (6 Apr., 1856), Broadlands MS GC/CL/856.

referred to: 221

— Speech on the Extradition Treaties Act Amendment Bill (19 July, 1866;
Lords), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 1058-9.

referred to: 116

Virgil (Publius Virgilius Maro) (70-19 bc; WWR). Aeneid. In Virgil
(Latin and English). Trans. H. Rushton Fairclough. 2 vols. London:
Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1922, I, 240-570 (Bks. I-VI) and II,
2-364 (Bks. VII-XII).

note: in SC is Opera, ed. C.G. Heyne, 4 vols. (London: Priestley, 1821).

quoted: 270

Edition: current; Page: [662]
Wakefield, Edward Gibbon (1796-1862; DNB). A Letter from Sydney, the
Principal Town of Australasia. Edited by Robert Gouger. Together with
the Outline of a System of Colonization. London: Cross, et al., 1829.

referred to: 16

— Plan of a Company to Be Established for the Purpose of Founding a
Colony in Southern Australia, Purchasing Land Therein, and Preparing the
Land So Purchased for the Reception of Immigrants. London: Ridgway,
1831.

note: published anonymously.

referred to: 16

Walker, George (1824-88).

note: an American writer on currency and banking questions.

referred to: 372

Wallace, Robert (1831-99; DNB). Referred to: 408

Walpole, Spencer Horatio (1806-98; DNB). Referred to: 102, 119, 134,
290, 298

— Statement on the Proposed Public Meeting in Hyde Park (19 July, 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, col. 1075.

referred to: 96

— Speech on the Reform Meeting in Hyde Park (24 July, 1866; Commons),
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 1391-8.

referred to: 99

— Speech on the Proposed Reform Meeting in Hyde Park (26 July, 1866;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 1537-40.

referred to: 101, 102, 104

Walton, Richard (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 94

Ward, Mary (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 95

Warren, John (fl. 1837-69).

note: a Fenian.

referred to: 310, 315

Wason, Peter Rigby (1798-1875; MEB). Referred to: 124

Watkin, Edward William (1819-1901; DNB). Speech on the Expiring Laws
Continuance Bill (6 Aug., 1867; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols.
982-3.

referred to: 227, 228

Wellesley, Henry Richard (Earl Cowley) (1804-84; DNB). Referred to: 121

Wellstead, Mark.

note: an alleged poacher.

referred to: 199, 212

Wemyss-Charteris-Douglas, Francis (1818-1914; WWBMP). Speech on
Parliamentary Reform—Representation of the People Bill (15 July, 1867;
Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1574-81.

referred to: 213

Whalley, George Hampden (1813-78; DNB). Motion on the Church of England,
Illegal Usages and Ornaments (23 May, 1865; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
178, cols. 774-5.

referred to: 37

Whig Club, Instituted in May, 1784, by John Bellamy, to Be Composed of
Gentlemen, Who Solemnly Pledge Themselves to Support the Constitution of
This Country, According to the Principles Established at the Glorious
Revolution. London: n.p., 1786.

Edition: current; Page: [663]
note: the toast quoted is a commonplace.

quoted: 251

251.13 “pious and immortal memory”] The glorious and immortal memory of
King William the Third. (1st Standing Toast, 15)

White, James (1809-83; WWBMP). Referred to: 352

Whiteside, James (1804-76; DNB). Speech on the Elective Franchise Bill
(30 May, 1866; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 183, cols. 1502-10.

referred to: 84, 92

Wilkinson, Josiah.

note: a barrister representing St. Pancras on the Metropolitan Board of
Works 1856-64.

referred to: 505

William III (of England) (1650-1702; DNB). Referred to: 251

Wilson, James.

note: a resident of Bloomsbury; had lived in New York, New Orleans, and
Canada.

questioned: 522-9

Windham, William (1750-1810; DNB). Speech on the Defence of the Country
(22 July, 1807; Commons), PD, 1st ser., Vol. 9, cols. 882-906.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 153

Windsor, Charles.

note: teller for Mercantile Bank of New York; accused of forgery.

referred to: 549, 564

Winter, William (d. 1865).

note: put to death in Jamaica.

referred to: 94

Winterbotham, Henry Selfe Page (1837-73; DNB). Speech on the Inclosure
Law Amendment Bill (23 Feb., 1871; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 204,
cols. 823-6.

referred to: 421

Wiseman, William Saltonstall (1814-74).

note: an Admiral in the British Navy.

referred to: 213-14

Wordsworth, William (1770-1850; DNB). Referred to: 73

Wright.

note: French teacher in Clonmel.

referred to: 111

Yelverton. See Avonmore.

Zincke, Foster Barham (1817-93; DNB). “The Elementary Education Bill,”
Sessional Proceedings of the National Association for the Promotion of
Social Science, III (7 Apr., 1870), 346-7.

note: Zincke spoke in the discussion immediately before JSM.

referred to: 392

Edition: current; Page: [664]


BRITAIN


PARLIAMENTARY PAPERS

“Papers, Presented to the House of Commons, Relating to the
Correspondence with America, on Certain Orders in Council” (1 Feb.,
1809), PP, 1809, IX, 375-430.

referred to: 226

“Copy of a Letter from the Chief Secretary for Ireland, to His Grace the
Duke of Leinster, on the Formation of a Board of Commissioners for
Education in Ireland,” PP, 1831-32, XXIX, 757-60.

referred to: 252

“A Bill [as Amended by the Committee] to Regulate the Labour of Children
and Young Persons in the Mills and Factories of the United Kingdom,” 4
William IV (1 Aug., 1833), PP, 1833, II, 281-95.

note: enacted as 3 & 4 William IV, c. 103.

referred to: 394

“Report from His Majesty’s Commissioners for Inquiring into the
Administration and Practical Operation of the Poor Laws” (21 Feb.,
1834), PP, 1834, XXVII, 1-263.

referred to: 139, 394, 529-30

“A Bill for the Amendment and Better Administration of the Laws Relating
to the Poor in England and Wales,” 4 William IV (18 Apr., 1834), PP,
1834, III, 235-90.

note: enacted as 4 & 5 William IV, c. 76.

referred to: 394

“First Report of the Commissioners Appointed to Inquire as to the Best
Means of Establishing an Efficient Constabulary Force in the Counties of
England and Wales,” PP, 1839, XIX, 1-233.

referred to: 529

“Treaty between Her Majesty and the United States of America, Signed at
Washington” (9 Aug., 1842), PP, 1843, LXI, 1-8.

referred to: 543, 564

“Convention between Her Majesty and the King of the French, for the
Mutual Surrender, in Certain Cases, of Persons Fugitive from Justice”
(13 Mar., 1843), PP, 1867-68, VII, 257.

note: see also 6 & 7 Victoria, c. 75.

referred to: 117, 544, 570

“An Account of Loans Advanced by the Imperial Treasury for Public Works
in Ireland:—Similar Account for England and Scotland:—Remittances from
the British and Irish Exchequers; and Totals of Relief of Taxation to
Great Britain and Ireland Respectively, in Each Year since 1800,” PP,
1847, LIV, 91-282.

referred to: 252

“First and Second Report of the Metropolitan Sanitary Commission,” PP,
1847-48, XXXII, 1-319.

referred to: 529-30

“Despatches between the Governor of Malta and the Secretary of State for
the Colonies, Relating to the Admission of Foreigners into the Island of
Malta” (12 Mar., 1850), PP, 1850, XXXVI, 843-917.

referred to: 571

Edition: current; Page: [665]
“Convention between Great Britain and France, for the Mutual Surrender
of Criminals,—Signed at London, May 28, 1852.” British and Foreign State
Papers 1851-52. Vol. 41. London: Ridgway, 1864, 20-36.

referred to: 544

“Report on the Census of 1851,” PP, 1852-53, LXXXV, 9-98.

referred to: 459

“Report of the Commissioners Appointed to Inquire into the Existing
State of the Corporation of the City of London, and to Collect
Information Respecting Its Constitution, Order, and Government, together
with the Minutes of Evidence and Appendix,” PP, 1854, XXVI, 1-1098.

referred to: 230, 275, 447, 501

“Report on the Organisation of the Permanent Civil Service, together
with a Letter from the Rev. B. Jowett,” PP, 1854, XXVII, 1-31.

note: known as the Northcote-Trevelyan Report; prepared by Sir Stafford
Northcote and Sir Charles Trevelyan, who dated it 23 Nov., 1853.

referred to: 88

“Declaration Respecting Maritime Law, Signed by the Plenipotentiaries of
Great Britain, Austria, France, Prussia, Russia, Sardinia, and Turkey,
Assembled in Congress at Paris” (16 Apr., 1856), PP, 1856, LXI, 153-8.

referred to: 220-7 passim, 412

“Ordinance of the Government of Labuan, for Facilitating the
Apprehension and Surrender of Certain Offenders Escaping to Labuan from
the Dominions of the Sultan of Borneo” (4 Feb., 1857), British and
Foreign State Papers, LVIII (1867-68), 754-6.

referred to: 560

“A Bill to Amend the Laws with Respect to the Property of Married
Women,” 20 Victoria (14 May, 1857), PP, 1857, III, Pt. ii, 243-8.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 284, 378

“An Account of Gross Public Revenue and Expenditure from the Year 1851
to the Year 1857 Inclusive . . .,” PP, 1857-58, XXXIII, 134.

referred to: 70

“An Account of the Expenditure for the Army, Navy, Ordnance, and Militia
from 1851-1857 Inclusive . . .,” PP, 1857-58, XXXIII, 135.

referred to: 70

“A Bill Further to Amend the Laws Relating to the Representation of the
People in England and Wales,” 23 Victoria (1 Mar., 1860), PP, 1860, V,
597-608.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 58

“Report from the Select Committee on the Gas (Metropolis) Bill; with the
Proceedings of the Committee, and Minutes of Evidence (27 July, 1860),”
PP, 1860, XXI, 29-428.

referred to: 454

“Report from the Select Committee on the Corrupt Practices Prevention
Act (1854) etc.; together with the Proceedings of the Committee, Minutes
of Evidence, Appendix, and Index,” PP, 1860, X, 1-338.

note: see also Philip Rose.

quoted: 308

referred to: 307

“A Bill to Grant Additional Facilities for Depositing Small Savings at
Interest, with the Security of the Government for Due Repayment
Thereof,” 24 Victoria (11 Feb., 1861), PP, 1861, III, 781-8.

Edition: current; Page: [666]
note: enacted as 24 Victoria, c. 14.

referred to: 365

“Second Report from the Select Committee on Metropolis Local Taxation;
together with the Minutes of Evidence, and Appendix” (24 June, 1861),
PP, 1861, VIII, 137-380.

referred to: 163, 446, 448, 455

“Third Report from the Select Committee on Metropolis Local Taxation
with the Proceedings of the Committee” (26 July, 1861), PP, 1861, VIII,
381-422.

referred to: 164

“A Bill to Render Legal Certain Marriages of Affinity,” 25 Victoria (11
Feb., 1862), PP, 1862, III, 133-4.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 26

“Education. Minute of the Right Honourable the Lords of the Privy
Council on Education Establishing a Revised Code of Regulations,” PP,
1862, XLI, 115-62.

referred to: 68

“Education. Minute of the Right Honourable the Lords of the Committee of
the Privy Council on Education Confirming the Alterations of the Revised
Code of Regulations Announced in Parliament on 13th February and 28th
March, 1862, and Specifying the Course to Be Adopted for Putting It into
Effect,” PP, 1862, XLI, 167-88.

referred to: 68

“General Report on the Census of 1861,” PP, 1863, LIII, 1-89.

referred to: 459

“A Bill to Enable Owners and Occupiers of Property in Certain Districts
to Prevent the Common Sale of Intoxicating Liquors within Such
Districts,” 27 Victoria (10 Mar., 1864), PP, 1864, II, 357-64.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 26-7

“A Bill for the Commutation of Church Rates,” 28 Victoria (21 Feb.,
1865), PP, 1865, I, 135-54.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 35

“A Bill to Substitute an Oath for the Oath Required to Be Taken by the
Statute Passed in the Tenth Year of the Reign of King George the Fourth,
for the Relief of His Majesty’s Roman Catholic Subjects,” 28 Victoria
(21 Mar., 1865), PP, 1865, IV, 375-8.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 35

“A Bill to Allow the Charging of the Excise Duty on Malt According to
the Weight of the Grain Used,” 28 Victoria (19 May, 1865), PP, 1865,
III, 1-6.

note: enacted as 28 & 29 Victoria, c. 66.

referred to: 31

“Report from the Select Committee on the Tenure and Improvement of Land
(Ireland) Act, together with the Proceedings of the Committee, Minutes
of Evidence, Appendix and Index” (23 June, 1865), PP, 1865, XI, 341-622.

referred to: 80

“Supplement to the Twenty-Fifth Annual Report of the Registrar-General
of Births, Deaths, and Marriages in England,” PP, 1865, XIII, 1-683.

referred to: 465

“Suggestions, by the Medical Officers of Health of the Metropolis, for
Amendments Which They Deem Desirable, in the Existing Sanitary Acts,”
App. 10 of “The Seventh Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy
Council, with Appendix,” PP, 1865, XXVI, 528-32.

referred to: 500

Edition: current; Page: [667]
“Memorandum of the Conference at the Foreign Office” (8 Feb., 1866). In
“Correspondence Respecting the Extradition Treaty with France” (July
1866), PP, 1866, LXXVI, 389-91.

referred to: 122

“A Bill to Amend the Law Relating to Contagious or Infectious Diseases
in Cattle and Other Animals,” 29 Victoria (12 Feb., 1866), PP, 1866, I,
423-44.

note: enacted as 29 Victoria, c.2.

referred to: 42-52 passim

“A Bill to Empower the Lord Lieutenant or Other Chief Governor or
Governors of Ireland to Apprehend and Detain until the First Day of
March One Thousand Eight Hundred and Sixty-Seven, Such Persons as He or
They Shall Suspect of Conspiring against Her Majesty’s Person and
Government,” 29 Victoria (16 Feb., 1866), PP, 1866, III, 121-4.

note: enacted as 29 Victoria, c.1.

referred to: 52-4

“A Bill to Provide Better Dwellings for Artizans and Labourers,” 29
Victoria (20 Feb., 1866), PP, 1866, I, 43-52.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 274, 294

“A Bill to Extend the Elective Franchise for Cities and Boroughs in
England and Wales,” 29 Victoria (22 Feb., 1866), PP, 1866, II, 493-514.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 84

“A Bill to Render Legal Marriage with a Deceased Wife’s Sister,” 29
Victoria (6 Mar., 1866), PP, 1866, III, 501-3.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 26

“A Bill for the Better Settling the Real Estates of Intestates,” 29
Victoria (13 Mar., 1866), PP, 1866, V, 29-32.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 346

“A Bill to Extend the Right of Voting at Elections of Members of
Parliament in England and Wales,” 29 Victoria (13 Mar. 1866), PP, 1866,
V, 87-100.

note: “Gladstone’s Reform Bill”; not enacted.

referred to: 54-69 passim, 87-90 passim, 171, 355

“A Bill to Amend and Consolidate the Law Relating to Bankruptcy in
England, and to Abolish Imprisonment for Debt on Final Process,” 29
Victoria (16 Apr., 1866), PP, 1866, I, 103-236.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 187

“A Bill Further to Amend the Law Relating to the Tenure and Improvement
of Land in Ireland,” 29 Victoria (30 Apr., 1866), PP, 1866, V, 353-64.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 75-83

“A Bill for the Redistribution of Seats,” 29 Victoria (7 May, 1866), PP,
1866, V, 33-48.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 84-6 passim, 469, 489, 538

“A Bill to Amend the Law Relating to the Public Health,” 29 Victoria (6
June 1866), PP, 1866, IV, 375-9. See also the version as amended in
Committee (29 June, 1866), below.

referred to: 500

Edition: current; Page: [668]
“Petition for Admission of Women to the Elective Franchise” (7 June,
1866), Reports of the Select Committee of the House of Commons on Public
Petitions, Session 1866, 697.

referred to: 91

“A Bill [as Amended by the Select Committee] to Provide Better Dwellings
for Artizans and Labourers,” 29 Victoria (18 June, 1866), PP, 1866, I,
53-72.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 274, 294

“A Bill [as Amended by the Select Committee and on Re-commitment] to
Amend the Law Relating to the Public Health,” 29 Victoria (29 June,
1866), PP, 1866, IV, 425-48.

note: enacted as 29 & 30 Victoria, c. 90.

referred to: 114-15

“A Bill Intituled An Act for the Amendment of the Law Relating to
Treaties of Extradition,” 29 & 30 Victoria (26 July, 1866), PP, 1866,
III, 39-42.

note: enacted as 29 & 30 Victoria, c. 121

referred to: 116, 117

“Reports from the Select Committee on Metropolitan Local Government,
etc.; together with the Proceedings of the Committee, Minutes of
Evidence, and Appendix” (16 Apr. and 30 July, 1866), PP, 1866, XIII,
171-628.

referred to: 162, 163, 230

“Report of the Jamaica Royal Commission, with Minutes of Evidence, and
Appendix,” PP, 1866, XXX, 489-531; XXXI, 1-1172.

referred to: 106-7

“Returns of the Total Number of Voters in Every Borough and City in
England and Wales in Which There Was a Contest at the Last Election . .
.,” PP, 1866, LVII, 747-9.

referred to: 62, 63

“A Bill to Amend the Law of Libel, and Thereby to Secure More
Effectually the Liberty of the Press,” 30 Victoria (8 Feb., 1867), PP,
1867, III, 391-4.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 194

“A Bill to Provide Better Dwellings for Artizans and Labourers,” 30
Victoria (12 Feb., 1867), PP, 1867, I, 109-28.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 294

“A Bill to Exempt Associations of Workmen from Certain Disabilities for
a Limited Time,” 30 Victoria (14 Feb., 1867), PP, 1867, I, 129-30.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 144

“A Bill to Provide for the Carrying into Effect Capital Punishments
within Prisons,” 30 Victoria (14 Feb., 1867), PP, 1867, I, 521-4.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 272

“A Bill for Regulating the Hours of Labour for Children, Young Persons,
and Women Employed in Workshops; and for Other Purposes Relating
Thereto,” 30 Victoria (1 Mar., 1867), PP, 1867, III, 121-32.

note: enacted as 30 & 31 Victoria, c. 146.

referred to: 238

“A Bill [as Amended in Committee] for the Establishment in the
Metropolis of Asylums for the Sick, Insane, and Other Classes of the
Poor, and of Dispensaries; and for the Distribution over the Metropolis
of Portions of the Charge for Poor Relief; and for Other Edition:
current; Page: [669] Purposes Relating to Poor Relief in the
Metropolis,” 30 Victoria (7 Mar., 1867), PP, 1867, IV, 283-324.

note: enacted as 30 Victoria, c.6.

referred to: 134, 136-43 passim

“A Bill to Repeal Enactments Relating to Bankruptcy in England, and to
Matters Connected Therewith,” 30 Victoria (14 Mar., 1867), PP, 1867, I,
377-80.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 187

“A Bill Further to Amend the Laws Relating to the Representation of the
People in England and Wales,” 30 Victoria (18 Mar., 1867), PP, 1867, V,
521-46.

note: the Second Reform Bill. See also the version as amended in
Committee (9 July, 1867), below.

referred to: 143, 145, 146-51 passim, 164-5, 167-87 passim, 194-201
passim, 205-11 passim

“Copy of the Proceedings of the Courts Martial Recently Held in Jamaica
upon Ensign Cullen and Assistant-Surgeon Morris of Her Majesty’s
Service, Including the Findings of the Courts, and the Nature of the
Sentences, if Any, Awarded to the Accused” (29 Mar., 1867), PP, 1867,
XLII, 31-342.

referred to: 218

“A Bill to Amend the Act of the 21st Year of George the Third, Chapter
Forty-nine, Intitled ‘An Act for Preventing Certain Abuses and
Profanations on the Lord’s Day, Called Sunday,’ ” 30 Victoria (2 Apr.,
1867), PP, 1867, VI, 367-70.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 190-3

“A Bill to Provide for the More Effectual Prevention of Corrupt
Practices and Undue Influence at Parliamentary Elections,” 30 Victoria
(9 Apr., 1867), PP, 1867, II, 213-32.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 148

“A Bill for the Better and More Effectually Securing the Use of Certain
Royal Parks and Gardens for the Enjoyment and Recreation of Her
Majesty’s Subjects,” 30 Victoria (3 May, 1867), PP, 1867, IV, 63-6.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 215-17, 237-8

“Petition for Revision of Sentences Passed upon the Fenians” (3 May,
1867), Reports from the Select Committee of the House of Commons on
Public Petitions, Session 1867-68, 223-4.

referred to: 188-9

“A Bill for the Establishment of Municipal Corporations within the
Metropolis,” 30 Victoria (21 May, 1867), PP, 1867, IV, 447-66.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 162-5, 230, 273, 291

“A Bill [as Amended by the Select Committee] for Confirming a Scheme of
the Charity Commissioners for the Several Charities Founded by the
Settlement and Will of Christopher Tancred of Whixley in the County of
York, Esquire, Deceased,” 30 & 31 Victoria (25 June, 1867), PP, 1867,
VI, 381-4.

note: enacted as 34 & 35 Victoria, c.117.

referred to: 206

“A Bill [as Amended in Committee] Further to Amend the Laws Relating to
the Representation of the People in England and Wales,” 30 & 31 Victoria
(9 July, 1867), PP, 1867, V, 547-80.

Edition: current; Page: [670]
note: the Second Reform Bill, enacted as 30 & 31 Victoria, c.102. See
also the unamended version of the Bill (18 Mar., 1867), above.

referred to: 213, 232

“A Bill for Regulating the Hours of Labour for Children, Young Persons,
and Women Employed in Workshops; and for Other Purposes Relating
Thereto,” 30 & 31 Victoria (16 July, 1867), PP, 1867, III, 133-47.

note: enacted as 30 & 31 Victoria, c. 146.

referred to: 354

“A Bill to Continue Various Expiring Laws,” 30 & 31 Victoria (26 July,
1867), PP, 1867, II, 733-6.

note: enacted as 30 & 31 Victoria, c. 143.

referred to: 227-30

“A Bill for the Better Government of the Metropolis,” 30 & 31 Victoria
(6 Aug., 1867), PP, 1867, IV, 215-56.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 163, 230-1, 273

“A Bill to Provide Better Dwellings for Artizans and Labourers,” 31
Victoria (20 Nov., 1867), PP, 1867-68, I, 21-42.

note: enacted as 31 & 32 Victoria, c. 130.

referred to: 238, 294

“A Bill for the Establishment of a Foreign Cattle Market for the
Metropolis; and for Other Purposes Connected Therewith,” 31 Victoria (5
Dec., 1867), PP, 1867-68, III, 387-94.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 329, 331, 332

“Reports of the Commissioners Appointed to Inquire into the Organization
and Rules of Trades Unions and Other Associations; together with Minutes
of Evidence,” PP, 1867, XXXII, 1-396.

referred to: 144

“Correspondence Respecting British and American Claims Arising out of
the Late Civil War in the United States,” PP, 1867, LXXIV, 1-48.

referred to: 244

“Correspondence Respecting the Grand Duchy of Luxemburg,” PP, 1867,
LXXIV, 449-92.

referred to: 225-6

“A Bill for the Amendment of the Representation of the People in
Scotland,” 31 Victoria (17 Feb., 1868), PP, 1867-68, IV, 583-616.

note: enacted as 31 & 32 Victoria, c. 48.

referred to: 281-3

“A Bill to Provide for Carrying out of Capital Punishment within
Prisons,” 31 Victoria (20 Feb., 1868), PP, 1867-68, I, 261-6.

note: enacted as 31 Victoria, c. 24.

referred to: 266-72 passim

“A Bill [as Amended in Committee] for Amending the Laws Relating to
Election Petitions, and Providing More Effectually for the Prevention of
Corrupt Practices at Elections,” 31 Victoria (16 Mar., 1868), PP,
1867-68, II, 291-307.

note: enacted as 31 & 32 Victoria, c. 125.

referred to: 262-5, 279-80, 300, 301-3, 306-10, 311-12, 313-14, 316-19,
326-8, 329-30, 343

“A Bill to Amend the Representation of the People in Ireland,” 31
Victoria (19 Mar., 1868), PP, 1867-68, IV, 549-64.

Edition: current; Page: [671]
note: enacted as 31 & 32 Victoria, c. 49.

referred to: 288

“A Bill to Amend the Law with Respect to the Property of Married Women,”
31 Victoria (21 Apr., 1868), PP, 1867-68, III, 375-8.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 283-6, 379

“A Bill to Amend in Certain Respects the Act for the Better Government
of India,” 31 Victoria (23 Apr., 1868), PP, 1867-68, II, 479-82.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 288-9, 296-7, 305-6

“A Bill to Amend the Laws Relative to the Coast and Deep Sea Fisheries
of Ireland,” 31 Victoria (30 Apr., 1868), PP, 1867-68, V, 205-20.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 299

“A Bill for the Creation of a Corporation of London,” 31 Victoria (7
May, 1868), PP, 1867-68, I, 347-96.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 273-6 passim, 290-1

“A Bill to Provide for the Establishment of Municipal Corporations
within the Metropolis,” 31 Victoria (7 May, 1868), PP, 1867-68, III,
515-36.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 273-6 passim, 290-5, 300-1, 349-50

“A Bill [as Amended in Committee and by the Select Committee] to Make
Further Provision for the Good Government and Extension of Certain
Public Schools in England,” 31 Victoria (22 May, 1868), PP, 1867-68, IV,
317-36.

note: enacted as 31 & 32 Victoria, c. 118.

referred to: 290, 298-9, 304

“A Bill Intituled An Act to Amend the Law Relating to Railways,” 31
Victoria (28 May, 1868), PP, 1867-68, IV, 513-30.

note: enacted as 31 & 32 Victoria, c. 119.

referred to: 328, 333

“A Bill to Amend the Law of Registration so Far as Relates to the Year
1868, and for Other Purposes Relating Thereto,” 31 Victoria (11 June,
1868), PP, 1867-68, IV, 395-406.

note: enacted as 31 & 32 Victoria, c. 58.

referred to: 289

“A Bill to Make Further Amendments in the Laws for the Relief of the
Poor,” 31 Victoria (23 June, 1868), PP, 1867-68, IV, 167-78.

note: enacted as 31 & 32 Victoria, c. 122.

referred to: 312, 334

“Report of the Select Committee on Extradition” (6 July, 1868), PP,
1867-68, VII, 129-338.

referred to: 542-71

“Copy of the Minute of the Lords of the Committee of Council on
Education Relating to Scientific Instruction; and Explanatory Memorandum
Thereon,” PP, 1867-68, LIV, 17-22.

note: the reference is anticipatory.

referred to: 217-18

“Further Correspondence Respecting British and American Claims Arising
out of the Late Civil War in the United States,” PP, 1867-68, LXXIII,
1-10.

referred to: 244

Edition: current; Page: [672]
“A Bill to Enable Owners and Occupiers of Property in Certain Districts
to Prevent the Common Sale of Intoxicating Liquors within Such
Districts,” 32 Victoria (22 Feb., 1869), PP, 1868-69, IV, 285-90.

note: the reference is general.

referred to: 340, 344

“A Bill to Amend the Law with Respect to the Property of Married Women,”
32 Victoria (25 Feb., 1869), PP, 1868-69, III, 427-30.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 379

“A Bill to Amend the Law Relating to Trade Combinations and Trade
Unions,” 32 Victoria (9 Apr., 1869), PP, 1868-69, V, 323-8.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 341

“Treaty between Great Britain and Spain, Respecting Quedah” (6 May,
1869), British and Foreign State Papers, LIX (1868-69), 1147-50.

referred to: 560-1

“Report from the Select Committee on the Inclosure Act; together with
the Proceedings of the Committee, Minutes of Evidence, and Appendix” (7
July, 1869), PP, 1868-69, X, 327-505.

referred to: 427

“A Bill to Remove the Electoral Disabilities of Women,” 33 Victoria (16
Feb., 1870), PP, 1870, IV, 799.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 391

“A Bill to Provide for Public Elementary Education in England and
Wales,” 33 Victoria (17 Feb., 1870), PP, 1870, I, 505-42.

note: enacted as 33 & 34 Victoria, c. 75.

referred to: 381-6, 391-2

“A Bill to Amend the Law Relating to Inclosures of Commons, and to
Provide for the Management of Commons Situate near Towns,” 34 Victoria
(14 Feb., 1871), PP, 1871, II, 377-96.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 420-1

“A Bill for the Better Regulation of the Regular and Auxiliary Land
Forces of the Crown; and for Other Purposes Relating Thereto,” 34 & 35
Victoria (16 Feb., 1871), PP, 1871, I, 11-38.

note: enacted as 34 & 35 Victoria, c. 86

referred to: 411-15

“Report of the Royal Commission upon the Administration and Operation of
the Contagious Diseases Acts,” PP, 1871, XIX, 3-20.

referred to: 411

“Army Estimates of Effective and Non-Effective Services, for 1871-72,”
PP, 1871, XXXVIII, 1-194.

referred to: 412

“Royal Warrant, Dated 20th July 1871, to Cancel and Determine All
Regulations Authorizing the Purchase or Sale or Exchange for Money of
Commissions in the Army, from the 1st November, 1871,” PP, 1871, XXXIX,
601.

referred to: 412

Edition: current; Page: [673]


STATUTES

12 Charles II, c. 24. An Act for Taking away the Court of Wards and
Liveries, and Tenures in capite, and by Knights-Service, and Purveyance,
and for Settling a Revenue upon His Majesty in Lieu Thereof (1660).

referred to: 417

18 Charles II, c. 2. An Act against Importing Cattle from Ireland and
Other Parts beyond the Seas, and Fish Taken by Foreigners (1666).

referred to: 251

25 Charles II, c. 2. An Act for Preventing Dangers Which May Happen from
Popish Recusants (1672).

note: the first Test Act.

referred to: 250

30 Charles II, 2nd sess., c. 1. An Act for the More Effectual Preserving
the King’s Person and Government, by Disabling Papists from Sitting in
Either House of Parliament (1677) [1678].

note: the second Test Act.

referred to: 250

1 William and Mary, c. 32. An Act for the Better Preventing the
Exportation of Wooll, and Encouraging the Woollen Manufactures of This
Kingdom (1688).

referred to: 251

2 William and Mary, Sess. 1, c. 8. For Reversing the Judgment in a Quo
Warranto against the City of London, and for Restoring the City of
London to Its Ancient Rights and Privileges (1689).

referred to: 444

4 William and Mary, c. 1. An Act for Granting to Their Majesties an Aid
of Four Shillings in the Pound for One Year, for Carrying on a Vigorous
War against France (1692).

referred to: 417

7 & 8 William III, c. 27. An Act for the Better Security of His
Majesty’s Royal Person and Government (1696).

referred to: 250

8 & 9 William III, c. 21. An Act for Laying a Duty upon Leather for the
Term of Three Years (1697).

note: the reference is inferred.

referred to: 251

10 & 11 William III, c. 10. An Act to Prevent the Exportation of Wooll
out of the Kingdom of Ireland and England into Foreign Parts; and for
the Encouragement of the Woollen Manufactures in the Kingdom of England
(1699).

referred to: 251

4 George II, c. 28. An Act for the More Effectual Preventing of Frauds
Committed by Tenants, and for the More Easy Recovery of Rents, and
Renewal of Leases (24 June, 1731).

referred to: 357-8

33 George III, c. 4. An Act for Establishing Regulations Respecting
Aliens Arriving in This Kingdom or Resident Therein, in Certain Cases
(1793).

referred to: 563

39 & 40 George III, c. 67. An Act for the Union of Great Britain and
Ireland (2 July, 1800).

referred to: 250, 251

Edition: current; Page: [674]
41 George III, c. 109. An Act for Consolidating in One Act Certain
Provisions Usually Inserted in Acts of Inclosure; and for Facilitating
the Mode of Proving the Several Acts Usually Required on the Passing of
Such Acts (2 July, 1801).

referred to: 427

55 George III, c. 26. An Act to Amend the Laws Now in Force for
Regulating the Importation of Corn (23 Mar., 1815).

referred to: 57, 64, 67, 321

60 George III & 1 George IV, c. 9. An Act to Subject Certain
Publications to the Duties of Stamps upon Newspapers, and to Make Other
Regulations for Restraining the Abuses Arising from the Publication of
Blasphemous and Seditious Libels (30 Dec., 1819).

referred to: 287

3 George IV, c. 60. An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Importation
of Corn (15 July, 1822).

referred to: 57, 64, 67, 321

7 & 8 George IV, c. 57. An Act to Permit, until 1st May, 1828, Certain
Corn, Meal, and Flour to Be Entered for Home Consumption (2 July, 1827).

referred to: 57, 64, 67, 321

9 George IV, c. 17. An Act for Repealing So Much of Several Acts as
Imposes the Necessity of Receiving the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper as
a Qualification for Certain Offices and Employments (9 May, 1828).

referred to: 67, 75

9 George IV, c. 60. An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Importation
of Corn (15 July, 1828).

referred to: 57, 64, 67, 321

10 George IV, c. 7. An Act for the Relief of His Majesty’s Roman
Catholic Subjects (13 Apr., 1829).

referred to: 52, 67, 75, 249, 251

10 George IV, c. 44. An Act for Improving the Police in and near the
Metropolis (19 June, 1829).

referred to: 293

1 & 2 William IV, c. 32. An Act to Amend the Laws in England Relative to
Game (5 Oct., 1831).

referred to: 331

2 & 3 William IV, c. 45. An Act to Amend the Representation of the
People in England and Wales (7 June, 1832).

note: the First Reform Act.

quoted: 500

referred to: 57, 63, 64, 111, 295, 461

2 & 3 William IV, c. 62. An Act for Abolishing the Punishment of Death
in Certain Cases, and Substituting a Lesser Punishment in Lieu Thereof
(11 July, 1832).

referred to: 267

3 & 4 William IV, c. 103. An Act to Regulate the Labour of Children and
Young Persons in the Mills and Factories of the United Kingdom (29 Aug.,
1833).

referred to: 394

4 & 5 William IV, c. 76. An Act for the Amendment and Better
Administration of the Laws Relating to the Poor in England and Wales (14
Aug., 1834).

referred to: 136, 139, 451, 463, 464, 529, 535

5 & 6 William IV, c. 76. An Act to Provide for the Regulation of
Municipal Corporations in England and Wales (9 Sept., 1835).

referred to: 295, 308, 451, 456

Edition: current; Page: [675]
6 & 7 William IV, c. 86. An Act for Registering Births, Deaths, and
Marriages in England (17 Aug., 1836).

referred to: 293

6 & 7 William IV, c. 115. An Act for Facilitating the Inclosure of Open
and Arable Fields in England and Wales (20 Aug., 1836).

referred to: 427

1 Victoria, c. 2. An Act for the Support of Her Majesty’s Household, and
of the Honour and Dignity of the Crown of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland (23 Dec., 1837).

referred to: 215

1 & 2 Victoria, c. 109. An Act to Abolish Composition for Tithes in
Ireland, and to Substitute Rent-charges in Lieu Thereof (15 Aug., 1838).

referred to: 252

2 & 3 Victoria, c. 47. An Act for Further Improving the Police in and
near the Metropolis (17 Aug., 1839).

referred to: 529

3 & 4 Victoria, c. 29. An Act to Extend the Practice of Vaccination (23
July, 1840).

referred to: 449

3 & 4 Victoria, c. 96. An Act for the Regulation of the Duties of
Postage (10 Aug., 1840).

referred to: 64

5 & 6 Victoria, c. 102. An Act for the Better Discovery and Prevention
of Bribery and Treating at the Election of Members of Parliament (10
Aug., 1842).

referred to: 148, 280

5 & 6 Victoria, sess. 2, c. 14. An Act to Amend the Laws for the
Importation of Corn (29 Apr., 1842).

referred to: 57, 64, 67, 321

6 Victoria, c. 18. An Act to Amend the Law for the Registration of
Persons Entitled to Vote, and to Define Certain Rights of Voting, and to
Regulate Certain Proceedings in the Election of Members to Serve in
Parliament for England and Wales (31 May, 1843).

referred to: 60, 319

6 & 7 Victoria, c. 75. An Act for Giving Effect to a Convention between
Her Majesty and the King of the French for the Apprehension of Certain
Offenders (22 Aug., 1843).

quoted: 121

referred to: 116, 117, 120-3 passim

121.18 It] [no paragraph] And . . . it

121.18 peace, having] peace, or other person having

121.18 trial, to] trial persons accused of crimes against the laws of
that part of Her Majesty’s dominions in which such supposed offender
shall be found, to

121.20 law] laws

121.21 committal of the person accused] committal for trial of the
person so accused

121.21 crime had] crime of which he or she shall be so accused had

121.22-3 for the magistrate to commit the prisoner into the custody of
the officers of the Power so demanding him.] for such justice of the
peace, or other person having power to commit as aforesaid, to issue his
warrant for the apprehension of such person, and also to commit the
person so accused to gaol, there to remain until delivered pursuant to
such requisition as aforesaid.

8 & 9 Victoria, c. 21 (Private and Local Acts). An Act for Better
Ascertaining and Collecting the Poor and Other Rates in the Parish of
Battersea (1845).

referred to: 515-16, 521

8 & 9 Victoria, c. 25. An Act to Amend Two Acts Passed in Ireland for
the Better Education of Persons Professing the Roman-Catholic Religion,
and for the Better Government of the College Established at Maynooth for
the Education of Such Persons; and also An Act Edition: current; Page:
[676] Passed in the Parliament of the United Kingdom for Amending Said
Two Acts (30 June, 1845).

referred to: 18, 31

8 & 9 Victoria, c. 118. An Act to Facilitate the Inclosure and
Improvement of Commons and Lands Held in Common, the Exchange of Lands,
and the Division of Intermixed Lands: to Provide Remedies for Defective
or Incomplete Executions, and for the Nonexecution of the Powers of
General and Local Inclosure Acts; and to Provide for the Revival of Such
Powers in Certain Cases (8 Aug., 1845).

referred to: 420, 427

8 & 9 Victoria, c. 120. An Act for Facilitating Execution of the
Treaties with France and the United States of America, for the
Apprehension of Certain Offenders (8 Aug., 1845).

referred to: 116, 117, 120-3 passim

9 & 10 Victoria, c. 22. An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the
Importation of Corn (26 June, 1846).

referred to: 57, 64, 67, 321

9 & 10 Victoria, c. 95. An Act for the More Easy Recovery of Small Debts
and Demands in England (28 Aug., 1846).

referred to: 293

11 & 12 Victoria, c. 43. An Act to Facilitate the Performance of the
Duties of Justices of the Peace out of Sessions, within England and
Wales, with Respect to Summary Convictions and Orders (14 Aug., 1848).

referred to: 333

11 & 12 Victoria, c. 63. An Act for Promoting the Public Health (31
Aug., 1848).

referred to: 529

12 & 13 Victoria, c. 29. An Act to Amend the Laws in Force for the
Encouragement of British Shipping and Navigation (26 June, 1849).

referred to: 64

12 & 13 Victoria, c. 77. An Act Further to Facilitate the Sale and
Transfer of Incumbered Estates in Ireland (28 July, 1849).

referred to: 52, 253

13 & 14 Victoria, c. 65. An Act for Enabling Town Councils to Establish
Public Libraries and Museums (14 Aug., 1850).

referred to: 395

13 & 14 Victoria, c. 69. An Act to Amend the Laws Which Regulate the
Qualification and Registration of Parliamentary Voters in Ireland, and
to Alter the Law for Rating Immediate Lessors of Premises to the Poor
Rate in Certain Boroughs (14 Aug., 1850).

referred to: 60

14 & 15 Victoria, c. 28. An Act for the Well-Ordering of Common Lodging
Houses (24 July, 1851).

referred to: 445, 500

15 & 16 Victoria, c. 31. An Act to Legalize the Formation of Industrial
and Provident Societies (30 June, 1852).

referred to: 29

15 & 16 Victoria, c. 50. An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Laws
Relating to the Militia in England (30 June, 1852).

referred to: 293

15 & 16 Victoria, c. 84. An Act to Make Better Provision Respecting the
Supply of Water to the Metropolis (1 July, 1852).

referred to: 447, 463

Edition: current; Page: [677]
16 & 17 Victoria, c. 99. An Act to Substitute, in Certain Cases, Other
Punishment in Lieu of Transportation (20 Aug., 1853).

referred to: 272

17 & 18 Victoria, c. 102. An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Laws
Relating to Bribery, Treating, and Undue Influence at Elections of
Members of Parliament (10 Aug., 1854).

referred to: 148, 317

18 & 19 Victoria, c. 63. An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Law
Relating to Friendly Societies (23 July, 1855).

referred to: 144

18 & 19 Victoria, c. 116. An Act for the Better Prevention of Diseases
(14 Aug., 1855).

referred to: c.i. 1785, 1831, 2184

18 & 19 Victoria, c. 120. An Act for the Better Local Management of the
Metropolis (14 Aug., 1855).

referred to: 163, 275, 294, 295, 437-542 passim

18 & 19 Victoria, c. 121. An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Nuisances
Removal and Diseases Prevention Acts, 1848 and 1849 (14 Aug., 1855).

referred to: 445-6, 451, 462-3, 488, 509

18 & 19 Victoria, c. 122. An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the
Construction of Buildings in the Metropolis and Its Neighbourhood (14
Aug., 1855).

referred to: 293

19 Victoria, c. 10. An Act for Punishing Mutiny and Desertion, and for
the Better Payment of the Army and Their Quarters (14 Mar., 1856).

note: the quotation and reference are illustrative.

quoted: 113

referred to: 263

19 & 20 Victoria, c. 58. An Act to Amend the Law for the Registration of
Persons Entitled to Vote in the Election of Members to Serve in
Parliament for Burghs in Scotland (21 July, 1856).

referred to: 60

19 & 20 Victoria, c. 120. An Act to Facilitate Leases and Sales of
Settled Land (29 July, 1856).

referred to: 417, 418

20 & 21 Victoria, c. 85. An Act to Amend the Law Relating to Divorce and
Matrimonial Causes in England (28 Aug., 1857).

referred to: 285

20 & 21 Victoria, c. 150 (Local and Private Acts). An Act for Enabling
the Metropolitan Board of Works to Form a Park for the Northern Suburbs
of the Metropolis, to be Called Finsbury Park (1857).

referred to: 511

21 & 22 Victoria, c. 49. An Act to Provide for the Relief of Her
Majesty’s Subjects Professing the Jewish Religion (23 July, 1858).

referred to: 67, 337

23 Victoria, c. 22. An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Customs (15
May, 1860).

referred to: 64

23 & 24 Victoria, c. 84. An Act for Preventing the Adulteration of
Articles of Food or Drink (6 Aug., 1860).

referred to: 445-6, 451, 462-3

23 & 24 Victoria, c. 125. An Act for Better Regulating the Supply of Gas
to the Metropolis (28 Aug., 1860).

referred to: 445-6, 451, 454, 462-3

Edition: current; Page: [678]
24 Victoria, c. 14. An Act to Grant Additional Facilities for Depositing
Small Savings at Interest, with the Security of the Government for Due
Repayment Thereof (17 May, 1861).

referred to: 360, 365

24 Victoria, c. 20. An Act to Continue Certain Duties of Customs and
Inland Revenue for the Service of Her Majesty, and to Alter and Repeal
Certain Other Duties (12 June, 1861).

referred to: 360, 365

24 & 25 Victoria, c. 100. An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Statute
Law of England and Ireland Relating to Offences against the Person (6
Aug., 1861).

referred to: 108, 272

25 & 26 Victoria, c. 47. An Act to Authorize the Inclosure of Certain
Lands in Pursuance of a Report of the Inclosure Commissioners for
England and Wales (29 July, 1862).

referred to: 74

25 & 26 Victoria, c. 110. An Act to Enable Boards of Guardians of
Certain Unions to Obtain Temporary Aid to Meet the Extraordinary Demands
for Relief Therein (7 Aug., 1862).

referred to: 349

26 & 27 Victoria, c. 44. An Act for the Further Security of the Persons
of Her Majesty’s Subjects from Personal Violence (13 July, 1863).

referred to: 272

27 & 28 Victoria, c. 43. An Act to Grant Additional Facilities for the
Purchase of Small Government Annuities, and for Assuring Payments of
Money on Death (14 July, 1864).

referred to: 360, 365

27 & 28 Victoria, c. 85. An Act for the Prevention of Contagious
Diseases at Certain Naval and Military Stations (29 July, 1864).

referred to: 388, 411

28 Victoria, c. 11. An Act for Punishing Mutiny and Desertion, and for
the Better Payment of the Army and Their Quarters (7 Apr., 1865).

referred to: 112-13

28 Victoria, c. 36. An Act to Amend the Law Relating to the Registration
of County Voters, and to the Powers and Duties of Revising Barristers in
Certain Cases (2 June, 1865).

referred to: 60

28 & 29 Victoria, c. 63. An Act to Remove Doubts as to the Validity of
Colonial Laws (29 June, 1865).

referred to: 64

28 & 29 Victoria, c. 66. An Act to Allow the Charging of the Excise Duty
on Malt According to the Weight of the Grain Used (29 June, 1865).

referred to: 31

28 & 29 Victoria, c. 79. An Act to Provide for the Better Distribution
of the Charge for the Relief of the Poor in Unions (29 June, 1865).

referred to: 464

28 & 29 Victoria, c. 90. An Act for the Establishment of a Fire Brigade
within the Metropolis (5 July, 1865).

referred to: 447

29 Victoria, c. 2. An Act to Amend the Law Relating to Contagious or
Infectious Diseases in Cattle and Other Animals (20 Feb., 1866).

referred to: 64

29 Victoria, c. 19. An Act to Amend the Law Relating to Parliamentary
Oaths (30 Apr., 1866).

referred to: 337

Edition: current; Page: [679]
29 Victoria, c. 35. An Act for the Better Prevention of Contagious
Diseases at Certain Naval and Military Stations (11 June, 1866).

note: superseded the first Contagious Diseases Act: 27 & 28 Victoria, c.
85.

referred to: 388-9, 411

29 & 30 Victoria, c. 121. An Act for the Amendment of the Law Relating
to Treaties of Extradition (10 Aug., 1866).

referred to: 116, 117, 122, 123, 543, 544-5, 554, 562, 570

30 Victoria, c. 6. An Act for the Establishment in the Metropolis of
Asylums for the Sick, Insane, and Other Classes of the Poor, and of
Dispensaries; and for the Distribution over the Metropolis of Portions
of the Charge for Poor Relief; and for Other Purposes Relating to Poor
Relief in the Metropolis (29 Mar., 1867).

referred to: 334

30 & 31 Victoria, c. 102. An Act Further to Amend the Laws Relating to
the Representation of the People in England and Wales (15 Aug., 1867).

note: the Second Reform Act.

referred to: 273, 282, 288, 291, 313, 317, 320, 336, 337, 338-9, 343,
346, 347, 355-6, 359, 368

30 & 31 Victoria, c. 146. An Act for Regulating the Hours of Labour for
Children, Young Persons, and Women Employed in Workshops; and for Other
Purposes Relating Thereto (21 Aug., 1867).

referred to: 238, 354

31 & 32 Victoria, c. 109. An Act for the Abolition of Compulsory Church
Rates (31 July, 1868).

referred to: 337

32 & 33 Victoria, c. 42. An Act to Put an End to the Establishment of
the Church of Ireland, and to Make Provision in Respect of the
Temporalities Thereof, and in Respect of the Royal College of Maynooth
(26 July, 1869).

referred to: 382

32 & 33 Victoria, c. 96. An Act to Amend the Contagious Diseases Act,
1866 (11 Aug., 1869).

referred to: 388-9, 411

33 & 34 Victoria, c. 75. An Act to Provide for Public Elementary
Education in England and Wales (9 Aug., 1870).

note: the references at 381-6 and 391-2 are to the Bill which, when
enacted, became this statute.

referred to: 381-6, 391-2, 397, 399-400, 401


FRENCH STATUTES

Instruction de l’Assemblée nationale, sur la contribution foncière (22
and 23 Nov., 1790), Lois, et actes du gouvernement, II, 183-221.

referred to: 442

Loi relative aux domaines nationaux, aux concessions et échanges qui ont
été faits, et aux apanages (1 Dec., 1790), Lois, et actes du
gouvernement, II, 163-73.

referred to: 442

Loi concernant la contribution foncière (1 Dec., 1790), Lois, et actes
du gouvernement, II, 173-83.

referred to: 442

Décret de l’Assemblée nationale du 13 janvier 1791, sur la contribution
mobilière, Archives parlementaires, XXII (13 Jan., 1791), 169-72.

referred to: 540

Edition: current; Page: [680]
Code civil des Français. Paris: Imprimerie de la république, 1804.

referred to: 274

Code Napoléon. Bull. 154 bis, No. 2653 bis (3 Sept., 1807), Bulletin des
lois de l’empire français, 4th ser., Nos. bis.

note: separately paginated, 1-383, with index 1-80. The “Bulletins bis”
are not included in their numerical places in the annual volumes, but
are gathered, for each period, in a separate volume.

referred to: 274

Code d’instruction criminelle, Bull. 214 bis (17, 19 Nov., 9, 10, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16 Dec., 1808), Bulletin des lois de l’empire français, 4th
ser., Nos. bis.

note: separately paginated, 1-151, with index, 17-52. See note to Code
Napoléon (1807).

referred to: 115, 116, 117, 122

Code pénal, Bull. 277 bis, Nos. 1-7 (12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20 Feb.,
1810), Bulletin des lois de l’empire français, 4th ser., Nos. bis.

note: separately paginated, 1-120, without index. See note to Code
Napoléon (1807).

referred to: 216

Loi sur l’organisation du conseil général et des conseils
d’arrondissement du département de la Seine et sur l’organisation
municipale de la ville de Paris, Bull. 116, No. 262 (20 Apr., 1834),
Bulletin des lois du royaume de France, 9th ser., Pt. 1 (Lois), VI,
113-17.

referred to: 533


IRISH STATUTES

38 George III, c. 19. An Act for Indemnifying Such Persons as Have Acted
since the Third Day of July, in the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Ninety-Seven, for the Preservation of the Public Peace, and Suppression
of the Insurrections Prevailing in Some Parts of This Kingdom (6 Oct.,
1798).

note: the quotation, which is not exact, is in a quotation from State
Trials.

quoted: 111

referred to: 111

Edition: current; Page: [681]
1
Michel Chevalier (1806-79), who was present and later spoke, had been
instrumental in securing the “Treaty of Commerce between France and
Great Britain” (23 Jan., 1860) (in The Consolidated Treaty Series, ed.
Clive Perry [Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Oceana Publications], Vol. 121, pp.
243-58).

2
François Barthélemy Arlès-Dufour (1797-1872), also present, who had been
a Saint-Simonian ally and a friend of Cobden’s, was another agent in the
treaty of 1860.

3
George Walker (1824-88) had written extensively on U.S. and
international banking and currency questions.

a-a
+MS, TT [in third person, past tense]

a-a
Manuscript practical

b
Manuscript , I say,

c-c
Manuscript a

d-d
Manuscript

e-e
Manuscript and

f-f
Manuscript opinions

g-g
Manuscript certain potent] MS,DT some important

h
Manuscript for themselves

i-i
Manuscript portion of the community as

j-j
Manuscript cared for

k-k
Manuscript set

l-l
Manuscript as P . . . only consider the various social . . . as P] MS,DT
Every improvement that characterised the present age would be found
tending in the same direction.

m-m
Manuscript There is not one of them which can be even tolerably

n-n
Manuscript a share in

o-o
Manuscript classes of the community

p-p
Manuscript indeed of

q-q
Manuscript instruction

r-r
Manuscript superiority

s-s
Manuscript votes

t-t
Manuscript the natural sphere of women

u-u
Manuscript contest

v-v
Manuscript the natural sphere of women

w-w
Manuscript appears to have fully made

x-x
Manuscript use

1
Shakespeare, Othello, II, i, 160; in The Riverside Shakespeare, p. 1213.

y-y
Manuscript great public

z-z
Manuscript will

a-a
Manuscript define

b-b
Manuscript [not in italics]

c-c
Manuscript has given an impulse, such as had never

d
Manuscript any

2
In fact a similar Bill had been introduced in the previous session (see
No. 99, where the Bill of 1857 is also referred to); the measure had
been brought forward again as “A Bill to Amend the Law with Respect to
the Property of Married Women,” 32 Victoria (25 Feb., 1869), PP,
1868-69, III, 427-30, but was not enacted.

e-e
Manuscript ought

f-f
Manuscript demarcation

g-g
Manuscript were not

h-h
Manuscript tolerated

i
Manuscript speedily

j-j
-Manuscript

k-k
Manuscript wider

l-l
Manuscript extend to

m-m
Manuscript with that

n-n
Manuscript higher

o-o
-Manuscript

a-a
Manuscript framed

1
By Clauses 7 and 14, it allowed denominational instruction by teachers
paid out of State funds.

b-b
TT] P,DT alterations that are promised] Manuscript promised attenuations

2
A suggestion made on 18 March by William Francis Cowper-Temple
(1811-88), M.P. for Hampshire South (PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 200, col. 289)
that religious instruction be given at the beginning or end of the
school day was incorporated into a successful amendment; see Sect. 7 of
33 & 34 Victoria, c. 75. Gladstone, in his Speech on the Elementary
Education Bill (18 Mar.), col. 301, indicated that concessions would be
made.

c-c
Manuscript gained

3
By 32 & 33 Victoria, c. 42 (1869).

d-d
DT dictate to the larger part of England and Wales their religion at the
risk

4
By Clause 7, the “conscience clause.”

e-e
DT a mean

f-f
DT It is true, we are told,] Manuscript We may be told, indeed,

5
Gladstone, speech of 18 March, col. 302.

g-g
DT hour set apart] Manuscript extra hours

6
Adderley, Speech on the Elementary Education Bill (18 Mar., 1870), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 200, cols. 227-36.

h-h
Manuscript tyrannize

i-i
DT liberty] -Manuscript

j
Manuscript all

7
By Clause 6.

k-k
Manuscript not probably, in

8
William Edward Forster, Speech on the Elementary Education Bill (14
Mar., 1870), ibid., Vol. 199, col. 1946.

9
Anthony John Mundella (1825-97), M.P. for Sheffield, Speech on the
Elementary Education Bill (18 Mar., 1870), ibid., Vol. 200, cols. 240-2.

l-l
Manuscript grants

10
By Clause 22.

m
Manuscript two

11
Leading article on the Education Bill, The Times, 21 Mar., 1870, p. 9.

n-n
DT,Manuscript] P,TT for

o-o
DT House of Commons] Manuscript principal speakers in support of the
Bill

12
In addition to Forster and Adderley, cited above, Alexander
Beresford-Hope (1820-87), then M.P. for Cambridge University, Speech on
the Elementary Education Bill (15 Mar., 1870), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 199,
cols. 2021-6.

p-p
Manuscript] P,DT,TT [not in italics]

q-q
Manuscript and

r-r
Manuscript It is not the poor and weak who

s-s
Manuscript claimed

t-t
Manuscript [paragraph] It appears however that

u-u
Manuscript as P . . . attend a school . . . as P] DT when their own
opinions, but when other people’s opinions are taught in schools

v-v
DT very idea of the] Manuscript very

w
Manuscript very

x-x
+DT

a-a
DN,DT,TT] P practical

b-b
DN,DT,TT at present disgrace the country [DN,TT in past tense]

1
27 & 28 Victoria, c. 85 (1864), which was superseded by 29 Victoria, c.
35 (1866), and the Act that amended the latter, 32 & 33 Victoria, c. 96
(1869).

2
The Ladies’ National Association for the Repeal of the Contagious
Diseases Acts was headed by Josephine Butler (1828-1906). Harriet
Martineau (1802-76) was a vigorous contributor to the campaign, her
articles in the Daily News leading at the end of 1869 to the formal
Women’s Protest signed by 2000 women published in the Daily News. Among
the signatories were Florence Nightingale, Mary Carpenter, Priscilla
McLaren (sister of John and Jacob Bright), and their sister Margaret
Lucas. The last was on the platform at this meeting, as were Ursula
Bright (Jacob’s wife), and Frances Bailey Martineau (married to Harriet
Martineau’s nephew, Russell).

c-c
+DN,DT,TT

3
“A Bill to Remove the Electoral Disabilities of Women,” 33 Victoria (16
Feb., 1870), PP, 1870, IV, 799 (not enacted).

1
I.e., “A Bill to Provide for Public Elementary Education in England and
Wales,” 33 Victoria (17 Feb., 1870), which had been introduced by
William Edward Forster as the Minister responsible for education, and
was enacted in August 1870 as 33 & 34 Victoria, c. 75.

2
The National Education League, which grew out of the Birmingham
Education Society’s efforts, beginning in 1868, to secure a national
secular education.

3
“On the New Education Bill,” pp. 266-8.

4
Foster Barham Zincke (1817-93), a Chaplain to the Queen, had spoken
immediately before Mill (Sessional Proceedings, III, 346-7).

5
In “On the New Education Bill,” p. 262, Chadwick cites (giving as his
source a private letter) this comment by James Fraser (1818-85), who
became Bishop of Manchester in 1870, and had formerly served on the
Royal Commission on Education in 1858-59, and reported on the schools of
Canada and the U.S.A. in 1866 (PP, 1867, XXVI, 293-435).

6
Edwin Pears (1835-1919), Sessional Proceedings, III, 345.

7
The Vestry of St. Pancras had become notorious for financial scandals,
bad management (especially in the over-crowded workhouse), inadequate
sanitation, and turbulent meetings.

8
Given Mill’s close relations with Chadwick (who was in the Chair at this
meeting) and his sustained interest in the Poor Law reform of 1834, it
is odd that he appears to be mistaken here. There were no explicit
provisions for education in the Poor Law Report, Chadwick did not draw
up the Bill, and the debate on it in Parliament does not indicate that
any clauses dealing with education were struck out. A Cabinet committee
went over the Bill with the Commissioners, but their revisions seem not
to have touched on education. Possibly Mill had in mind not the Poor Law
but the Factory legislation of 1833: Chadwick was instrumental in
drawing up the Bill (4 William IV [1 Aug., 1833], PP, II, 281-96), which
contained education clauses modified in the Act (3 & 4 William IV, c.
103 [1833]).

9
13 & 14 Victoria, c. 65 (1850).

1
See No. 147, n5, for the background to this reference.

2
33 & 34 Victoria, c. 75 (1870).

a-a
PMG] B regions [printer’s error?]

3
Provided for ibid., Schedule 2, Sect. 20.

b-b
+TT

a-a
DT] TT only

b-b
DT] TT,PMG charm

1
33 & 34 Victoria, c. 75 (1870).

2
See No. 147, n5, for the background to this reference.

c-c
DT] TT,PMG this is

3
On 16 June, 1870, in answer to a question by P.A. Taylor, Forster said
that in the Education Bill “he” included both sexes (PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
202, col. 259).

d-d
DT] TT persons

a-a
+TT

b-b
Scot But how is this to be remedied? Put

c-c
Scot rational opinion upon what she is told is

d
Scot to man

e-e
Scot public movements

f-f
+W] Scot Mr. Mill concluded, amid great applause, by proposing the
following resolution: . . . as W . . . land or houses . . . exercise the
franchise . . . England prove . . . that right . . . as W

1
David Masson (1822-1907), Professor of Rhetoric and English Literature
at Edinburgh since 1865.

2
Philip Kelland (1808-79), Professor of Mathematics at Edinburgh since
1838.

3
Robert Wallace (1831-99), rector of Old Greyfriars, Edinburgh, since
1868, and examiner in philosophy at St. Andrews since 1866.

g-g
+W,Scot [Scot in summary]

h-h
+Scot

4
In addition to Priscilla McLaren, Duncan’s wife (see No. 146, n2), Mill
is referring specially to his daughter (by a previous marriage) Agnes
(1837-1913); both of them were on the platform, Priscilla McLaren as
President and Agnes McLaren as Secretary of the Edinburgh Branch of the
National Society for Women’s Suffrage.

1
William Augustus Fraser (1826-98), author of London Self-Governed
(London: Harvey, 1866) and former M.P., had spoken before Mill: “On the
Suggestions Afforded by the Application of the Cumulative Vote, and by
the Other Incidents of the School Board Elections, for Improvement in
the Constitution of Municipal and Local Governing Bodies,” Sessional
Proceedings of the National Association for the Promotion of Social
Science, IV (1870-71), 228-9.

2
Chadwick, ibid., p. 228.

1
“Report of the Royal Commission upon the Administration and Operation of
the Contagious Diseases Acts,” PP, 1871, XIX, 3-20. For the Acts, See
No. 146, n1.

a-a
+TT,DN

1
“A Bill for the Better Regulation of the Regular and Auxiliary Land
Forces of the Crown; and for Other Purposes Relating Thereto,” 34 & 35
Victoria (16 Feb., 1871), PP, 1871, I, 11-38 (enacted as 34 & 35
Victoria, c. 86 [1871]).

b-b
+TT,DN

c
+TT

2
For the additional £3,000,000, see “Army Estimates of Effective and
Non-Effective Services, for 1871-72,” PP, 1871, XXXVIII, 3. The
abolition of purchase of commissions was provided in Clause 2 of the
Bill under discussion (see n1 above), and was effected by a Royal
Warrant (1 Nov., 1871), PP, 1871, XXXIX, 601.

d-d
+TT,DN

3
For the action of George Villiers, Lord Clarendon, with reference to the
Declaration of Paris, see No. 80, n5.

e-e
+TT,DN

f-f
TT,DN right

g-g
+TT,DN

h-h
TT where the blow would fall. Our fleet has only to be two days out of
the way and our first line of defence is gone

i-i
TT but we must remember that it is possible. We

j-j
TT,DN A nation in arms requires a nation in arms to withstand it No

k-k
+TT,DN

l-l
+TT,DN

m-m
TT,DN] DT this is laid

n-n
+TT,DN

o-o
TT] DT,DN who

p-p
+TT,DN

q-q
TT,DN] DT steady

r-r
TT] DT,DN favour

1
By 12 Charles II, c. 24 (1660).

2
By 4 William and Mary, c. 1 (1692).

3
By 19 & 20 Victoria, c. 120 (1856).

4
Mill himself drew up the Programme of the Land Tenure Reform Association
(London: Longmans, et al., 1871); see CW, Vol. V, pp. 687-95.

5
A bill had been promised by Gladstone, Speech on Real Estate Intestacy
(16 Feb., 1871), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 204, col. 322, but in the event no
bill was introduced. Article II of the Programme of the Land Tenure
Reform Association called for the abolition of primogeniture (CW, Vol.
V, p. 689).

a-a
DT speculative

6
Speech at Rochdale (23 Nov., 1864), in Speeches on Questions of Public
Policy, ed. John Bright and James E. Thorold Rogers, 2 vols. (London:
Macmillan, 1870), Vol. II, p. 367.

b-b
DT inherent

7
See the Address of the Land and Labour League to the Working Men and
Women of Great Britain and Ireland (London: printed Higginbottom,
[1869]).

c-c
DT the land be given by nature and was taken from

8
8 & 9 Victoria, c. 118 (1845).

9
Clause 3 of “A Bill to Amend the Law Relating to Inclosures of Commons,
and to Provide for the Management of Commons Situate near Towns,” 34
Victoria (14 Feb., 1871), PP, 1871, II, 377-96 (not enacted).

10
Henry Selfe Page Winterbotham (1837-73), M.P. for Stroud, appointed
Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department in March 1871, Speech
on the Inclosure Law Amendment Bill (23 Feb., 1871), PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
204, col. 825.

11
Thomas Hare, experienced as an Inspector of Charities, gave this
information in a reply to Mill before the Select Committee on
Metropolitan Local Government, PP, 1866, Vol. XIII, p. 387 (see App. B,
Question 2811, below).

12
See especially Art. IV of the Programme, CW, Vol. V, p. 690.

a-a
DN,DT pittance

1
For the first, see Art. VIII of the Programme of the Land Tenure Reform
Association, in CW, Vol. V, p. 695.

b-b
DN,DT persons

2
On 20 April, 1869, Henry Fawcett had moved for a Select Committee on the
Inclosure Act (PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 195, cols. 1286-7), and the resulting
“Report from the Select Committee,” 7 July, 1869 (PP, 1868-69, X,
327-505) recommended, as he wished, that the annual Inclosure Bill
should always be scrutinized by Parliament (p. 332).

3
For the activities of this body, on whose Executive Committee Mill sat,
see its Report of Proceedings, 1868-9 (London: printed Grant, 1869), pp.
5-14.

4
E.g., Charles Isaac Elton (1839-1900), A Treatise on Commons and Waste
Lands (London: Wildy, 1868 [1867]); Henry James Sumner Maine (1822-88),
Village-Communities in the East and West (London: Murray, 1871),
reviewed by Mill in the Fortnightly Review, n.s. IX (May 1871), 543-6;
and Erwin Nasse (1829-90), On the Agricultural Community of the Middle
Ages, and Inclosures of the Sixteenth Century in England (in German,
1869), trans. H.A. Ouvry (London: Macmillan, 1871).

5
The General Enclosure Acts, 41 George III, c. 109 (1801), 6 & 7 William
IV, c. 115 (1836), and 8 & 9 Victoria, c. 118 (1845).

c-c
DN,DT by other

d-d
DN,DT chooses rather

6
I Kings, 21.

7
II Samuel, 12:1-14.

8
Art. IV of the Programme, CW, Vol. V, p. 690.

9
The Grosvenor and Portman estates in London increased enormously in
value with the growth of the fashionable areas in the West End; the
Stanleys benefited from the industrial development of Lancashire.

e-e
DN,DT not of so much

f-f
D&D and that

g-g
D&D This which we propose

10
Cf. Matthew, 13:3-8.

h-h
+DN

i-i
DN classes

11
The National Agricultural Labourers’ Union began to form in 1872 under
the leadership of Joseph Arch (1826-1919).

1
Walter Francis Scott (1806-84), 5th Duke of Buccleuch.

2
George Percy (1778-1867), 5th Duke of Northumberland, and Henry
Fitzalan-Howard (1847-1917), 15th Duke of Norfolk.

3
The legislation covering taxation, following on the crown lands’
becoming national property, is found in Instruction de l’Assemblée
nationale sur la contribution foncière (22 and 23 Nov., 1790), Lois, et
actes du gouvernement, II, 183-221; Loi relative aux domaines nationaux,
aux concessions et échanges qui ont été faits, et aux apanages (1 Dec.,
1790), ibid., 163-73; and Loi concernant la contribution foncière (1
Dec., 1790), ibid., 178-83.

4
Member of the Common Council of the City of London, and Chairman of the
Holborn Valley Improvement Committee.

5
William Corrie (1806-81), solicitor and barrister, Remembrancer of the
City of London from 1864.

6
Benjamin Scott (1814-92), Chamberlain of the City of London from 1858.

7
“Quo Warranto—3 James I” (20 Aug., 1605), App. 3 to the Second Report of
the Select Committee on Metropolitan Local Taxation (1861).

8
2 William and Mary, Sess. 1, c. 8 (1689).

9
James Beal (1829-91), land agent and auctioneer, and one of Mill’s most
active political supporters.

10
18 & 19 Victoria, c. 120. Sects. 67-134 outline the vestries’ powers.
Benjamin Hall (1802-67), later Lord Llanover, introduced the Act in the
Commons. Shortly thereafter he became Chief Commissioner of Works for
London.

11
18 & 19 Victoria, cc. 116 and 121 (1855) (Diseases Prevention); 23 & 24
Victoria, cc. 84 and 125 (1860) (Food and Gas); and 14 & 15 Victoria, c.
28 (1851) (Lodging Houses).

12
Chiefly the Nuisances Removal and Diseases Prevention Acts, 18 & 19
Victoria, cc. 116 and 121.

13
See his evidence given to the Select Committee on Metropolis Local
Taxation, PP, 1861, VIII, 139-64, esp. 153.

14
Ibid.

15
See No. 93, n7.

16
By 28 & 29 Victoria, c. 90 (1865).

17
15 & 16 Victoria, c. 84 (1852).

18
“Memorial to the Home Secretary, from the Vestry of St. James,” App. 1
to “Second Report of the Select Committee on Metropolis Local Taxation,”
321-2.

*
The Report was delivered in.—Vide Appendix. [“Report of a Meeting of
Delegates,” in App. 9 of the present Report, 616-18.]

19
By 3 & 4 Victoria, c. 29 (1840).

20
Edwin Lankester (1814-74), Medical Officer of Health for St. James’s
parish from 1856.

21
See Schedule A of the Bill.

†
A copy of the Bill was delivered in.—Vide Appendix. [“A Bill Intituled
‘An Act for the Establishment of Municipal Corporations within the
Metropolis,’ ” in App. 9 of the present Report, 619-28.]

22
It was not printed in the Appendix. The bill for a central municipality
that Mill introduced in the House of Commons in 1867 was based partly on
Beal’s model (see No. 82).

23
See “Report from the Select Committee on the Gas (Metropolis) Bill,” PP,
1860, XXI, 29-428. The resulting Act was 22 & 23 Victoria, c. 125.

24
See n13.

25
The Lord Mayor’s Day, marked by a banquet and a procession to
Westminster in a gilded coach.

26
At Q. 2083-4 it was pointed out that the Corporation of London received
no income from the Irish estates.

27
Appointed under the Charitable Trusts Act (1853) to supervise charities
and inspect their accounts.

28
William Farr (1807-83), a medical doctor, superintendent of statistics
in the Registrar General’s office from 1838 and a pioneer statistician.

29
For their reports see PP, 1852-53, LXXXV, 9-98, and 1863, LIII, 1-89.

30
George Horton, a clerk in the General Register Office (questioned at
2443 ff.), had written a pamphlet entitled Municipal Government of the
Metropolis (London: Hardwicke, 1865).

31
Horton’s proposed divisions are reproduced in the “Report of a Meeting
of Delegates,” in App. 9 of the present Report, 617.

32
15 & 16 Victoria, c. 84 (1852), sect. 1.

33
28 & 29 Victoria, c. 79 (1865).

34
Farr had been responsible for compiling the “Supplement to the
Twenty-Fifth Annual Report of the Registrar-General of Births, Deaths,
and Marriages in England,” PP, 1865, XIII; see esp. sect. ix, “Mortality
of Cities; Relation between Density and Death-Rate,” 33-5.

35
Julius Jeffreys (1801-77) invented the respirator in 1835 to relieve his
sister after a pulmonary attack; the principle was based on a ventilator
invented by Neil Arnott (1788-1874) in 1810 to ventilate a ship.

36
“A Bill for the Redistribution of Seats,” to be introduced by Gladstone
on May 7.

37
Thomas Beggs (1808-96), mechanical engineer, sanitary reformer, and
writer; he had been one of the early supporters of Mill’s candidacy for
Westmister.

38
Notes to Beggs’ testimony say that both map and schedule were handed in,
but only the schedule was printed, in App. 2, 270.

39
In sect. 6 of 18 & 19 Victoria, c. 120.

40
See App. 2, 270.

41
Usque ad coelum. Thoughts on the Dwellings of the People, Charitable
Estates, Improvements, and Local Government in the Metropolis (London:
Low, 1862).

42
Macmillan’s Magazine, VII (Apr. 1863), 441-7.

43
Actually in 1865, reported in the Morning Star, 11 Apr., 1865, 3. For
Mill’s support of Hare at that meeting, see No. 4.

44
For these details see “Ideal of a Local Government,” esp. 445, where,
however, 75 representatives of property are suggested.

45
Denmark’s Electoral Law of 2 Oct., 1855, introduced proportional
representation into the Rigsraad as part of the new constitution for the
United Kingdom of Denmark, Schleswig, and Holstein. The assembly ended
when the duchies were lost in the Prusso-Danish War of 1864.

46
See Hare’s speech, “On Such an Organization of the Metropolitan
Elections.”

47
See “Ideal of a Local Government for the Metropolis,” 445.

48
See Q. 2689.

49
Vestry clerk and solicitor for St. Martin-in-the-Fields parish.

50
Samuel Jones Loyd, Lord Overstone (1796-1883), banker and financial
expert, and Henry Hoare (1807-66), also a banker and active public
figure.

51
See “Proposed Market at Leicester Square,” The Times, 27, 28, and 30
Apr., 1863, 6, 10, and 14.

52
By sect. 132 of 18 & 19 Victoria, c. 120, vestries and district boards
“shall from time to time appoint” medical officers of health; by sect. 9
of 18 & 19 Victoria, c. 121, they might appoint a sanitary inspector.

53
An allusion to Edwin Lankester (see Q. 1833).

54
A bookseller living in Whitechapel.

55
In clause 13 of “A Bill for the Redistribution of Seats.”

56
William Henry Black (1808-72), antiquary and assistant keeper in the
Public Record Office.

57
Vestry clerk of Whitechapel.

58
William Augustus Fraser, London Self-Governed (London: Harvey, 1866).

59
Presumably an allusion to Considerations on Representative Government,
CW, XIX, 542, which points out that the local is less powerful than the
national press.

60
Perhaps the East London Observer (1857-1928).

61
At Q. 3128, Gladding had averred that, of the 58 members of the
Whitechapel Board of Works, 52 were tradesmen, but that “there are not
more than 16 out of the 52 who are not men of property distinct from
their trades; and the rest, so far as I know, are respectable
tradesmen.”

62
Member of Kensington vestry, and its representative on the Metropolitan
Board of Works.

63
Chairman of the Board of Works of St. Pancras district.

64
A chemist and member of St. Pancras vestry.

65
Member of the vestry of St. George’s in the East.

66
William Francis Jebb (1828-90), lawyer, became clerk to the Westminster
Board of Works in 1867.

67
Medical Officer of Health to the Newington vestry.

68
Mill is probably referring to “A Bill to Amend the Law Relating to the
Public Health,” which had been introduced into the Commons on 6 June
(PP, 1866, IV, 375-98). Clause 32 enlarges the powers of the sanitary
authorities to inspect, cleanse, and ventilate the common lodging
houses. It received royal assent on 7 August.

69
By virtue of the Common Lodging Houses Act of 1851.

70
“Suggestions, by the Medical Officers of Health of the Metropolis, for
Amendments which they Deem Desirable, in the Existing Sanitary Acts,”
App. 9 of the “Seventh Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy
Council,” PP, 1865, XXVI, 531.

71
Died 1878, a draper, vestry clerk of St. George-the-Martyr, Southwark.

72
That proposed by the Commissioners reporting on the Corporation of the
City of London in 1854; see No. 93, n7.

73
Vestryman of St. James’s parish, Westminster, and its representative on
the Metropolitan Board of Works.

74
George Henry Drew (1817-1906), solicitor, vestry clerk of Bermondsey
parish.

75
Solicitor and member of St. Pancras vestry.

76
Vestry clerk of Islington.

77
See sects. 12-14 of 18 & 19 Victoria, c. 121.

78
Sect. 6 sets forth the qualifications of a vestryman, including the £40
requirement, and the waiving of it, discussed in Qs. 5781 ff.

79
See sect. 16.

80
As provided for in 20 & 21 Victoria, c. 150, Local and Private Acts
(1857).

81
Sects. 96-9 and 105 of the Metropolis Local Management Act concern the
payment for street paving.

82
John Edwin Bradfield (1818-88), a parliamentary agent, appearing before
the Commission to express the dissatisfaction of some Islington
parishioners with their vestry.

83
John Charles Buckmaster (1823-1908), J.P. and Science Examiner for the
South Kensington Museum.

84
By sect. 32.

85
8 & 9 Victoria, c. 21, Local and Private Acts (1845).

86
Member of the vestry in Islington.

87
Resident of Bloomsbury.

88
Local commissioners appointed by the Land Tax Commissioners from their
own body, to appoint and supervise assessors and collectors of the
income tax.

89
See clause 11 of the proposed Bill.

90
Chadwick refers to the Report of 1834 and to the resulting Act, 4 & 5
William IV, c. 76 (1834).

91
See “First Report of the Commissioners Appointed to Inquire into the
Best Means of Establishing an Efficient Constabulary Force in the
Counties of England and Wales,” PP, 1839, XIX, 1-233, and 2 & 3
Victoria, c. 47.

92
The Act resulting from Chadwick’s 1842 report was 11 & 12 Victoria, c.
63 (1848).

93
See “First and Second Reports of the Metropolitan Sanitary Commission,”
PP, 1847-48, XXXII, 1-319.

94
Louis Philippe (1773-1850), King of France 1830-48; “Loi . . . sur
l’organisation municipale de la ville de Paris” (20 Apr., 1834),
Bulletin des lois du royaume de France, 9th ser., Pt. 1 (Lois), VI,
113-17.

95
A note indicates that “The Witness delivered in the documents.—Vide
Appendix”; however, no such statement on the Poor Law appears there.

96
Died 1875.

97
John Thwaites; see 231 above.

98
William Edward Hickson (1803-70), City resident and writer.

99
“Hand-Loom Weavers. Copy of Report by Mr. Hickson, on the Condition of
the Hand-Loom Weavers” (11 Aug., 1840), PP, 1840, XXIV, 659-717.

100
“Décret de l’Assemblée nationale du 13 janvier 1791, sur la contribution
mobilière,” Archives parlementaires, XXII (13 Jan., 1791), 169-72.

101
William Rendle (1811-93), surgeon, at one time Officer of Health and
later vestryman for St. George-the-Martyr parish, Southwark.

102
E.g., London Vestries, and Their Sanitary Work (London: Churchill,
1865), and Fever in London (London: Metropolitan Sanitary Association,
1866).

1
Edmund Hammond (1802-90), Undersecretary of State for Foreign Affairs
from 1854.

2
“Convention for the Surrender of Criminals between France and the United
States, signed at Washington, 9 Nov. 1843,” in The Consolidated Treaty
Series, ed. Clive Parry (Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Oceana Publications, 1969),
XCV, 393-7.

3
The first article added robbery and burglary, the second forgery,
counterfeiting, and embezzlement (ibid., XCV, 398-401, and CXVIII,
325-6).

4
John Anderson, a runaway slave who had mortally wounded one of his
pursuers, and whose extradition from Canada was demanded by the U.S.
(see Annual Register, 1861, 520-8).

5
29 & 30 Victoria, c. 121 (1866), amending the extradition treaty. Mill
spoke on this treaty in Parliament; see Nos. 36, 37, and 39.

6
“Convention between Her Majesty and the King of the French, for the
Mutual Surrender, in Certain Cases, of Persons Fugitive from Justice”
(13 Mar., 1843), PP, 1867-68, VII, 257.

7
“Convention between Great Britain and France, for the Mutual Surrender
of Criminals,” British and Foreign State Papers, 1851-52, XLI, 20-36.

8
See Henri Godfroi, prince de La Tour d’Auvergne-Lauraguais (1823-71),
Letter to the Earl of Clarendon (4 Dec., 1865), PP, 1866, LXXVI, 373-4.

9
“Extradition Convention between Denmark and Great Britain” (15 Apr.,
1862), in The Consolidated Treaty Series, CXXV, 465-70, Art. 1.

10
An allusion to Napoleon III of France and his attempted coup at Boulogne
(see No. 36, n8).

11
In this incident, on 13 November, 1867, the Fenians attempted to rescue
Richard Burke (1838-1922) and Joseph Casey, his assistant, from
Clerkenwell prison in London. They blew a hole in the prison wall, the
explosion killing twelve people, but did not succeed in freeing the
prisoners. Michael Barrett (1841-69), who was convicted of the crime,
was the last man to be hanged publicly in England.

12
Thomas Henry (1807-76), Chief Magistrate of the Metropolitan Police
Court, and a negotiator with France for the treaty of 1866.

13
See “Police,” The Times, 23 and 29 May, 1866, both p. 11. The bankrupt
was Victor Widermann (b. ca. 1831), and the assignee Adolph Picard.

14
The case of Charles Windsor, teller for the Mercantile Bank of New York,
accused of forgery in 1865 under New York law. (See 122 English Reports
1288-91.)

15
“Circulaire du ministre de la justice du 5 septembre 1841, relatant les
principes de la matière d’extradition,” App. 7 of the present report,
288-90.

16
The treaty with Belgium (22 Nov., 1834, in Consolidated Treaty Series,
LXXXIV, 457-63) referred to in the next questions expressly excluded
political crimes in Art. 5. It was modified by an additional convention
of 22 September, 1856 (ibid., CXV, 437-9).

17
See the answer to Q. 355, concerning the Charles Windsor case.

18
See Extradition Convention between France and the Holy See (19 July,
1859), in Consolidated Treaty Series, CXXI, 7-12, Art. 9, and
Extradition Treaty between Chile and France (11 Apr., 1860), ibid.,
CXXII, 79-81, Art. 7. For Belgium, see n16.

19
See n11.

20
Colonel Thomas James Kelly (1833-1907) and Captain Timothy Deasy (ca.
1838-88) were being conveyed through Manchester in a prison van on 18
Sept., 1867, when some of their fellow Fenians attempted to rescue them
by storming the van. A guard was killed, and three Fenians, later known
as the “Manchester martyrs,” were hanged: Michael Larkin, Michael
O’Brien, and William Philip Allen (1848-67).

21
Franz Müller (1840-64), a German tailor living in London, was accused of
the murder of Thomas Briggs (1793-1864) on a railway train, 9 July 1864.
The dramatic case, extensively reported in The Times, involved his being
pursued to New York on a faster vessel by Chief Inspector Richard Tanner
and two witnesses: John Death, a jeweller, and Jonathan Matthews, a
cabman. He was arrested when his boat landed, extradited, tried, and
hanged. (See, e.g., “The Surrender of Franz Müller,” The Times, 13
Sept., 1864, 10.)

22
Henry Thurstan Holland (1825-1914), legal adviser to the Colonial
Office.

23
Art. XI, Bull. 1400, No. 14,336, in App. 2 of the present report, 238.

24
Malta, Ordinance No. 1 of 1863, App. 3 of the present report, 239-41.

25
British Guiana, Ordinance No. 2 of 1861.

26
“Ordinance of the Government of Labuan, for Facilitating the
Apprehension and Surrender of Certain Offenders Escaping to Labuan from
the Dominions of the Sultan of Borneo” (4 Feb., 1857), British and
Foreign State Papers, 58 (1867-68), 754-6.

27
“Treaty between Great Britain and Spain, Respecting Quedah” (6 May,
1869), ibid., 59 (1868-69), 1147-50.

28
In his answers to Qs. 216 and 246.

29
In his answers to Qs. 578-9.

30
33 George III, c. 4 (1793), a temporary act renewed from time to time
with modifications, but fallen into disuse after 1843.

31
Solicitor to the Association of Bankers.

32
Alexander Heilbronn, whose extradition from the U.S. in March 1854 is
reported in 12 New York Legal Observer 66.

33
A French barrister, acting as legal adviser to the English embassy at
Paris.

34
Tibaldi was an Italian worker resident in Paris, tried and convicted for
an attempt to assassinate Napoleon III in August 1857.

35
Nicolas Martin du Nord (1790-1847), Minister of Justice 1840-47.

36
Alexandre Auguste Ledru Rollin (1807-74), French politician prominent in
the 1848 revolution, had fled to England in 1849 after taking part in a
demonstration against Louis Napoleon.

37
Michel Auguste Dupoty (1797-1864), liberal editor of the Journal du
Peuple, accused in 1841.

38
Jean Baptiste Nicolas Armand Carrel (1800-36), radical journalist and
one of Mill’s heroes, accused along with two members of the Société des
Droits de l’Homme of complicity in an attempt on the life of Louis
Philippe by Giuseppe Marco Fieschi (1790-1836) on 28 July, 1835.

39
Extrait du dossier d’un prévenu de complicité morale dans l’attentat du
28 juillet (Paris: Paulin, 1835). Mill comments on this in CW, XX,
207-8.

40
“Despatches between the Governor of Malta and the Secretary of State for
the Colonies, Relating to the Admission of Foreigners into the Island of
Malta” (12 Mar., 1850), PP, 1850, XXXVI, 843-917. Mill mentions the
matter in CW, XXV, 1142.

1
A note says that the petition would have been given in full had “the
Member presenting the same” complied with the Order of 20 Mar., 1833,
that every member presenting a petition “affix his name at the beginning
thereof” (p. 570).

2
TT gives the number as 1515, and says, “Mill stated that the whole of
the signatures to it had been obtained during a period of little more
than a fortnight.” The Committee notes that they “have reported the
number of names appended to this Petition, but they observe that, with
the exception of seven, they are all written on Slips of Paper and
pasted on the Petition” (p. 697).

3
Again a note that the petition would have been given in full had “the
Member presenting the same” complied with the Order of 20 Mar., 1833,
that every member presenting a petition “affix his name at the beginning
thereof” (p. 134).

4
TT, 3 Apr., p. 6, gives another petition, perhaps a confused version of
this: “Praying that an Act may be passed disqualifying every person
concerned in corrupt practices at elections, whether on his own behalf
or on behalf of another, from holding any public office or exercising
any political privilege, from Lancaster.”

5
TT gives the number as 3161.

6
TT gives the number as 246, and says the petition was from Manchester.

7
TT gives the number as 1812, and says “also from a public meeting in
Westminster.”

8
TT gives this and the following three petitions as against the Bill,
adds Cambridge and Sheffield, and says the Westminster Board of Works
petitioned for a Select Committee on the Bill.

9
RPP does not assign this and the following two petitions to any Member.

10
TT evidently conflates this and the next petition, saying the
petitioners were the trustees and governors of Archbishop Tenison’s
School and those of the parochial school of the parish.

11
TT gives the number as 2348.

12
TT gives the number as 104.

13
RPP does not assign this petition to any Member.

14
Given its appearance in TT of 14 June, the petition must have been
presented on the 13th, but the date of 20 June in RPP conforms to the
official numbering.

15
TT gives the number as 21,757.

16
The heading in RPP is “Law of Libel—for Alteration”; under the heading
“Newspapers—for Alteration of Law” another petition from Bradlaugh,
apparently identical, is given as No. 16,970, also submitted by Mill;
Nos. 16,975-6 and 16,979 below appear under the latter title.

17
TT gives the number as 731, plus those named, and probably including the
next entry.

18
Nos. 17,621 and 17,622 repeat exactly No. 17,620, giving 14 and 23
signatures respectively.

1
Here a page of manuscript is missing.

a-a
[written on verso of previous folio; marked for insertion at this point]

2
The manuscript ends here.

a-a
[marked for insertion from f. 3v]

1
Here Helen Taylor has written “See A”; the next folio is headed “A” (and
that insertion, running for two sides, completes the manuscript).


