

ONLINE LIBRARY OF LIBERTY


A collection of scholarly works about individual liberty and free
markets. A project of Liberty Fund, Inc.



JOHN STUART MILL, _THE COLLECTED WORKS OF JOHN STUART MILL, VOLUME IX – AN EXAMINATION OF WILLIAM HAMILTON’S PHILOSOPHY_ [1865]


Edition used:

John Stuart Mill, _The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume IX –
An Examination of William Hamilton’s Philosophy and of The Principal
Philosophical Questions Discussed in his Writings,_ ed. John M. Robson,
Introduction by Alan Ryan (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1979). http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/240

About this Title:

Vol. 9 of the 33 vol. Collected Works contains Mill’s book on William
Hamilton’s philosophy.

Copyright information:

The online edition of the _Collected Works_ is published under licence
from the copyright holder, The University of Toronto Press. ©2006 The
University of Toronto Press. All rights reserved. No part of this
material may be reproduced in any form or medium without the permission
of The University of Toronto Press.

Fair use statement:

This material is put online to further the educational goals of Liberty
Fund, Inc. Unless otherwise stated in the Copyright Information section
above, this material may be used freely for educational and academic
purposes. It may not be used in any way for profit.

Table of Contents:

-   Contents
-   Introduction
-   I.: REPUTATION OF THE WORK
-   II.: MILL’S MOTIVATION
-   III.: HAMILTON AND MANSEL
-   IV.: THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE CONDITIONED
-   V.: GOD AND PROFESSOR MANSEL
-   VI.: OTHER MAJOR ISSUES
-   MATTER AND MIND
-   CAUSATION
-   LOGIC
-   FREEDOM OF THE WILL
-   Textual Introduction
-   I.: BACKGROUND
-   II.: THE WRITING OF THE EXAMINATION
-   III.: THE REVISIONS
-   IV.: THE PRESENT TEXT
-   V.: APPENDICES
-   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
-   Preface to the Third Edition[*]
-   AN EXAMINATION OF SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON’S PHILOSOPHY
-   CHAPTER I: Introductory Remarks
-   CHAPTER II: The Relativity of Human Knowledge
-   CHAPTER III: The Doctrine of the Relativity of Human Knowledge, as
    Held by Sir William Hamilton
-   CHAPTER IV: In What Respect Sir William Hamilton Really Differs from
    the Philosophers of the Absolute
-   CHAPTER V: What is Rejected as Knowledge by Sir William Hamilton,
    Brought Back Under the Name of Belief
-   CHAPTER VI: The Philosophy of the Conditioned
-   CHAPTER VII: The Philosophy of the Conditioned, as Applied by Mr.
    Mansel to the Limits of Religious Thought
-   CHAPTER VIII: Of Consciousness, as Understood by Sir William
    Hamilton
-   CHAPTER IX: Of the Interpretation of Consciousness
-   CHAPTER X: Sir William Hamilton’s View of the Different Theories
    Respecting the Belief in an External World
-   CHAPTER XI: The Psychological Theory of the Belief in an External
    World
-   CHAPTER XII: The Psychological Theory of the Belief in Matter, How
    Far Applicable to Mind
-   hAPPENDIX TO THE TWO PRECEDING CHAPTERS
-   CHAPTER XIII: The Psychological Theory of the Primary Qualities of
    Matter
-   cNOTE TO THE PRECEDING CHAPTER
-   CHAPTER XIV: How Sir William Hamilton and Mr. Mansel Dispose of the
    Law of Inseparable Association
-   jNOTE TO THE PRECEDING CHAPTER
-   CHAPTER XV: Sir William Hamilton’s Doctrine of Unconscious Mental
    Modifications
-   CHAPTER XVI: Sir William Hamilton’s Theory of Causation
-   CHAPTER XVII: The Doctrine of Concepts, or General Notions
-   CHAPTER XVIII: Of Judgment
-   CHAPTER XIX: Of Reasoning
-   CHAPTER XX: On Sir William Hamilton’s Conception of Logic as a
    Science. Is Logic the Science of the Laws, or Forms, of Thought?
-   CHAPTER XXI: The Fundamental Laws of Thought According to Sir
    William Hamilton
-   CHAPTER XXII: Of Sir William Hamilton’s Supposed Improvements in
    Formal Logic
-   CHAPTER XXIII: Of Some Minor Peculiarities of Doctrine in Sir
    William Hamilton’s View of Formal Logic
-   CHAPTER XXIV: Of Some Natural Prejudices Countenanced by Sir William
    Hamilton, and Some Fallacies Which He Considers Insoluble
-   CHAPTER XXV: Sir William Hamilton’s Theory of Pleasure and Pain
-   CHAPTER XXVI: On the Freedom of the Will
-   CHAPTER XXVII: Sir William Hamilton’s Opinions on the Study of
    Mathematics
-   CHAPTER XXVIII: Concluding Remarks
-   APPENDICES
-   Appendix A
-   Manuscript Fragments
-   Fragment 1. Pp. 21.17-22.3 (Yale)
-   Fragment 2. P. 38n.13-27 (Harvard)
-   Fragment 3. Pp. 52.14-53.15[*] (Harvard)
-   Fragment 4. P. 57.19-32 (Harvard)
-   Fragment 5. P. 77n.33-41 (Columbia)
-   Fragment 6. P. 118n.32[*] (Harvard)
-   Fragment 7. P. 225n.25-33 (Harvard)
-   Fragment 8. Pp. 503.25-504.7[*] (Yale)
-   Appendix B
-   Textual Emendations
-   Appendix C
-   Corrected References
-   Appendix D
-   Bibliographic Index of Persons and Works Cited in the Examination,
    with Variants and Notes

Edition: current; Page: [i]
COLLECTED WORKS OF JOHN STUART MILL

volume ix

Edition: current; Page: [ii]
The Collected Edition of the works of John Stuart Mill has been planned
and is being directed by an editorial committee appointed from the
Faculty of Arts and Science of the University of Toronto, and from the
University of Toronto Press. The primary aim of the edition is to
present fully collated texts of those works which exist in a number of
versions, both printed and manuscript, and to provide accurate texts of
works previously unpublished or which have become relatively
inaccessible.

Editorial Committee

j. m. robson, General Editor

v. w. bladen, alexander brady, j. c. cairns,

j. b. conacher, d. p. dryer, s. hollander,

r. f. mcrae, f. e. l. priestley, marsh jeanneret,

francess halpenny, jean houston

Edition: current; Page: [iii]
An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy

and of The Principal Philosophical Questions Discussed in his Writings

by JOHN STUART MILL

Editor of the Text

J. M. ROBSON Professor of English, Victoria College, University of
Toronto

Introduction by ALAN RYAN New College, Oxford University

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS

ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL

Edition: current; Page: [iv]
© University of Toronto Press 1979

Toronto and Buffalo

Printed in Canada

ISBN 0-8020-2329-0

LC 63-25976

London: Routledge & Kegan Paul

ISBN 0 7100 0178 9

This volume has been published with the assistance of a grant from the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada

Edition: current; Page: [v]


Contents

-   

    Introduction, by A. Ryan vii
-   

    Textual Introduction, by J. M. Robson lxix
-   

    Preface to the Third Edition ciii
-   

    chapter i. Introductory Remarks 1
-   

    chapter ii. The Relativity of Human Knowledge 4
-   

    chapter iii. The Doctrine of the Relativity of Human Knowledge, as
    Held by Sir William Hamilton 13
-   

    chapter iv. In What Respect Sir William Hamilton Really Differs from
    the Philosophers of the Absolute 34
-   

    chapter v. What is Rejected as Knowledge by Sir William Hamilton,
    Brought Back Under the Name of Belief 60
-   

    chapter vi. The Philosophy of the Conditioned 66
-   

    chapter vii. The Philosophy of the Conditioned, as Applied by Mr.
    Mansel to the Limits of Religious Thought 89
-   

    chapter viii. Of Consciousness, as Understood by Sir William
    Hamilton 109
-   

    chapter ix. Of the Interpretation of Consciousness 125
-   

    chapter x. Sir William Hamilton’s View of the Different Theories
    Respecting the Belief in an External World 149
-   

    chapter xi. The Psychological Theory of the Belief in an External
    World 177
-   

    chapter xii. The Psychological Theory of the Belief in Matter, How
    Far Applicable to Mind. Appendix to the Two Preceding Chapters 188
-   

    chapter xiii. The Psychological Theory of the Primary Qualities of
    Matter 210
-   

    chapter xiv. How Sir William Hamilton and Mr. Mansel Dispose of the
    Law of Inseparable Association 250
-   

    chapter xv. Sir William Hamilton’s Doctrine of Unconscious Mental
    Modifications 272 Edition: current; Page: [vi]
-   

    chapter xvi. Sir William Hamilton’s Theory of Causation 286
-   

    chapter xvii. The Doctrine of Concepts, or General Notions 301
-   

    chapter xviii. Of Judgment 324
-   

    chapter xix. Of Reasoning 342
-   

    chapter xx. On Sir William Hamilton’s Conception of Logic as a
    Science. Is Logic the Science of the Laws, or Forms, of Thought? 348
-   

    chapter xxi. The Fundamental Laws of Thought According to Sir
    William Hamilton 372
-   

    chapter xxii. Of Sir William Hamilton’s Supposed Improvements in
    Formal Logic 385
-   

    chapter xxiii. Of Some Minor Peculiarities of Doctrine in Sir
    William Hamilton’s View of Formal Logic 404
-   

    chapter xxiv. Of Some Natural Prejudices Countenanced by Sir William
    Hamilton, and Some Fallacies Which He Considers Insoluble 417
-   

    chapter xxv. Sir William Hamilton’s Theory of Pleasure and Pain 430
-   

    chapter xxvi. On the Freedom of the Will 437
-   

    chapter xxvii. Sir William Hamilton’s Opinions on the Study of
    Mathematics 470
-   

    chapter xxviii. Concluding Remarks 490
-   

    Appendices
    -   

        appendix a. Manuscript Fragments 507
    -   

        appendix b. Textual Emendations 513
    -   

        appendix c. Corrected References 518
    -   

        appendix d. Bibliographic Index of Persons and Works Cited in
        the Examination, with Variants and Notes 521

-   

    index 597

Edition: current; Page: [vii]


Introduction

ALAN RYAN


I.: REPUTATION OF THE WORK

an examination of sir william hamilton’s philosophy is not a widely read
work; nor is it very highly regarded, even by those who are most
attracted to Mill’s writings on philosophy. It contains some instructive
set-pieces, which have preserved a sort of exemplary interest: Mill’s
analysis of Matter in terms of “permanent possibilities of sensation,”
his confessedly abortive analysis of personal identity in similarly
phenomenalist terms, his analysis of free-will and responsibility, and
his ringing declaration that he would not bow his knee to worship a God
whose moral worth he was required to take on trust—all these still find
their place in contemporary discussions of empiricism. Mill’s analysis
of the nature of judgment and belief perhaps engages the interest of
those who hope to explore the problems raised by A System of Logic in a
secondary source. But it is doubtful whether many readers who leave the
Logic wondering quite what Mill really thought about the epistemological
status of arithmetic and geometry find themselves helped by reading the
Examination; nor does it add much to Mill’s earlier account of
causation, beyond the effective demonstration that whatever rivals there
were to Mill’s account, Hamilton’s was not one.

In part, the fallen position of the Examination is the result of the
obscurity into which its target has fallen. If the Examination is not
much read, then Hamilton’s edition of Reid’s Works1 is certainly not
read now, as it was in Mill’s day, for Hamilton’s elaborate
“Dissertations on Reid.” The most recent discussion of Reid’s
philosophy, for example, treats Hamilton as a late and somewhat
eccentric contributor to the philosophy of common sense.2 Hamilton’s
Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic,3 of whose repetitive Edition:
current; Page: [viii] and elementary character Mill was severely
critical, were something of an embarrassment to their editors when they
appeared after Hamilton’s death. Now they are simply unreadable. The one
accessible source for Hamilton’s opinions is the volume of collected
essays, Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, Education and
University Reform,4 in which he reprinted his contributions to the
Edinburgh Review. Even those essays now attract the educational
historian rather more than the philosopher; Hamilton’s attack on the
corruption and incompetence of early nineteenth-century Oxford excites
more interest than his critique of Cousin’s views on the Absolute.

To the destruction of Hamilton’s philosophical reputation, Mill’s
Examination contributed a good deal. Mark Pattison, reviewing the
Examination in The Reader, exclaimed:

The effect of Mr Mill’s review is the absolute annihilation of all Sir
W. Hamilton’s doctrines, opinions, of all he has written or taught. Nor
of himself only, but all his followers, pupils, copyists, are involved
in the common ruin. The whole fabric of the Hamiltonian philosophy is
not only demolished, but its very stones are ground to powder. Where
once stood Sebastopol bidding proud defiance to rival systems is now

-   

    a coast barren and blue
-   

    Sandheaps behind and sandhills before.5

The enthusiasm with which Pattison contemplated the ruin of Sir
William’s followers may have had rather more to do with the academic
politics of Oxford, in which Pattison and Hamilton’s disciple H. L.
Mansel were fiercely opposed to one another, than to any very exact
appreciation of just which of Hamilton’s doctrines had suffered just
what damage. But, although Hamilton’s friends and followers ignored
Pattison’s advice that they “had better erect a monument to him, and say
nothing about Mr Mill’s book,”6 they could not restore Hamilton’s
status. Mill might not have shown that the intuitive school of
metaphysics was inevitably doomed to obscurity and muddle, but it was
generally held that he had shown Hamilton himself to be at best obscure,
at worst simply incompetent.

Whether Hamilton was worth the expenditure of Mill’s powder and shot is
another question. W. G. Ward, writing some years after in the Dublin
Review,7 thought that Mill had done well to take on one representative
figure of the anti-empiricist school and pursue him steadily through all
the cruces of the argument between associationism and its opponents. But
Edition: current; Page: [ix] Mark Pattison thought that the cracking of
dead nuts just to make sure they were empty was a task which wearied
both those who undertook it and those who watched them do it. It is, at
the very least, doubtful whether Mill was wise to devote quite so much
attention to Hamilton, for the Examination falls awkwardly between the
twin tasks of providing a complete critical exposition of Hamilton’s
philosophy on the one hand and of providing an equally comprehensive
defence of associationism on the other. In effect, Mill’s defence of
associationism is spread over the notes he supplied to James Mill’s
Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind,8 and over his reviews, as
well as through the Examination. Whatever else may be said for this
defence, its organization impedes the reader of the Examination, who is
likely to resent having to recover Mill’s views on perception, say, from
an argument conducted at several removes from the issues, in which Mill
complains of the injustice of Hamilton’s attacking Thomas Brown for
supposed misrepresentation of the views of Thomas Reid.9 It also does
something to account for the fact that the criticisms of Mill were
criticisms of his positive claims on behalf of associationism more
frequently than they were positive defences of Hamilton. Perhaps Mill
should have ignored Hamilton altogether, and stuck to the positive task;
he certainly left a great many openings for his critics, and might have
been better advised to stop them up rather than triumph over Hamilton.

There are more serious problems than these in the way of the reader of
the Examination. Mill’s critique of Hamilton and Mansel was one
engagement in the battle between empiricism and rationalism. But it was
an engagement in which the combatants employed intellectual weapons
which we find difficult to use. The argument between Mill and Hamilton
is, in their terms, an argument about the nature and contents of
“consciousness”; it is in some sense an argument about psychological
issues. But whereas we now tend to draw a sharp distinction between the
empirical inquiry into the mind and its powers which we call psychology,
and the non-empirical inquiry into the possibility of knowledge or into
the intelligibility of knowledge-claims which we now call philosophy, no
such distinction appears in the Examination. Where we are tolerably sure
that philosophical claims about the nature of space and time, or about
the nature of perception, ought to be immune from empirical confirmation
and disconfirmation, Mill and Hamilton were not. This difference does
not make for difficulties with Mill alone; it means that the views of
all other philosophers are “read” rather differently by Mill and
Hamilton from the way it is natural to us to read Edition: current;
Page: [x] them. Thus, Kant’s contribution to philosophy is treated as a
contribution to psychology. Where, for instance, we might interpret
Kant’s account of the synthetic a priori as entailing that it is a sort
of nonsense, though not strictly a grammatical or syntactical sort of
nonsense, to suggest that there might be regions of space and time in
which the laws of geometry or arithmetic do not apply, Hamilton plainly
took the claim to be one about the incapacity of the mind to conceive
non-Euclidean space or things which were not countable; and Mill was
equally ready to understand Kant in this way, differing over the issue
of whether our incapacity to conceive such a space or such objects was
part of the original constitution of the mind or the result of
experience. To some extent, therefore, readers of the Examination have
to engage in a process of translation in order to feel at home with
Mill’s argument. Sometimes there are cases which seem to defy the
process. Mill’s discussion of how we might come to have the concept of
space, for instance, is, as we shall see, very awkward if it is read as
an empirical hypothesis about how the furniture of the mind might have
been built; and it is more awkward still if it is read as what we now
call philosophy.

Against such a background, the proper task of a critic is a matter for
debate. Even if we can decently evade any obligation to show that the
Examination is a neglected masterpiece, there is a good deal left to do.
The task is partly historical and partly philosophical, and it is
perhaps an instance of those cases where the history is unintelligible
without the philosophy, as well as the other way about. Firstly,
something has to be said about why Mill should have decided to write the
Examination at all, and about the reasons for its immediate succès both
d’estime and de scandale. Then, something must be said about the life
and career of Sir William Hamilton, and at least a little about the role
of Mill’s other main antagonist, H. L. Mansel. Once the appropriate
background in Mill’s career has been filled in, and the main characters
have been identified, I shall go on to provide a substitute for the
extended analytical table of contents which was once (though it was not
part of the Examination) such a useful feature of scholarly works. My
account will be both expository and critical, and some at least of the
distinctive philosophical views of Hamilton and Mansel will be there
explored.


II.: MILL’S MOTIVATION

why should mill in particular have devoted himself to writing such a
book as the Examination?10 From his reading of the Discussions shortly
Edition: current; Page: [xi] after its appearance, Mill had inferred
that Hamilton occupied a sort of halfway house, subscribing neither to
his own enthusiasm for the principle of the association of ideas nor to
the excesses of post-Kantian Continental philosophy, in which, as Mill
saw it, we were supposed to know intuitively all sorts of implausible
things. Mill explains in his Autobiography, however, that his reading of
Hamilton’s posthumously published Lectures during 1861 alerted him to
the fact (a fact confirmed by his subsequent study of the “Dissertations
on Reid”) that Hamilton was a much more committed and unrestrained
intuitionist than he had previously supposed.11

As readers of the Autobiography will recall, Mill was very insistent
that the struggle between the intuitionists and the school of
“Experience and Association” was much more than an academic argument
over the first principles of the moral sciences. In explaining why he
had written the System of Logic, Mill had said that “it is hardly
possible to exaggerate the mischiefs”12 caused by a false philosophy of
mind. The doctrine that we have intuitive and infallible knowledge of
the principles governing either our own selves or the outside world
seemed to him

the great intellectual support of false doctrines and bad institutions.
By the aid of this theory, every inveterate belief and every intense
feeling, of which the origin is not remembered, is enabled to dispense
with the obligation of justifying itself by reason, and is erected into
its own all-sufficient voucher and justification. There never was such
an instrument devised for consecrating all deep seated prejudices.13

The System of Logic was in quite large part directed at William Whewell,
and, up to a point, Mill was right to see Whewell as the defender of
conservative and Anglican institutions—he was Master of Trinity, and
Mill had refused to attend Trinity as a youth for obvious anti-clerical
reasons.14 The Examination is described in terms which suggest that Mill
thought it necessary to return to the attack on the same front. The
difference between the intuitionists and the associationists, he says,

is not a mere matter of abstract speculation; it is full of practical
consequences, and lies at the foundation of all the greatest differences
of practical opinion in an age of progress. The practical reformer has
continually to demand that changes be made in things which are supported
by powerful and widely spread feelings, or to question the apparent
necessity and indefeasibleness of established facts; and it is often an
indispensable part of his argument to shew, how those powerful feelings
had their origin, and how those facts came to seem necessary and
indefeasible.15

One might doubt whether there was any very close practical connection
Edition: current; Page: [xii] between, say, a Kantian view of knowledge
and conservatism on the one hand, and a Humean view and liberalism on
the other. Certainly it is hard to imagine Hume welcoming the French
Revolution, had he lived to see it, and it is not very difficult to
construct radical political philosophies of a broadly intuitionist kind.
Kant at least welcomed the French Revolution, even if he trembled before
the execution of Louis XVI.16

But Mill had no doubt that some such connection did hold.

I have long felt that the prevailing tendency to regard all the marked
distinctions of human character as innate, and in the main indelible,
and to ignore the irresistible proofs that by far the greater part of
those differences, whether between individuals, races, or sexes, are
such as not only might but naturally would be produced by differences in
circumstances, is one of the chief hindrances to the rational treatment
of great social questions, and one of the greatest stumbling blocks to
human improvement.17

He therefore decided that it was right to produce something more
combative and controversial than a treatise on the associationist
philosophy of mind. It was necessary to attack the chief exponent of the
opposite view—hence what some readers will surely think of as the
grindingly negative tone of a good deal of the Examination. Mill, in
many ways, was ill-fitted to assault Hamilton in this fashion; he was
too fair-minded to let Hamilton’s case take its chances, and therefore
encumbered his attack with enormous and tedious quantities of quotation
from Hamilton. Yet at the same time he was so entirely unsympathetic to
Hamilton that he rarely paused to wonder if some rational and useful
case might be extracted from the confused jumble, which was all that
Hamilton’s writings eventually seemed to him to amount to. In a way, he
could neither do his worst to Hamilton, nor could he do his best for
him.

Yet the attack was a sort of duty, especially in view of the use made of
Hamilton’s philosophy of the conditioned by his pupil Mansel. H. L.
Mansel’s Bampton Lectures had aroused a good deal of indignation from
the time of their delivery in 1858, and they went into several editions,
with replies to critics appended to new editions. Mansel’s aim had been
something like Kant’s—to limit the pretensions of reason to make room
for faith. Accordingly, he had argued that we were obliged as a matter
of faith to believe that God was everything that was good, although
“good,” as applied to the Almighty, was a term which was at best related
only by analogy to “good” applied to a human being. Mill thought that
this conclusion amounted to using Hamilton’s doctrine to justify a “view
of religion which I hold to be profoundly immoral—that it is our duty to
bow down in worship Edition: current; Page: [xiii] before a Being whose
moral attributes are affirmed to be unknowable by us, and to be perhaps
extremely different from those which, when we are speaking of our
fellow-creatures, we call by the same names.”18

The implausibility of Mill’s attempt to line up the progressives behind
the doctrine of association and the reactionaries behind the doctrine of
intuitive knowledge is neatly illustrated by his conjoining Hamilton and
Mansel in this fashion. Their political allegiances were practically as
far apart as it was possible to get. Mansel was politically a Tory, and
was conservative in educational matters too. He was one of the most
powerful defenders of the old tutorial arrangements that characterized
teaching at Oxford and distinguished it from the Scottish and German
universities. Hamilton, on the other hand, was a liberal in politics,
thought the tutorial system beneath contempt, thought Oxford colleges
entirely corrupt, and, had he been able, would have swept away the whole
system in favour of something modelled on the Scottish system.

Mill’s intention of provoking a combat à outrance was wholly successful.
The Examination attracted much more attention than the System of Logic
had done.19 Mansel’s long review of it, The Philosophy of the
Conditioned—which only covered the first few chapters on the principle
of the relativity of knowledge and the attack on his Bampton
Lectures—came out within months. James McCosh produced a volume, In
Defence of Fundamental Truth, intended to defend those parts of
Hamilton’s philosophy which were most characteristic of the Scottish
philosophy of common sense. Within two years Mill was preparing a third
edition of the Examination in which these and several other extended
attacks were answered; the furore continued in the years before Mill’s
death, with the appearance in 1869 of John Veitch’s Memoir of Sir
William Hamilton Bart., a pious defence of the opinions as well as the
life of his old teacher, and W. G. Ward’s further assault on
associationism in the Dublin Review in 1871. The balance of the comments
was undoubtedly hostile to Mill, less because of a widespread enthusiasm
for the doctrines of Sir William Hamilton than because of a widespread
fear that their rejection must lead to what McCosh almost invariably
conjoined as “Humeanism and Comtism”—a mixture of atheism and dubious
French politics. In this sense Mill’s belief that he was fighting the
pious and the conservative was absolutely right, for it was they—with
the exception of some support from Herbert Spencer on the one topic of
self-evidence—who were his hostile reviewers. Even then, some of the
supposedly pious and the conservative were more in sympathy Edition:
current; Page: [xiv] with Mill than with Hamilton. Two notable adherents
were William Whewell, who, for all that he was Mill’s victim on many
occasions, had no doubt that Hamilton was an intellectual disaster who
had set the course of speculation back by twenty years, and F. D.
Maurice, who had been a harsh and persistent critic of Mansel for years.

It is difficult to know when this interest in the argument between Mill
and Hamilton died.20 From what evidence there is, it looks as though an
interest in the Examination lasted so long as the System of Logic was
still doing its good work in changing the philosophical syllabus in
Oxford and Cambridge. But during the 1870s a new and in many ways more
professional generation of philosophers became prominent, who had in one
sense absorbed as much as they needed of Mill’s work and, in another,
were determined to clear away his intellectual influence. In Oxford at
any rate, it was T. H. Green and F. H. Bradley who set the pace; and
they were not inclined to defend Hamilton for the sake of refuting Mill,
especially when their epistemological allegiances were Hegelian rather
than patchily Kantian. So Bradley’s Ethical Studies contains an
extremely effective analysis of Mill’s account of personal identity, but
does not bother with the rest of the contest between the transcendental
and empiricist analysis of the relations between mind and matter. And
Green, though he applies to Mill the criticisms he develops against
Hume, does not treat the Examination as the locus classicus of Mill’s
views. Thereafter, it seems that anyone much interested in Mill’s
philosophy would look into the Examination only for the range of topics
mentioned at the beginning of this Introduction.


III.: HAMILTON AND MANSEL

ALTHOUGH THE NAME OF HAMILTON is scarcely mentioned now, except in
connection with his doctrine of the quantification of the predicate, it
seems a proper estimate of his eminence in the first half of the
nineteenth century to say that he and Mill were the two people in
Britain whose names might occur to a philosophically educated foreigner
who was asked to name a British thinker of any distinction. Sorley’s
History of English Philosophy, for instance, links the two names
together in precisely this sense.21 And it seems that if one had asked
teachers in American universities during the middle years of the century
what contemporary influences they felt from Edition: current; Page: [xv]
Britain, they would have talked of Hamilton and Mill—though a little
later the influence of Spencer would no doubt have been, if anything,
stronger.

Hamilton was born in Glasgow on 8 March, 1788, in one of the houses in
Professors’ Court, for his father was Professor of Botany and Anatomy.
His father died when William was only two years old, but there is no
evidence that the family suffered any financial difficulties in
consequence, and Mrs. Hamilton’s character was quite strong enough to
ensure that the absence of the father’s hand was not much felt.

After attending both Scottish and English schools and Glasgow and
Edinburgh Universities, Hamilton began in 1807 a distinguished academic
career at Balliol College, Oxford. In spite of his exceptional erudition
and an epic performance in the final examination in Classics, as a Scot
he received no offer of a fellowship, and returned to study law at
Edinburgh, being admitted to the bar in 1813. His legal career was
distinguished solely by a successful application (heard by the sheriff
of Edinburgh in 1816) to be recognized as the heir to the Baronetcy of
Preston and Fingalton.

If his nationality cost him the first opportunity of academic
preferment, it was his Whig sympathies that scotched the second when, in
1820, he failed to succeed Thomas Brown in the Chair of Moral Philosophy
in Edinburgh. The following year he obtained an underpaid and
undemanding Chair in Civil History, but he made no mark in intellectual
circles until 1829, when he began to contribute to the Edinburgh Review.

His first article, on Cousin, was an editor’s nightmare, being late in
arrival, much too long, and completely beyond the grasp of most of the
readers of the Review.22 But it was a great success with Cousin himself,
and it served notice on the outside world that someone in the British
Isles was abreast of European philosophy. It was for the Edinburgh that
Hamilton wrote the most readable of his work: the two essays on “The
Philosophy of the Conditioned” and on “Perception,” his essay on “Logic”
which contains (at least on Hamilton’s reading of it) the first
statement of the doctrine of the quantification of the predicate, and
his condemnation of the intellectual and legal condition of the
University of Oxford. It cannot be said that they were thought, even at
the time, to be uniformly readable; Napier, the editor, was frequently
reduced to complaining of the excessive length, the overabundant
quotations, and the archaic forms of speech which Hamilton indulged
in.23 But, as Mill’s account would lead one to expect, it is these
essays, reprinted in his Discussions, which show Hamilton at his best
and most accessible. Even then, there are longueurs attributable less to
the mania for quotation that to the combative manner of the author. The
essay Edition: current; Page: [xvi] on perception, for instance, is so
grindingly critical of Thomas Brown that the reader loses patience with
the argument.

In 1836, however, academic justice was at last done. The Chair of Logic
and Metaphysics in Edinburgh fell vacant, and this time the City Council
elected him, by eighteen votes to fourteen. The composition of lectures
for the courses he was now obliged to give followed very much the same
pattern as his literary exploits—everything was done too late and too
elaborately; so in his first year Hamilton not infrequently worked until
dawn the night before delivering his lectures, and then took what rest
he could while his wife got the day’s lecture into shape for delivery.
Shortly after the election, he embarked on his edition of the Works of
Reid. This was a characteristically acrimonious business, in which
Hamilton started work at the suggestion of Tait, the Edinburgh
bookseller, then took offence at the financial arrangements proposed by
Tait (who seems to have expected a volume of Reid’s writings with a
short preface, rather than something with as much of Hamilton’s
erudition as Reid’s thinking in it, and who was not willing to pay for
labours he had no wish to see anyone undertake), and published the
edition at his own expense in 1846.24

Hamilton’s active career was relatively brief. In 1844 he suffered a
stroke, which did not impair his general intellectual grasp, but left
him lame in the right side and increasingly enfeebled. He had to have
his lectures read for him much of the time, although he managed to keep
up a reasonably active role in the discussion of them. He was, however,
well enough to see the republication of his earlier essays and to carry
on a violent controversy with Augustus De Morgan, both about their
relative priority in the discovery of the principle of the
quantification of the predicate, and about its merits. De Morgan was
vastly entertained by the violence of Hamilton’s attacks, both because
he enjoyed the resulting publicity it conferred on his own work and, so
far as one can see, because he liked having an argument with someone so
uninhibited in his aggression as was Hamilton.25 Others were less sure:
Boole, thanking Hamilton for the gift of a copy of the Discussions, took
the opportunity to say: “I think you are unjustifiably severe upon my
friend Mr De Morgan. He is, I believe, a man as much imbued with the
love of truth as can anywhere be found. When such men err, a calm and
simple statement of the ground of their error answers every purpose
which the interests either of learning or of justice can require.”26 The
effort was wasted twice over, seeing that Hamilton was unlikely to
become more moderate, and De Morgan was perfectly happy to be abused.

Edition: current; Page: [xvii]
Hamilton’s health became worse after a fall during 1853, and he became
less mentally active in the last two or three years of his life.
Retirement, however, was impossible, since he could not live without the
£500 a year that the Chair gave him.27 Despite these outward
difficulties, and the acerbity of his writings, all was not gloom and
grimness. Hamilton’s domestic life was strikingly happy; when he died on
6 May, 1856, he left behind a devoted family, loyal pupils, and a good
many friends as well.

A matter of much more difficulty than establishing the outward
conditions of his life is working out how Hamilton came to exercise such
a considerable influence on the philosophical life of the country. He
created enthusiastic students, of whom Thomas S. Baynes became the most
professionally and professorially successful, but otherwise it seems to
have been the weight of learning of a half-traditional kind which backed
up the reception of his views. His innovations in logic, for instance,
were produced in articles which were largely devoted to a minute
chronicle of the fate of deductive logic in the fifteenth to seventeenth
centuries. His views on perception, or on the relativity of knowledge,
are always placed in the framework of an historical analysis of the sort
which the higher education of the time encouraged. How much it assisted
his, or anyone’s, understanding of Kant to yoke him with Plato for the
purposes of comparison and contrast is debatable, but the weight it
added to his arguments looked to some of his audience very much like
intellectual power rather than mere weight. He was more or less an
intellectual fossil thirty years after his death, however. Sir Leslie
Stephen’s account of Hamilton in the Dictionary of National Biography
presents him as an eccentric and pedantic leftover from the Scottish
school of common sense. And Stephen’s marginal comments in his copy of
the Discussions display the exasperation Hamilton is likely to induce;
at the end of “Philosophy of the Conditioned,” the pencilled comment
reads: “A good deal of this seems to be very paltry logomachy. His
amazing way of quoting ‘authorities’ (eg Sir K. Digby, Walpole & Mme de
Stael) to prove an obvious commonplace is of the genuine pedant. And yet
he had a very sound argument—only rather spoilt.”28

Henry Longueville Mansel was Hamilton’s chief disciple in Oxford.29 Born
in 1820 he shone as a pupil first at Merchant Taylor’s School and then
at St. John’s College, Oxford; and in 1843, with a double First in
Mathematics and Classics, he settled down with great pleasure to the
task of tutoring Edition: current; Page: [xviii] clever undergraduates;
he was regarded throughout the university as its best tutor. He held the
first appointment as Waynflete Professor of Metaphysical Philosophy, and
therefore counts R. G. Collingwood, Gilbert Ryle, and Sir Peter Strawson
among his intellectual progeny. With his interest in Kant and his German
successors, and his astringent, largely destructive approach to the
subject he professed, he might almost be said to have set the boundaries
of the subsequent style.

Mansel was a productive writer: his Prolegomena Logica appeared in 1851;
his Metaphysics, which was an expansion of a substantial essay for the
Encyclopædia Britannica, in 1860. He was most widely known as the author
of The Limits of Religious Thought, the Bampton Lectures for 1858. This
work was reprinted several times, and aroused a great deal of
controversy, in which F. D. Maurice played an especially acrimonious
role. Philosophically, Mansel was greatly indebted to Kant, but he was
very hostile to Kant’s theology and to Kant’s moral philosophy alike.
The Limits of Religious Thought was described by Mansel himself as

an attempt to pursue, in relation to Theology, the inquiry instituted by
Kant in relation to Metaphysics; namely, How are synthetical judgments à
priori possible? In other words: Does there exist in the human mind any
direct faculty of religious knowledge, by which, in its speculative
exercise, we are enabled to decide, independently of all external
Revelation, what is the true nature of God, and the manner in which He
must manifest Himself to the world . . . ?30

The answer he gave was that there was no such faculty of religious
knowledge, and that natural theology was quite unable to set limits to
the nature and attributes of God. Moreover, he shared none of Kant’s
certainty that our moral faculty allowed us to judge supposed
revelations by their consistency with divine goodness. What goodness is
in the divinity is not a matter on which human reason is fit to
pronounce.

Mansel was not only a productive writer; he wrote elegantly and lucidly.
There are many reasons for wishing that it had been Mansel’s Metaphysics
which Mill had examined, rather than Hamilton’s Lectures, and the
clarity of Mansel’s prose is not the least. Even in the pious context of
the Bampton Lectures he is witty—replying to a critic who complains that
Mansel’s attack on rationalism in theology is an attempt to limit the
use of reason, he says that it is only the improper use of reason he is
rejecting: “All Dogmatic Theology is not Dogmatism, nor all use of
Reason, Rationalism, any more than all drinking is drunkenness.”31 It
was not surprising that progress Edition: current; Page: [xix] came
quickly. In 1855 he was elected to the Readership in Moral and
Metaphysical Philosophy, and in 1859 to the Waynflete Professorship.
Mansel’s wit and exuberance were, however, not matched by physical
strength. His acceptance of the Chair of Ecclesiastical History in 1866
was a partial recognition of the need to conserve his energy, and a move
to London as Dean of St. Paul’s in 1868 more explicit recognition.
Besides, by the mid-1860s he was finding the moderately reformed Oxford
increasingly uncongenial to his conservative tastes. In 1871 he died
suddenly in his sleep.

The contrasts between Mansel and Hamilton are so complete that it is
difficult to know why Mansel was so devoted a follower of “the Edinburgh
metaphysician”—for his devotion did indeed extend to employing
Hamilton’s logical innovations in rather unlikely contexts, and even to
defending them against De Morgan.32 What is evident so far is that
Mansel required nothing much more than an ally against the pretensions
of Absolute Idealism; but that judgment plainly understates the strength
of his conviction. It is obviously preposterous to think of Mansel and
Hamilton as sharing any political commitment which would account for
such a degree of conviction. It is more reasonable to suppose that they
shared something which one can only gesture towards by calling it a
matter of religious psychology. Mansel genuinely seems to have thought
that an acknowledgement of the limitations of human reason was a more
reverent attitude towards the unknowable God than any attempt to look
further into His nature, and he seems to have been impressed by a
similar outlook in Hamilton:

True, therefore, are the declarations of a pious philosophy:—“A God
understood would be no God at all;”—“To think that God is, as we can
think him to be, is blasphemy.”—The Divinity, in a certain sense, is
revealed; in a certain sense is concealed: He is at once known and
unknown. But the last and highest consecration of all true religion,
must be an altar—Ἀγνώστῳ Θεῳ̑—“To the unknown and unknowable God.”33

Hamilton’s insistence that his doubts about Absolute knowledge are not
only compatible with, but in some sense required by, Christian
revelation is practically the theme of Mansel’s Bampton Lectures.
Between them and Mill there was a gulf, therefore, but one less
political than Mill’s Autobiography Edition: current; Page: [xx]
suggests. It was the gulf between Mill’s utterly secular, this-worldly
temperament and their sense of the final mysteriousness of the world.
The harshness of Mansel’s attack on the Examination in The Philosophy of
the Conditioned reflects his resentment of this matter-of-fact approach
to the world, a resentment which cannot have been soothed by the fact
that in Oxford, as elsewhere, the staples of a Christian philosophy,
such as Butler’s Analogy, were losing ground to such textbooks as the
System of Logic.34


IV.: THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE CONDITIONED

the opening shots of Mill’s campaign against Hamilton’s philosophy are
directed against “the philosophy of the conditioned.” The burden of
Mill’s complaint against Hamilton is that his attachment to what he and
Mill term “the relativity of knowledge” is intermittent, half-hearted,
explained in incoherent and self-contradictory ways. He accuses Hamilton
of both asserting and denying that we can have knowledge of Things in
themselves, and of giving wholly feeble reasons for supposing that we
cannot conceive of, particularly, the nature of space and time as they
are intrinsically, but can nevertheless believe that they are genuinely
and in themselves infinite. It is this part of Hamilton’s philosophy
that Mansel’s essay on The Philosophy of the Conditioned had to
endeavour to rescue; his Bampton Lectures on The Limits of Religious
Thought hung on the negative claim that the human mind could not
conceive of the nature of the Deity, so that He remained inaccessible to
philosophical speculation, and on the positive claim that there was
still room for belief in such an inconceivable Deity. Mansel’s version
of the philosophy of the conditioned was intended to repel the
pretensions of philosophy in the sphere of religion. “Pantheist”
philosophers of the Absolute, such as Hegel and Schelling, were unable
to provide knowledge of an Absolute that might replace, or be recognized
as the philosophically reputable surrogate of, the God of Christianity;
less ambitious philosophers were shown to be unable to restrict the
attributes of a Deity by the categories of human reason. As this account
suggests, the Kantian overtones in Mansel’s work are very marked, and,
as we shall see, The Philosophy of the Conditioned gives a very Kantian
interpretation of Hamilton.

Yet the oddity, or perhaps we should only say the distinctive feature,
of Hamilton’s philosophy on its metaphysical front was the combination
of the critical philosophy of Kant with Reid’s philosophy of common
sense. Edition: current; Page: [xxi] Hamilton’s position seems at first
to be exactly that of Reid. He sided with Reid and common sense in
holding that “the way of ideas” is suicidal, that any theory which
presents the external world as a logical construction from the immediate
objects of perception (construed as “ideas”) simply fails to account for
the world’s true externality. In particular, he held, with Reid, that
what we perceive are things themselves, not a representation of them, or
an intermediary idea. Moreover, some of the properties which we perceive
things to possess really are properties of the objects themselves, and
not contributions of the percipient mind. The secondary qualities he was
willing to recognize as not existing in the object itself, but primary
qualities were wholly objective, not observer dependent. The knowledge
we have of things, however, still remains in some sense relative or
conditioned. The question is, in what sense?

It is at this point that the invocation of Kant’s criticalism causes
difficulties, for Hamilton could afford to take only a few details from
Kant if he was not to run headlong against Reid. Above all, he wanted to
side with Kant against Kant’s successors, and to deny that we can know
anything of the Absolute or the Unconditioned. He wanted, that is, to
deny the possibility of a positive pre- or post-critical metaphysics, in
which it was supposed to be demonstrated that Space and Time were in
themselves infinite—or not. But he did not want to follow Kant in his
“Copernican revolution”; or, rather, he could not have intended to do
anything of the sort. For Hamilton did not think that the contribution
of the percipient mind to what is perceived is anything like as
extensive as Kant claimed. The implication for metaphysics of the
“relative” or “conditioned” nature of human knowledge he certainly took
to be what Kant claimed it to be:

The result of his examination was the abolition of the metaphysical
sciences,—of Rational Psychology, Ontology, Speculative Theology, &c.,
as founded on mere petitiones principiorum. . . . “Things in
themselves,” Matter, Mind, God,—all, in short, that is not finite,
relative, and phænomenal, as bearing no analogy to our faculties, is
beyond the verge of our knowledge. Philosophy was thus restricted to the
observation and analysis of the phænomena of consciousness; and what is
not explicitly or implicitly given in a fact of consciousness, is
condemned, as transcending the sphere of a legitimate speculation. A
knowledge of the Unconditioned is declared impossible; either
immediately, as an intuition, or mediately, as an inference.35

But he refused to draw Kant’s conclusions about the subjectivity of
space and time, and denied that the antinomies showed that they were
only forms of intuition:

The Conditioned is the mean between two extremes,—two inconditionates,
exclusive of each other, neither of which can be conceived as possible,
but of Edition: current; Page: [xxii] which, on the principles of
contradiction and excluded middle, one must be admitted as necessary. On
this opinion, therefore, our faculties are shown to be weak, but not
deceitful. The mind is not represented as conceiving two propositions
subversive of each other, as equally possible; but only, as unable to
understand as possible, either of two extremes; one of which, however,
on the ground of their mutual repugnance, it is compelled to recognise
as true.36

In effect, Hamilton’s view seems to have been that Reid and common sense
were right in holding that what we perceive are real, material objects,
located in an objective space and time, objectively possessed of (some
of) the properties we ascribe to them, but that Kant was right in
holding that those properties which we can ascribe to them must be
adapted to our faculties, “relative” in the sense of being related to
our cognitive capacities.

The question of the sense in which all our knowledge is thus of the
relative or the conditioned is not quite here answered, however. For
there remains a considerable ambiguity about the nature of this
relativism, or relatedness. The simplest reading turns the doctrine of
relativity into a truism. It amounts to saying that what we can know
depends in part upon our perceptive capacities, and that beings with
different perceptual arrangements from our own would perceive the world
differently. In that sense, it is no doubt true that what we perceive of
the world is only an aspect of the whole of what is there to be
perceived. More philosophically interesting is an exploration of why we
seem able to agree that we might in principle perceive the world quite
otherwise than we do, but find it impossible to say much about how we
might do so. Mill, however, pursues that topic no further than to its
familiar sources in the questions asked by Locke—whether a man born
blind could conceive of space, for instance (222ff.). Mill’s chief
complaint is that Hamilton confuses several senses of relativity
together, when talking of the relativity of knowledge, and that the only
sense he consistently adheres to is this truistic sense. In any real
sense, says Mill, Hamilton was not a relativist:

Sir W. Hamilton did not hold any opinion in virtue of which it could
rationally be asserted that all human knowledge is relative; but did
hold, as one of the main elements of his philosophical creed, the
opposite doctrine, of the cognoscibility of external Things, in certain
of their aspects, as they are in themselves, absolutely

(33).

When Hamilton attempts to reconcile this objectivist account with the
doctrine of the relativity of knowledge, flat contradiction is only
averted by retreat into banality:

He affirms without reservation, that certain attributes (extension,
figures, &c.) are known to us as they really exist out of ourselves; and
also that all our knowledge of Edition: current; Page: [xxiii] them is
relative to us. And these two assertions are only reconcileable, if
relativity to us is understood in the altogether trivial sense, that we
know them only so far as our faculties permit.

(22.)

Mill was not the severest critic of Hamilton on this score. J. H.
Stirling’s critique of Hamilton’s account of perception treats
Hamilton’s views with complete contempt. The contradiction between the
objectivist account and the relativist account of our knowledge of the
outside world is so blatant that Hamilton cannot have failed to notice
it. Where Mill suspects Hamilton of mere confusion, Stirling accuses him
of disingenuousness. Mill demurely declines to press any such charge
(cv). He did not even suggest that Reid and Kant made awkward allies in
principle. In an earlier article on “Bain’s Psychology” he had indeed
yoked Reid and Kant together as members of the a priori school of
psychological analysis. But he went on to point out that the question of
the connection between our faculties and the nature of the external
reality was an issue of ontology rather than psychology; and here Reid
was “decidedly of opinion that Matter—not the set of phenomena so
called, but the actual Thing, of which these are effects and
manifestations—is congnizable by us as a reality in the universe.”37
This comment suggests that Mill thought of Hamilton as discussing
metaphysics in a wide sense—both “the science of being” and psychology;
Reid, Kant, and Hamilton were allies in so far as they belonged to the
same camp in psychology, but they made an ill-assorted trio in matters
of ontology. Here Kant and Reid belonged to different camps and no one
could tell where Hamilton stood. Mansel’s reply to Mill was to insist
that everything in Reid, and everything in Hamilton which expressed an
allegiance to Reid, should be as it were put in Kantian brackets. We
might perceive things themselves, but the “thing itself” which we
perceive is not the “thing-in-itself,” but only the phenomenally
objective thing. The thing known in perception was the appearance to us
of a noumenon of which nothing whatever could be known.38

There is something to be said for Mansel’s claims. Reid at times writes
as if knowledge is doubly relative: in the knower, it is a state of an
ego of which we only know the states, though convinced that it exists as
a continuing substance; and, in the known, what we know is states of
things external to us, though again we are irresistibly convinced of
their continued substantial existence. But we cannot safely go far along
this path. Reid did not like to talk of substances, and certainly did
not wish to introduce them as mysterious substrates; to the extent that
Mansel rescues Hamilton by claiming that Edition: current; Page: [xxiv]
external things are known “relatively” as phenomena related to
imperceptible noumena, he goes against the evident thrust of Reid’s
views. The further one presses Hamilton’s attachment to Kant beyond his
avowed enthusiasm for the destructive attack on positive metaphysics,
the harder it is to get any textual backing for the case. It is
doubtless true that a sophisticated Kantian would have been untroubled
by Mill’s attack, but it is quite implausible to suggest that that is
what Sir William Hamilton was.

At all events, Mill’s approach to Hamilton is initially entirely
negative. Mill does not put forward any view of his own on the
relativity of knowledge. The reason is a good one so far as it goes.
Mill’s distinction between the a priori and a posteriori schools of
psychology is one which only partially overlaps his main theme. For in
the Examination, just as in the Logic, Mill’s hostility is directed
against those who attempt to infer the nature of the world from the
contents and capacities of our minds. In principle, there is no reason
why there should be any overlap between a priorism in psychology and the
view that mental capacities and incapacities reflect real possibilities
and impossibilities in the world. A priorism, as Mill describes it, is a
psychological approach which refers our most important beliefs about the
world, and our moral principles, too, to instincts or to innate
capacities or dispositions. The sense in which these are a priori is not
very easy to characterize, although the fact that many of the
instinctive beliefs described by the a priori psychologists of Mill’s
account coincide with the judgments described by Kant as synthetic a
priori suggests most of the appropriate connotations. Thus the
perception that objects occupy a space described by Euclidean geometry
embodies the instinctive judgment that bodies must occupy space, and the
necessity ascribed to the truths of geometry reflects the instinctive
judgment that, for instance, two straight lines cannot enclose a space,
and so on. Such judgments, says Mill, purport to be a priori in the
sense that they have to be presumed true before experience is possible,
or at any rate characterizable. Whether they are held to be temporally
prior to experience is, he recognizes, not essential: there is no need
to deny that children have to learn arithmetic in order to deny that its
truths reflect the teachings of experience. Mill sees that it is quite
arguable that the capacity to recognize necessities of thought is one
which matures in the child, and requires experience to set it to work.
Indeed, at times, he seems to suggest that the dispute between a priori
and a posteriori psychologists is an empirical dispute in which there
need not be only two opposing sides. For if the issue is one of how much
of an adult’s understanding of the world we can account for as the
result of individual learning, there will be a continuum between
psychologists who stress the extent to which such an understanding is as
it were preprogrammed into the human organism and those who stress how
much of it can be accounted for Edition: current; Page: [xxv] by
trial-and-error learning from the organism’s environment. In like
manner, with reference to the area of moral and prudential reasoning,
there would be a similar continuum between those who see us as
relatively plastic and malleable organisms and those who claim to see
some moral and prudential attachments more or less genetically built in.

Now, in so far as the argument proceeds in these terms, it will still
follow a pattern which is visible in Mill’s own approach. That is, the
environmentalist must attempt to show some way in which the capacity,
whose acquisition he is trying to explain, could have been built up
through experience; the innatist will respond by showing that there are
features of such a capacity which are simply omitted or more subtly
misrepresented by such an account. The question of how much of what we
perceive of the world is to be credited to the programme by which the
percipient organism organizes its physical interaction with the world,
and how much is to be set down to learning, is then an empirical
question, or rather a whole series of empirical questions. This was the
point at which Mill and Herbert Spencer came close to agreement.
Spencer’s long discussion of the nature of intuitive knowledge in the
Fortnightly Review is a protest against being assigned to the
rationalist camp by Mill, in which Spencer’s central point is that when
we refer our sensations to external objects as their causes this is, as
it were, a hypothesis proferred by the organism, a hypothesis which we
cannot consciously shake, and one on which we cannot help acting.
Nonetheless, it is only a hypothesis; it is, however, one which seems to
have been programmed into us by evolution, and one whose reliability is
most readily accounted for by the theory that the external world is,
indeed, much as we perceive it is.39 The doctrine is not one which would
perturb Mill; he ascribed something very like it to Reid.40

This assertion, however, does imply that Mill’s own interest in the
relativity of knowledge as a central issue in epistemology rather than
psychology, would necessarily be slight. That the organic constitution
of human beings sets limits to what they could hope to know about the
world was an uninteresting empirical truth; interesting truths about the
ways in which we were prone to illusions in some areas, or about the
ways in which we estimated the size, shape, movement, or whatever of
external bodies, would emerge piecemeal. Mill never quite propounded a
version of the verification principle, and therefore never went to the
lengths of suggesting that what one might call transcendental relativism
or transcendental idealism was simply meaningless, because its truth or
falsity could make no observational difference. But he came very close.

Edition: current; Page: [xxvi]
He came particularly close when he turned from Hamilton’s views on the
positive relativity of knowledge to Hamilton’s negative case, as set out
in his critique of Cousin. In his attack on Cousin, Hamilton had denied
that we can ever attain to positive knowledge of “the Infinite” and “the
Absolute”; Mill dismantles Hamilton’s various arguments to this effect,
distinguishing Kantian arguments to show that we can know nothing of
noumena from arguments against the possibility of an “infinite being.”
They are, he points out, directed at very different targets. That our
knowledge is phenomenal, not noumenal, “is true of the finite as well as
of the infinite, of the imperfect as well as of the completed or
absolute” (58-9). The “Unconditioned,” in so far as it is to be
identified with the noumenal, is certainly not an object of knowledge
for us. But “the Absolute” and “the Infinite” are in considerably worse
shape than the merely noumenal. These, though Hamilton never meant to go
so far, are shown up as a tissue of contradictory attributes: “he has
established, more thoroughly perhaps than he intended, the futility of
all speculation respecting those meaningless abstractions ‘The Infinite’
and ‘The Absolute,’ notions contradictory in themselves, and to which no
corresponding realities do or can exist” (58). To Mansel’s reply that
Hamilton had not tried to argue that they were meaningless abstractions,
Mill had a ready retort:

I never pretended that he did; the gist of my complaint against him is,
that he did not perceive them to be unmeaning. “Hamilton,” says Mr
Mansel, “maintains that the terms absolute and infinite are perfectly
intelligible as abstractions, as much so as relative and finite.” Quis
dubitavit? It is not the terms absolute and infinite that are unmeaning;
it is “The Infinite” and “The Absolute.” Infinite and Absolute are real
attributes, abstracted from concrete objects of thought, if not of
experience, which are at least believed to possess those attributes.
“The Infinite” and “The Absolute” are illegitimate abstractions of what
never were, nor could without self-contradiction be supposed to be,
attributes of any concrete.

(58n.)

Mill’s harassment of Hamilton on the Absolute and the Infinite has few
lessons of great moment. It is interesting that Mill does not adopt, as
he might have done, Hobbes’s method of dealing with the question of
infinity. Where Hobbes had said that “infinite” characterizes not the
attribute itself, but our incapacity to set a limit to whatever
attribute is in question, Mill treats it as an attribute, that of being
greater than any completed attribute of the appropriate sort—a line of
infinite length is thus longer than any completed line. Some attributes
could be characterized as absolutely present, but not infinitely so,
others as infinitely but not absolutely present. The purity of water has
an absolute limit, viz., when all impurities are absent, but there is no
sense to be given to the notion of infinitely pure water. Concerning
this issue, Mill changed his mind on minor points from one edition to
another. He began by claiming that power could be infinite, Edition:
current; Page: [xxvii] but knowledge only absolute, because absolute
knowledge meant knowing everything there is to be known; but under
pressure from Mansel and other critics, he agreed that a being of
infinite power would know everything he could think or create, so that
his knowledge would be infinite also (37-8). But he is casual about such
concessions, quite rightly seeing them as having little bearing on the
main question, whether there is any sense at all to be attached to such
notions as “the Absolute.”

It is surprising that Mill does not press his opponents harder on the
meaninglessness of propositions about beings with infinite attributes
and the rest. Mansel in particular, but Hamilton also, was very
vulnerable to the charge that in showing God or the Unconditioned to be
beyond our conceiving, they had also shown them to be beyond our
believing. Both Hamilton and Mansel were utterly committed to the
principle that what was not a possible object of knowledge was
nevertheless a proper object of belief. Mansel stated his position with
characteristic lucidity in the Preface to his Bampton Lectures:

“the terms conceive, conception, &c., as they are employed in the
following Lectures, always imply an apprehension of the manner in which
certain attributes can coexist with each other, so as to form a whole or
complex notion. . . . Thus when it is said that the nature of God as an
absolute and infinite being is inconceivable, it is not meant that the
terms absolute and infinite have no meaning—as mere terms they are as
intelligible as the opposite terms relative and finite—but that we
cannot apprehend how the attributes of absoluteness and infinity coexist
with the personal attributes of God, though we may believe that, in some
manner unknown to us, they do coexist. In like manner, we cannot
conceive how a purely spiritual being sees and hears without the bodily
organs of sight and hearing; yet we may believe that He does so in some
manner. Belief is possible in the mere fact (τὸ ὅτι). Conception must
include the manner (τὸ πω̑ς).41

The obvious question invited is, what is the mere fact believed in? If
we cannot form any conception of the state of affairs which is said to
be the object of our belief, it is not clear that we can be said to know
what we believe at all. Mill’s attack on the discussion of “the
Infinite” and “the Absolute” concentrates, as we have just seen, on the
claim that they cannot be talked about because they are literal
self-contradictions; Mansel does not quite go to the length of saying
that self-contradictory propositions might be true, though we cannot
imagine how, and Mill does not press on him the obvious dilemma that he
must either say that, or admit that the terms he is using no longer bear
their usual meaning, and perhaps bear no clear meaning at all.

What Mill does argue against Hamilton is that no sooner has Hamilton
Edition: current; Page: [xxviii] routed those of his opponents who
believe that we have direct knowledge of the unconditioned, or perhaps
an indirect and implicit knowledge only, than he joins forces with them
by letting what they describe as “knowledge” back into his system under
the label of “belief.” If one were looking for the weak points in Mill’s
account of Hamilton, this brief attack would surely be one place to seek
them in. In essence, Mill’s complaint is that whatever Hamilton had
maintained about the relativity of knowledge, and whatever scepticism he
had evinced about the Unconditioned, everything would have been

reduced to naught, or to a mere verbal controversy, by his admission of
a second kind of intellectual conviction called Belief; which is
anterior to knowledge, is the foundation of it, and is not subject to
its limitations; and through the medium of which we may have, and are
justified in having, a full assurance of all the things which he has
pronounced unknowable to us; and this not exclusively by revelation,
that is, on the supposed testimony of a Being whom we have ground for
trusting as veracious, but by our natural faculties

(60).

Mill’s outrage is intelligible enough. If one supposes that
philosophical first principles are supposed to furnish a set of premises
from which we can deduce the general reliability of our knowledge, then
some such method as that of Descartes is the obvious one to pursue, and
it would seem that first principles must be better known than anything
that hangs upon them. At least it would seem scandalous to any Cartesian
to suppose that we merely believed in our own existence and yet knew
that bodies could not interpenetrate or that the sun would rise again in
the morning. Yet it is doubtful whether this is how Mill ought to have
understood Hamilton. Spencer, who tackled the issue more
sympathetically, suggested a more plausible interpretation, and one
which does more justice than Mill’s to the difference between a
Cartesian and a Kantian view of first principles. Mill, who treats the
difference between belief and knowledge very much as twentieth century
empiricism was to do—that is, regarding knowledge as justified true
belief (65n)—cannot allow for a difference in the ways of treating
particular knowledge claims and claims about the whole of our knowledge.
But Spencer does just that. When we claim to know something, we assume
that we can set our belief against external evidence; but we cannot peel
off the whole of our knowledge of the world from the hidden world of
which it is knowledge and claim that we now know that it is knowledge.42
All we can do is believe that it really is knowledge. More than one
twentieth-century philosopher of science has similarly claimed that we
can only make sense of the sciences’ claim to supply us with knowledge
of the world if we believe in an occult, underlying, objective order in
the world, which is beyond experience but accounts for its possibility.

Edition: current; Page: [xxix]
It is only when Mill comes to sum up the successes and failures of the
philosophy of the conditioned that he supplies the reader with what is
most required—an explanation of what Mill himself understands by
inconceivability, and how he explains it, in opposition to the
intuitionists and innatists. The explanation occupies a considerable
space, but it is worth noticing two main points. The first is Mill’s
claim that the majority of cases of inconceivability can be explained by
our experience of inseparable associations between attributes, and the
other his claim that most of the things that Hamilton claims to be
inconceivable are not difficult, let alone impossible, to conceive. What
is most likely to scandalize twentieth-century readers is the way Mill
treats it as an empirical psychological law that we cannot conjoin
contradictory attributes, and therefore cannot conceive things with
contradictory attributes. The source of the scandal is obvious: we are
inclined to hold that it is a matter of logic that a thing cannot have
inconsistent attributes, not because of any property of things or our
minds, but because a proposition is logically equivalent to the negation
of its negation, and to ascribe a property and its contradictory to an
object is simply to say nothing. The assertion negates and is negated by
the denial of it. The law of non-contradiction, on this view, cannot be
interpreted psychologically, without putting the cart before the horse:
that a man cannot be both alive and not alive is not the consequence of
our de facto inability to put the ideas of life and death together.

Mill, however, suggests something like a gradation, from flat
contradiction through decreasingly well-attested repugnances of
attributes:

We cannot represent anything to ourselves as at once being something,
and not being it; as at once having, and not having, a given attribute.
The following are other examples. We cannot represent to ourselves time
or space as having an end. We cannot represent to ourselves two and two
as making five; nor two straight lines as enclosing a space. We cannot
represent to ourselves a round square; nor a body all black, and at the
same time all white.

(69-70.)

But he goes on to make something nearer a sharp break between flat
contradiction and everything else:

A distinction may be made, which, I think, will be found pertinent to
the question. That the same thing should at once be and not be—that
identically the same statement should be both true and false—is not only
inconceivable to us, but we cannot imagine that it could be made
conceivable. We cannot attach sufficient meaning to the proposition, to
be able to represent to ourselves the supposition of a different
experience on this matter. We cannot therefore even entertain the
question, whether the incompatibility is in the original structure of
our minds, or is only put there by our experience. The case is otherwise
in all the other examples of inconceivability.

(70.)

These, Mill begins by saying, are only the result of inseparable
association; but he rather confusingly qualifies this by suggesting that
even there the Edition: current; Page: [xxx] inconceivability somehow
involves the contradictoriness of what is said to be inconceivable: “all
inconceivabilities may be reduced to inseparable association, combined
with the original inconceivability of a direct contradiction” (70). The
point he is making is, evidently, the following. We cannot conceive of a
state of affairs characterized as A and not-A, because the conception
corresponding to A is just the negative of the conception of not-A. In
other cases, there is no direct contradiction; it is A and B we are
asked to conceive jointly, and if we are unable to do so it is because
in our experience B is always associated with not-A. Hence the attempt
to conceive A and B turns out to be special case of trying to conceive A
and not-A, and the real point at issue between Mill and the opposition
is the nature of our certainty that in these proposed instances B really
does imply not-A. Mill thinks it is an empirical conviction, implanted
by experience, reflecting the way the world actually is, but telling us
nothing about how it has to be. The opposition have no common doctrine;
the Kantian members of it think that the conviction reflects how the
world has to be, but only in the sense that since “the world” is a
phenomenal product of our minds working upon unknown and unknowable data
it must obey the laws of our own minds; Catholic transcendentalists like
W. G. Ward claimed to be objectivists and realists on this issue, where
the Kantians were subjectivists and phenomenalists; they held that real
inconceivabilities in our minds reflect the necessity of a certain
rational structure to the universe, a structure that is not a matter of
choice even for Omnipotence itself. So, in attacking Mill’s attempt to
explain the truths of mathematics in experiential terms, Ward says:

I have never even once experienced the equality of 2+9 to 3+8, and yet
am convinced that not even Omnipotence could overthrow that equality. I
have most habitually experienced the warmth-giving property of fire, and
yet see no reason for doubting that Omnipotence (if it exist) can at any
time suspend or remove that property.43

Mill himself makes something like a concession to the Kantian mode of
analysis, though it is a physiological rather than a psychological
version of transcendental idealism that he perhaps offers. In the body
of the text he claims that “a round square” is in principle no more
inconceivable than a heavy square or a hard square; to suppose that one
might exist is no more than to suppose that we might simultaneously have
those sensations which we call seeing something round and those which we
call seeing something square:

we should probably be as well able to conceive a round square as a hard
square, or a heavy square, if it were not that, in our uniform
experience, at the instant when Edition: current; Page: [xxxi] a thing
begins to be round it ceases to be square, so that the beginning of the
one impression is inseparably associated with the departure or cessation
of the other

(70).

But in a later footnote he drew back:

It has been remarked to me by a correspondent, that a round square
differs from a hard square or a heavy square in this respect, that the
two sensations or sets of sensations supposed to be joined in the
first-named combination are affections of the same nerves, and
therefore, being different affections, are mutually incompatible by our
organic constitution, and could not be made compatible by any change in
the arrangements of external nature. This is probably true, and may be
the physical reason why when a thing begins to be perceived as round it
ceases to be perceived as square; but it is not the less true that this
mere fact suffices, under the laws of association, to account for the
inconceivability of the combination. I am willing, however, to admit, as
suggested by my correspondent, that “if the imagination employs the
organism in its representations,” which it probably does, “what is
originally unperceivable in consequence of organic laws” may also be
“originally unimaginable.”

(70n-1n.)

The note nicely illustrates the difficulty of seeing quite what Mill’s
case was. Even here he seems determined to appeal to the laws of
association, and yet the case he is partially conceding is that there
are structural constraints on what things can be perceived and therefore
come to be associated. Evidently the one thing he is determined not to
concede is that the laws of the Macrocosm can be inferred from the laws
of the Microcosm; but as he says, he is here at one with Hamilton and
Mansel.

Yet it is this view which Mill mostly writes to defend, and perhaps in a
form which does set him apart from Hamilton and Mansel. For Mill plainly
treats the question of what we can and cannot conceive as a flatly
factual one, and so, in turn, he treats the laws of number or the
findings of geometry as flatly factual too. Indeed, he goes so far as to
claim that even with our present mental and physical constitution we
could envisage alternative geometries and different arithmetical laws.
“That the reverse of the most familiar principles of arithmetic and
geometry might have been made conceivable, even to our present mental
faculties, if those faculties had coexisted with a totally different
constitution of external nature, is,” says Mill, “ingeniously shown in
the concluding paper of a recent volume, anonymous, but of known
authorship, ‘Essays, by a Barrister’ [i.e., Fitzjames Stephen]” (71n),
and he quotes the paper at length. The gist of it is that we can
perfectly well imagine a world in which 2+2=5; for all we need imagine
is a world in which “whenever two pairs of things are either placed in
proximity or are contemplated together, a fifth thing is immediately
created and brought within the contemplation of the mind engaged in
putting two and two together” (71n). Mill does not suggest, what is
surely rather plausible, that such a statement of the case is
self-destructive, Edition: current; Page: [xxxii] in that it presupposes
that what we should say under such conditions is not that 2+2=5, but, as
he does say, that associating pairs creates a fifth object. The
supposition, of course, is much more complicated in any case than Mill
allows. As Frege later argued, things are only countable under a common
concept—a cow and a sheep are not a pair of cows nor a pair of sheep,
but they are a pair of animals, mammals, familiar English objects, and
so on. Are we to suppose that they spontaneously generate a fifth
something or other when conceptualized one way but not another? Can we
stop the process by thinking of four things, not as two pairs but as a
trio and an individual? Are addition and subtraction supposed to cease
to be isomorphic, so that 5-2=3, even though 2+2=5? Nor is it clear what
the notion of contemplating pairs is going to embrace. If I read a word
of six letters, do I read a word of three pairs of letters, and if so,
is it not a word of at least seven letters? Or will it stay one word of
only six letters so long as I read it as one word only—in which case how
will anyone ever learn to read? There is, no doubt, something contingent
about the fact that our system of geometry and arithmetic apply in the
world, but it is hardly so flatly contingent as this account suggests.

Mill is much more persuasive when he sets out to deny Hamilton’s claims
about the limitations from which our thinking necessarily suffers. Mill
distinguishes three kinds of inconceivability, which, he says, Hamilton
habitually confuses. The first is what we have been examining until now,
the supposed impossibility of picturing the states of affairs at stake,
either directly or indirectly as the result of its making contradictory
demands on the imagination. The second is the apparent incredibility of
what is perfectly visualizable. Mill’s example is the existence of the
Antipodes; we could model a globe in clay and recognize that there need
be no absolute “up” or “down,” but still fail to see how people could
remain on the surface of the globe at what we were sure to think of as
its underside (74-5). Finally, there is a sense in which an event or
state of affairs is inconceivable if it is impossible to see what might
explain it: “The inconceivable in this third sense is simply the
inexplicable.” Mill says, and quite rightly, that it merely invites
confusion to employ “inconceivable” to cover mere inexplicability:

This use of the word inconceivable, being a complete perversion of it
from its established meanings, I decline to recognise. If all the
general truths which we are most certain of are to be called
inconceivable, the word no longer serves any purpose. Inconceivable is
not to be confounded with unprovable, or unanalysable. A truth which is
not inconceivable in either of the received meanings of the term—a truth
which is completely apprehended, and without difficulty believed, I
cannot consent to call inconceivable merely because we cannot account
for it, or deduce it from a higher truth.

(76.)

Oddly enough, it was Mansel who got into the most serious muddle here,
and for no very obvious reason. He denied that Hamilton had ever used
the Edition: current; Page: [xxxiii] term “inconceivable” to cover more
than the unimaginable, and yet, as we have seen already, employed the
term himself in Mill’s third sense. We believe that the will is free,
but we cannot explain how it is, and so, on Mansel’s view, we have here
a believable inconceivability.44 Had he stuck simply to saying that we
can conceive that something is the case where we cannot conceive how it
is, there would be no problem—what is imaginable and credible is the
bare fact, what is unimaginable is a mechanism which might account for
it. The connection, as Mill is quick to see, between the narrower,
proper senses of inconceivable, and the wider, improper sense, is that
the offer of a hypothetical mechanism to account for a phenomenon makes
it so much the easier both to visualize it and to believe in its
existence. None of this, of course, is to deny that Mansel is quite
right to suggest that the mind does indeed boggle at the task of
explaining how the physical interaction of brain and world results in
perceptions which are themselves not in any obvious sense physical
phenomena at all; all it shows is that there is no point in muddying the
waters by suggesting that the facts are inconceivable when what one
means is that they are in certain respects inexplicable.

Having cleared up these terminological difficulties, Mill then embarks
on the question of whether, as Hamilton claims, the philosophy of the
conditioned shows that there are propositions about the world which are
inconceivable and yet true. The examples Mill has in mind, as we have
seen, are such propositions as that space is finite, or, conversely,
that space is infinite. The language of conceivability causes a few more
difficulties, even after Mill’s sanitizing operations, for between Mill
and Mansel there remains a difference of opinion on the question of what
it is to have a conception of any state of affairs. Mansel seems to
require that there should be some kind of one-to-one relationship
between the elements in our conception and that of which it is the
conception. Mill does not entirely repudiate this view; it will serve as
a criterion for having an adequate—or perhaps one had better say, a
complete—conception of the phenomenon that one should be able to
enumerate the elements in one’s conception and match them to the
components of the thing conceived. But, says Mill, in one of his most
felicitous moves, it is impossible to have a wholly adequate conception
of anything whatever, since everything and anything can be envisaged in
an infinite number of ways. The obsession with the infinite and absolute
in Hamilton and Mansel is ill-defended by Mansel’s arguments about
adequacy, since, says Mill, there is no suggestion that a number like
695,788 is inconceivable, and yet it is pretty clear that we do not
enumerate its components when we think of it (84).

What, then, is it for us to conceive of space as infinite, or
conversely, as Edition: current; Page: [xxxiv] finite? On Mill’s view,
we can conceive of an infinite space by simply conceiving of what we
call space and believing that it is of greater extent than any bounded
space.

We realize it as space. We realize it as greater than any given space.
We even realize it as endless, in an intelligible manner, that is, we
clearly represent to ourselves that however much of space has been
already explored, and however much more of it we may imagine ourselves
to traverse, we are no nearer to the end of it than we were at first. .
. .

(85.)

The same confidence applies to conceiving of space as finite. Mill
supposes that all we need to imagine is that at some point or other an
impression of a wholly novel kind would announce to us that we were
indeed at the end of space. The extent to which neither Mill nor
Hamilton, nor Mansel for that matter, takes the full measure of Kant is
somewhat surprising. There is no suggestion that drawing the boundaries
of space is conceptual nonsense because boundaries are something one
draws in space, so that if space is finite it must be finite but
unbounded. There is no attempt to explore further what could lead us to
recognize an experience as, say, the experience of reaching the end of
time or the end of space.

For, as we have seen, Mill does not do more than skirt round the
suggestion that “infinite” may have something odd about it, if it is
treated as an ordinary first-order predicate, or that “Space” may be the
name of an object to which it is only dubiously proper to apply a
predicate like “finite.” Mill does not extend the notion of
“meaninglessness” beyond its most literal applications. He thinks that
it is impossible to conceive what is meant by a literally meaningless
utterance, or one to which we can attach no meaning, but that this is
not a philosophically interesting sort of inconceivability:

If any one says to me, Humpty Dumpty is an Abracadabra, I neither
knowing what is meant by an Abracadabra, nor what is meant by Humpty
Dumpty, I may, if I have confidence in my informant, believe that he
means something, and that the something which he means is probably true:
but I do not believe the very thing which he means, since I am entirely
ignorant what it is. Propositions of this kind, the unmeaningness of
which lies in the subject or predicate, are not those generally
described as inconceivable.

(78-9.)

For Mill, then, in so far as the states of affairs described by Hamilton
as inconceivable are picked out by intelligible propositions, it becomes
a question of fact, even if one which there is no hope of deciding,
which branch of the antinomies proposed by Hamiton is true. In that
case, what of the philosophy of the conditioned? The answer, says Mill,
is that there is in it a good deal less than meets the eye. Hamilton’s
claim that “Thought is only of the conditioned,” and that the
“Conditioned is the mean between two extremes—two inconditionates,
exclusive of each other, neither of Edition: current; Page: [xxxv] which
can be conceived as possible, but of which, on the principles of
contradiction and excluded middle, one must be admitted as necessary,”45
turns out to be nothing better than noise. It “must be placed in that
numerous class of metaphysical doctrines, which have a magnificent
sound, but are empty of the smallest substance” (88).


V.: GOD AND PROFESSOR MANSEL

with hamilton thus routed, Mill turns to meet Mansel’s application of
the philosophy of the conditioned to religious thought. Neither Mill’s
attack nor Mansel’s response stands out as a model of dispassionate and
impersonal inquiry. Mill all but accuses the clergy of being under a
professional obligation to talk nonsense (104), and Mansel replies in
kind.46 Mill opens his assault by paying Mansel a backhanded compliment:
“Clearness and explicitness of statement being in the number of Mr.
Mansel’s merits, it is easier to perceive the flaws in his arguments
than in those of his master, because he often leaves us less in doubt
what he means by his words” (91). In fact, it is not always quite clear
where Mansel does and where he does not rest on arguments borrowed from
Hamilton; against Mill he tended to argue by complaining of Mill’s
defective appreciation of the history of philosophy, a procedure which
has the defect of turning the interesting question of where Mill and
Mansel disagreed over the possible extent of a human knowledge of God’s
nature into a much less interesting question, about the extent of Mill’s
acquaintance with traditional natural theology. Mansel was probably
right in his conjecture that in some sense Mill thought traditional
metaphysics was pointless and nonsensical, but he was far too annoyed to
tackle the question that he had really set for himself—namely, if
traditional natural theology and traditional metaphysics were as
essentially flawed as The Limits of Religious Thought maintained, was
Mill not right? Why was not agnosticism the proper resting place?

Still, Mill hardly encouraged Mansel to adopt a conciliatory attitude.
After a rapid summary of Mansel’s argument that we cannot form an
adequate conception of God—since God as Absolute and Infinite is
inconceivable by us—he comes to Mansel’s conclusion that we can only
fall back on revelation. That the God thus revealed can or cannot have
any particular characteristics, Mansel says it is not for reason to
declare; the credibility of a revelation is a matter of historical
probabilities, “and no argument grounded on the incredibility of the
doctrine, as involving an intellectual Edition: current; Page: [xxxvi]
absurdity, or on its moral badness as unworthy of a good or wise being,
ought to have any weight, since of these things we are incompetent to
judge” (90). It is not, says Mill, a new doctrine, but “it is simply the
most morally pernicious doctrine now current . . . ” (90).

Readers who have begun to weary of the hunting of the Absolute will
probably take it on trust that in so far as “the Absolute” means the
unrelated-to-anything-in-our-experience it is no great achievement to
show that we have no knowledge of the Absolute. But Mill presses Mansel
rather harder than this, for he at last challenges him to make good on
the claim that we are able and indeed obliged on the strength of
revelation to believe in this unknowable entity. Mansel, says Mill,
succeeds in showing that “the Absolute” and “the Infinite” as defined by
himself are simply self-contradictory; but, on Mill’s view, this entails
their being also unbelievable. “Believing God to be infinite and
absolute must be believing something, and it must be possible to say
what” (98). Mansel’s argument to the effect that “the Absolute” and “the
Infinite” are involved in self-contradiction is altogether too
devastating for his own good, for Mansel certainly does not want to say
that the divine nature is really and inherently contradictory. Mansel,
indeed, went out of his way to deny any such suggestion; credo quia
impossibile he thought unworthy of any sane man.47 His reply to Mill,
abusive though it is, shows how little he wished to get himself into
such depths, for when Mill taunts him with not being able to say what
the object of his belief is, he falls back on propositions which Mill
readily admits to be intelligible, such as the proposition that God made
the world, though we cannot tell how He did it. The explanation of the
trouble is simple, though rather strange. Mansel thought it an aid to
Christian belief to show that the sceptic could not attack its doctrines
on rational grounds; but the way in which he rescued them from the
sceptic was by making them too elusive to disbelieve. Inevitably the
price he paid was making them too elusive to be believed either.

The single thing in the Examination that most heartened his allies and
most outraged his opponents was Mill’s assault on what he took to be the
immorality of Mansel’s doctrine of the unknowability of the moral
attributes of God. To Mill the issue was simple enough. When the clergy
talked of God’s power they generally meant what we would mean by talking
of human power, for instance the divine ability to throw us into the
inferno; only on God’s moral attributes did they equivocate and suggest
that God’s goodness was not as mortal goodness.

Is it unfair to surmise that this is because those who speak in the name
of God, have need of the human conception of his power, since an idea
which can overawe and Edition: current; Page: [xxxvii] enforce obedience
must address itself to real feelings; but are content that his goodness
should be conceived only as something inconceivable, because they are so
often required to teach doctrines respecting him which conflict
irreconcilably with all goodness that we can conceive?

(104.)

Whether it is or not, Mill’s case is that Mansel cannot hope to argue
that God’s moral attributes are unlike their human analogues without
thereby sacrificing the right to expect us to worship Him. There is, as
any reader of Mansel’s Bampton Lectures can see, an awkwardness in
Mansel’s case, analogous to the awkwardness of his epistemology. The
case he presents is the familiar one: the Christian who believes in the
infinite power and goodness of God is confronted with a world in which
the just suffer and the wicked flourish. The austere Mansel does not
argue in the Kantian manner that we are thereby licensed to expect a
reconciliation of virtue and happiness in the life hereafter. What he
does instead is suggest that the inscrutability of God extends to the
inscrutable goodness He exhibits. It is not clear that Mansel intends to
show that God’s goodness is not ours; mostly, he argues that how God is
working out an overall plan for His universe, a plan which is good in
the same sense as a human plan would be good, simply remains unknowable.
The goodness of God’s agents particularly exercises Mansel: what would
be cruelty or injustice if done otherwise than in obedience to God’s
commands is, we must hope, not cruelty or injustice after all. But, once
again, it is less a matter of the imperfect analogy between human and
divine attributes (which is the object of Mill’s complaint) than of the
imperfection of our knowledge of the Almighty’s programme, for the sake
of which these orders were given. In this light one can understand why
Mansel’s reply to Mill takes the form of a rather querulous complaint
that surely Mill cannot deny that a son may recognize the goodness of
his father’s actions without wholly understanding them—and Mill does not
deny it.

Mill, however, surely gets the best of the dispute, with his famous
outburst, for all that Mansel tries to dismiss it as “an extraordinary
outburst of rhetoric.”48

If, instead of the “glad tidings” that there exists a Being in whom all
the excellences which the highest human mind can conceive, exist in a
degree inconceivable to us, I am informed that the world is ruled by a
being whose attributes are infinite, but what they are we cannot learn,
nor what are the principles of his government, except that “the highest
human morality which we are capable of conceiving” does not sanction
them; convince me of it, and I will bear my fate as I may. But when I am
told that I must believe this, and at the same time call this being by
the names which express and affirm the highest human morality, I say in
plain terms that I will not. Whatever power such a being may have over
me, there is one thing which he shall not do: he Edition: current; Page:
[xxxviii] shall not compel me to worship him. I will call no being good,
who is not what I mean when I apply that epithet to my fellow-creatures;
and if such a being can sentence me to hell for not so calling him, to
hell I will go.

(103.)


VI.: OTHER MAJOR ISSUES

as one might guess from the title of Mansel’s The Philosophy of the
Conditioned, it was that doctrine which Mansel, like Mill, saw as
Hamilton’s most distinctive contribution to philosophy (109). The rest
of this Introduction will take its cue from the combatants, and confine
itself to the piecemeal treatment of some major issues. The most
interesting of these would seem to be the following: Mill’s
phenomenalist analysis of matter and mind; his demolition of Hamilton’s
account of causation, which is perhaps a major curiosity rather than a
major issue; his account of conception, judgment, and inference, and his
assessment of Hamilton’s contribution to logic; and, finally, his
analysis of the freedom of the will.


MATTER AND MIND

Mill’s account of matter and mind begins with what amounts to a hostile
review of Hamilton’s own hostile review of Thomas Brown’s Lectures on
the Philosophy of the Mind. (Hamilton’s article appeared in the
Edinburgh Review in October, 1830, and was reprinted in his
Discussions.) Hamilton declared that it was a striking proof of the low
state of intellectual life in Britain that Brown’s Lectures had not
hitherto received their just deserts:

The radical inconsistencies which they involve, in every branch of their
subject, remain undeveloped; their unacknowledged appropriations are
still lauded as original; their endless mistakes, in the history of
philosophy, stand yet uncorrected; and their frequent misrepresentations
of other philosophers continue to mislead. In particular, nothing has
more convinced us of the general neglect, in this country, of
psychological science, than that Brown’s ignorant attack on Reid, and,
through Reid, confessedly on Stewart, has not long since been
repelled;—except, indeed, the general belief that it was triumphant.49

Hamilton claimed that Brown played fast and loose not only with the
testimony of consciousness, a vice to which all philosophers are liable
to succumb, but with the testimony of Reid. Brown was what Hamilton
called a cosmothetic idealist, and Hamilton was at pains to insist that
between the testimony of consciousness—which is all on behalf of
“Natural Realism” or “Natural Dualism”—and the inferences of idealism
there is a great opposition. Reid, on Hamilton’s view, was a realist and
dualist, where Brown falsely makes him out to be an idealist of the same
kind as himself.

Edition: current; Page: [xxxix]
Mill devotes a chapter to showing not merely that Reid wavered in his
convictions on the question, but that when he was plainly committed to
any view, that view was cosmothetic idealism. Moreover, very few of
Hamilton’s arguments against Brown hold water, and when Hamilton
adduces, to attack Brown, general principles, such as the impossibility
of representative perception, the result, on Mill’s account, is to leave
Brown untouched and most of Hamilton’s own argument in ruins (164). Mill
distinguishes, with Hamilton, three views about perception which have
been held by those he lumps together as cosmothetic idealists: the first
is the view that what is really perceived is not a state of the
perceiver’s mind, but something else, whether a motion in the brain as
in Hobbes or an Idea in the mind as in Berkeley; the second is the view
that what is perceived is a state of mind, but that it and the
perceiving of it are distinguishable. These two doctrines, says Mill,
really are doctrines of mediate or representative perception, as
Hamilton says they are. There is a something which is the direct object
of perception and which represents the external object. The third view,
however, and the view which Brown held, is not a theory of
representative perception at all, for there is no tertium quid, no
object of direct perception from which the existence of some other
object is inferred. The object of perception here is “a state of mind
identical with the act by which we are said to perceive it” (155). There
is here no very clear distinction between a certain sort of
phenomenalism on the one hand and outright realism on the other,
indeed—a point which Mill does not make, but which some current versions
of a “sense data” theory of perception do.50

Brown’s account of the perception of external objects is invulnerable to
the objection that there is no way of knowing whether the object of
perception resembles, or truly or faithfully represents, the external
object itself. For Brown does not claim that it bears any such
relationship to anything external. The relation is causal, not
pictorial. In effect, to perceive something in the outside world just is
to be in a certain sensory state and to conclude non-inferentially that
the cause of this state lies in something external to oneself. And this,
says Mill happily, is the only rational interpretation to be placed on
the views of Reid as well. Indeed,

if Brown’s theory is not a theory of mediate perception, it loses all
that essentially distinguishes it from Sir W. Hamilton’s own doctrine.
For Brown, also, thinks that we have, on the occasion of certain
sensations, an instantaneous and irresistible conviction of an outward
object. And if this conviction is immediate, and necessitated by the
constitution of our nature, in what does it differ from our author’s
direct consciousness? Consciousness, immediate knowledge, and intuitive
knowledge, are, Sir W. Hamilton tells us, convertible expressions; and
if it be granted that whenever our senses are affected by a material
object, we immediately and intuitively Edition: current; Page: [xl]
recognise that object as existing and distinct from us, it requires a
great deal of ingenuity to make out any substantial difference between
this immediate intuition of an external world, and Sir W. Hamilton’s
direct perception of it.

(156-7.)

Brown, on Mill’s account, gets the better of Hamilton by consistently
denying that some properties of things are known as they really are in
the (unknowable) object and some not; Brown genuinely held the doctrine
of the relativity of knowledge in an unconfused form (167). In this
Brown was on the opposite side to both Reid and Hamilton, but it was an
issue on which not even Hamilton was willing to suggest that Brown was
unaware of the differences between his own views and those of Reid.
Brown’s theory of perception explains all our knowledge of the
attributes of matter in terms of the sensory promptings of an external
cause, while Reid’s, like Hamilton’s, allows us “a direct intuition of
the Primary Qualities of bodies” (176). Mill, of course, thinks that
Brown’s view is the only one consistent with his premises; certainly, as
Mill argues both earlier and later in the Examination, Hamilton can
hardly hope to keep his half-way house. Either he must be a
thoroughgoing vulgar realist and agree that what we see just are things,
endowed with the attributes we see them to have, the plain man’s view;
or else, if he is to allow himself such corrections of consciousness as
are required when he says, for instance, that no two people see the same
object, or indeed that each of us sees two “suns,” say, because we
receive an image through each eye, and in so saying departs very widely
from what any plain man believes, then he must adopt a much more
wholesale subjectivism.

Mill’s own account of what we believe when we believe in the existence
of the outside world is the best known part of the Examination. It is
hard to know whether to be more surprised by the confidence with which
he puts it forward or by the contrast between that confidence and the
diffidence, so reminiscent of Hume, with which he confesses that it will
not yield a plausible analysis of mind. Mill’s account of matter seeks
to analyze it in terms of possible sensations. In effect, the
requirements of something’s being a material thing, distinct from our
sensations of it, are the following: it must be public in the sense that
it can be perceived by many different people, whereas each of them alone
can have his actual sensations; it must be “perdurable,” that is, it
must exist unperceived, and must outlast the fleeting experiences of it
which those who perceive it may have; and it must retain the same
properties even if these make it “look different” in different
circumstances.

We mean, that there is concerned in our perceptions something which
exists when we are not thinking of it; which existed before we had ever
thought of it, and would exist if we were annihilated; and further, that
there exist things which we never saw, touched, or otherwise perceived,
and things which never have been perceived by Edition: current; Page:
[xli] man. This idea of something which is distinguished from our
fleeting impressions by what, in Kantian language, is called
Perdurability; something which is fixed and the same, while our
impressions vary; something which exists whether we are aware of it or
not, and which is always square (or of some other given figure) whether
it appears to us square or round—constitutes altogether our idea of
external substance. Whoever can assign an origin to this complex
conception, has accounted for what we mean by the belief in matter.

(178-9.)

The question is, of course, whether an appeal to “possible sensations”
can account for all this. Perhaps the first thing that should be said is
that Mill is oddly reticent about employing the fact that human beings
are embodied consciousnesses in any of the argument; later, he employs
the sensations of muscular effort and resistance as part of the
primitive data which he suggests the mind works on in arriving at a
conception of space. But it is on the face of it odd to begin arguing
about the belief in an external world without raising any question about
what external can mean unless “external to me,” and how it can mean
that, unless we are spatially located from the beginning—and how, if we
are so located, it can make any sense to begin to construct a world
whose existence we seem to have to assume in order to talk about the
constructive task in the first place. Mill can, of course, retort that
he is not talking about spatial externality yet. What he is talking
about initially is permanence; it is a second part of the case to show
that a permanent object in sensation has to be construed—or is naturally
to be construed—as a spatially external object. That is, so long as we
do not insist on publicity, and do not have too many qualms about
whether something could be round or square except in a spatially
extended world, we could perhaps break up the belief in a material world
into a belief in something permanent which holds together the objects of
sense and into a second belief that it is located in space as well as in
time. If we think of the percipient as a non-spatial ego in which
subjective experiences inhere and which has a history as the history of
one such being, we might think of the non-ego as the objective correlate
of the percipient self. It is not at all clear that Mill had any such
possibility in mind, and it is quite clear that we shall not get very
much out of Mill’s account by pressing it; nonetheless, to the extent
that Mill takes over the terminology of Hamilton, in which we are said
to be conscious of an Ego and a non-Ego, the question whether the
non-Ego is an external—that is spatially external—world is evidently an
open one. The first step establishes a non-Ego as a deliverance of
consciousness, if we side with Hamilton, and as an inference if we side
with Mill; only subsequent steps can establish its nature.

Mill at any rate is eager to show that so long as the mind is credited
with a capacity to form expectations, we can see how the mind would move
from having had experiences in certain circumstances in the past, to
believing in Edition: current; Page: [xlii] possible experiences
realized by similar conditions in the future. These, Mill says, are not
bare possibilities but conditional certainties—by which he merely means
to insist that he does not suggest that, in the everyday sense, it is
only “possible” that when we look at a chair we shall have the
appropriate sensations. He means that we shall quite certainly have the
appropriate sensations, but, of course, only in the appropriate
conditions. The mind, then, faces the fact that its experiences occur in
various determinate ways; it constructs the hypothesis that this
orderliness will be found in all sorts of other areas, and finds it
confirmed. The content of the hypothesis is that the world contains
permanent possibilities of sensation, and the world turns out to do so.
Mill is eager not to turn the Permanent Possibilities themselves into
mental constructions; in a footnote replying to a critic who had
complained that Mill had offered “no proofs that objects are external to
us,” he says that he had never attempted any such proof:

I am accounting for our conceiving, or representing to ourselves, the
Permanent Possibilities as real objects external to us. I do not believe
that the real externality to us of anything, except other minds, is
capable of proof. But the Permanent Possibilities are external to us in
the only sense we need care about; they are not constructed by the mind
itself, but merely recognised by it; in Kantian language, they are given
to us, and to other beings in common with us.

(187n.)

It is their givenness which explains the sense in which they are
objective rather than subjective; whether this makes them external in a
sense which would satisfy the plain man as well as the philosopher
remains to be seen.

That there is an external world is a sort of hypothesis, then. It is
formed entirely unconsciously, of course, but the awkwardness is not its
genesis but its meaning. Mill seems unworried by this, and given the
remark quoted immediately above, it is easy to see why. He could share
Brown’s view of what the belief in an external world amounted to—namely
belief in an underlying cause of our sensory experience—since his
interest lay not in disputing the adequacy of the analysis, but in
accounting for the fact thus analyzed without invoking anything like an
original conviction of the existence of an external world. Not for
nothing did Mill call his account the psychological theory of the belief
in an external world; he thought that Hamilton, Reid, and for that
matter Brown, too, had erred by adopting the “introspective” method of
analysis, by which he meant that they were too ready to infer from the
present existence of a belief in their own minds that it was part of the
mind’s native constitution. The psychological theory was in principle no
more than a genetic hypothesis, a hypothesis about how the belief could
have grown up. As such, it seems to be a rather difficult one to bring
to empirical test, although such a test seems appropriate for it; the
difficulties are too obvious to be worth dwelling on, but they make one
wonder why Mill did not make more of the question whether there was any
Edition: current; Page: [xliii] way of averting them. Would he have
regarded infantile efforts at focussing on remote objects as evidence
one way or the other? Would a new-born baby’s recoil from what looks
like a sheer drop be evidence about how original a sense of spatial
location might be? In the absence of more discussion in Mill’s work,
speculation is fruitless.

Whether Mill’s analysis of matter would satisfy the plain man’s notions
about matter is a question to which he does devote some attention. He
has two rather different stances. The first is that the belief in matter
goes beyond the belief in the permanent possibility of sensation: we
move from believing that we shall have certain sensations under certain
conditions to believing that the whole series of possible sensations has
an underlying cause. Now, on this view, we are at any rate inclined to
ask whether this belief in an underlying cause actually means
anything—since it makes no observational difference whether or not there
is such a cause, there is some difficulty in knowing what difference is
made by its affirmation or denial. Believers in parsimony, Occam’s
Razor, or other austerities of thought will perhaps incline to reject it
on the grounds that we should believe as little as we must to account
for the facts; Mill thinks that Hamilton’s “Law of Parsimony” should
cause him an analogous embarrassment, but makes nothing of it in this
context—he is concerned to reduce the number of our primary intuitions,
rather than to purge the plain man’s ontology. This being his aim, he is
quite content to argue that

Whatever relation we find to exist between any one of our sensations and
something different from it, that same relation we have no difficulty in
conceiving to exist between the sum of all our sensations and something
different from them. . . . This familiarity with the idea of something
different from each thing we know, makes it natural and easy to form the
notion of something different from all things that we know, collectively
as well as individually. It is true we can form no conception of what
such a thing can be; our notion of it is merely negative; but the idea
of a substance, apart from its relation to the impressions which we
conceive it as making on our senses, is a merely negative one. There is
thus no psychological obstacle to our forming the notion of a something
which is neither a sensation nor a possibility of sensation, even if our
consciousness does not testify to it; and nothing is more likely than
that the Permanent Possibilities of sensation, to which our
consciousness does testify, should be confounded in our minds with this
imaginary conception. All experience attests the strength of the
tendency to mistake mental abstractions, even negative ones, for
substantive realities.

(185.)

On the whole, this argument suggests that the generality of mankind hold
mistaken views about matter, though its intention may only be to suggest
that they hold unverifiable views. But Mill also suggests that he and
the plain man may not be at odds.

Matter, then, may be defined, a Permanent Possibility of Sensation. If I
am asked, whether I believe in matter, I ask whether the questioner
accepts this definition of it. Edition: current; Page: [xliv] If he
does, I believe in matter: and so do all Berkeleians. In any other sense
than this, I do not. But I affirm with confidence, that this conception
of Matter includes the whole meaning attached to it by the common world,
apart from philosophical, and sometimes from theological, theories. The
reliance of mankind on the real existence of visible and tangible
objects, means reliance on the reality and permanence of Possibilities
of visual and tactual sensations, when no such sensations are actually
experienced.

(183.)

This view, in contrast to the first one, suggests that the plain man qua
plain man believes in Permanent Possibilities only; the belief in an
unknowable underlying substance is either imposed on him by
philosophers, or adopted by the plain man only qua amateur philosopher.

The argument between phenomenalists and their opponents has, of course,
continued unabated ever since. It is not only the plain man who feels
uneasily that Mill’s “permanent possibilities of sensation” moves
awkwardly between an account of matter which stresses that it is
permanently and objectively available to be sensed, and one which
dissolves that objective existence into the fact that minds are
permanently available to sense—but not necessarily to sense anything
other than their own contents. It is at the very best difficult to feel
that a possible, but non-actual sensation is more solid, more material,
more firmly part of the furniture of the world than an actual sensation
is.

Before turning to Mill’s attempt to provide a phenomenalist account of
personal identity, therefore, we should look to Mill’s expansion of his
analysis of matter in the shape of his account of our knowledge of its
primary qualities. Mill’s analysis is devoted to several different
tasks, of which the most important is to show that the “psychological
theory” can deal with the generation of the idea of Extension, which

has long been considered as one of the principal stumbling blocks of the
Psychological Theory. Reid and Stewart were willing to let the whole
question of the intuitive character of our knowledge of Matter, depend
on the inability of psychologists to assign any origin to the idea of
Extension, or analyse it into any combination of sensations and
reminiscences of sensation. Sir W. Hamilton follows their example in
laying great stress on this point.

(216.)

But Mill also wants to explain two other things, firstly, the difference
between what we treat as subjective feelings as distinct from what we
treat as perceptions of something in the object and, secondly, why we
group the objective properties of bodies together as their primary
qualities. These did not cause much controversy among Mill’s critics,
but the attempts at generating the idea of extension along the lines
laid down in Bain’s treatise on psychology did. The fundamental
complaint was always the same, that all attempts to explain where we
might have acquired the concept of extension presuppose that we have it
already. As Mill says in the footnote in which he replies to them:

Edition: current; Page: [xlv]
A host of critics, headed by Dr. McCosh, Mr. Mahaffy, and the writer in
Blackwood, have directed their shafts against this chapter. . . . The
principal objection is the same which was made to the two preceding
chapters [on the Psychological Theory of the belief in an external
world, and its application to mind]: that the explanation given of
Extension presupposes Extension: that the notion itself is
surreptitiously introduced, to account for its own origin.

(240.)

The distinction between sensations referred mostly to the subject of
perception and those referred mostly to the object, Mill explains fairly
casually. That we can refer the experience to an outer object is the
major difference between sensation and other mental phenomena; so, the
pleasure of a man eating a good meal can be said to inhere in the meal,
but is more readily ascribed to the man than the meal, because pleasure
and pain are part of a class of “sensations which are highly interesting
to us on their own account, and on which we willingly dwell, or which by
their intensity compel us to concentrate our attention on them.” The
result is that in our consciousness of them “the reference to their
Object does not play so conspicuous and predominant a part . . .” (212).
Mill does not appeal to the way in which the pleasure and, to a lesser
extent, the pain caused by a given object varies from one person to
another as a reason for distinguishing the pleasure and pain from what
causes them; nor does he suggest that there is anything problematic in
treating secondary qualities like colour in the same way as pleasure and
pain. The distinction he is interested in is really that which his
opponents see as a distinction between the essence of matter, and all
else. If we can imagine a thing losing its colour without ceasing to
exist, and losing its capacity to give pain or pleasure without ceasing
to exist, then colour and pleasure lie on the side of the secondary
qualities; if we cannot imagine an object losing its extension or
impenetrability without ceasing to exist, then these are its primary
qualities. That we in fact agree in thinking of resistance, extension,
and figure as the primary qualities of matter, indeed think of matter as
consisting of these attributes “together with miscellaneous powers of
exciting other sensations” (214), Mill readily admits. That we group
these together he explains by the fact that sensations of smell, taste,
and hearing do not cohere directly, but “through the connexion which
they all have, by laws of coexistence or of causation, with the
sensations which are referable to the sense of touch and to the muscles;
those which answer to the terms Resistance, Extension, and Figure.
These, therefore, become the leading and conspicuous elements. . . .”
(213.)

So the question eventually comes to that of whether the associationist
psychology can explain our conception of things as being spatially
extended, with the implications that this property suggests, that they
must have boundaries or figure, if we are to tell one thing from
another, and that they must be less than wholly interpenetrable.
Resistance, or relative impenetrability, Mill explains as an inference
from the experience of Edition: current; Page: [xlvi] obstructed
muscular movement when this is combined with appropriate sensations of
touch. The combination assures us that the impediment to movement is not
internal paralysis or something similar. Figure, Mill deals with rather
casually as the conjoined information of sight and touch; he invokes a
good deal of not very persuasive psychological evidence to suggest that
a blind man either has a different conception of figure from that of a
sighted man or no conception at all, and even toys with the less than
obviously coherent claim that a blind man might think the external world
was composed entirely of one object. But it is evidently the analysis of
extension that is crucial to his case. He makes it at second hand by way
of an extended quotation from Bain. The gist of the case is simple
enough. We have certain sensations connected with the contraction of our
voluntary muscles, and these are different according to the extent of
such contraction, so that we can discriminate half, wholly, or very
partially contracted muscles; these are associated with the sweep of a
limb or other bodily movement. Now it would obviously be putting the
cart before the horse if Mill and Bain were to employ the idea of a limb
sweeping a certain amount of space in explaining the origins of our idea
of space. Most of Mill’s critics, as we have seen, said that this was
just what they had done. Whether the charge can be rebutted is very
difficult to decide. In a sense, Mill is between the devil and the deep
blue sea. Any notion of the sweep of a limb which is distinctively
non-spatial looks inadequate to generate a conception of space at all,
while any notion adequate to the generation of a concept of space seems
to get there by starting with some notion of space already. If we make
the sweep of a limb purely temporal—that is, if we say that the
non-spatial notion is simply one of the length of time it takes for
sensations to succeed each other—we escape the charge of paralogism, but
we do not get very close to the usual idea of space. Mill does not make
this admission; on his analysis, the blind man’s conception of space is
temporal not spatial, and even the sighted majority have a conception
which is basically temporal:

a person blind from birth must necessarily perceive the parts of
extension—the parts of a line, of a surface, or of a solid—in conscious
succession. He perceives them by passing his hand along them, if small,
or by walking over them if great. The parts of extension which it is
possible for him to perceive simultaneously, are only very small parts,
almost the minima of extension. Hence, if the Psychological theory of
the idea of extension is true, the blind metaphysician would feel very
little of the difficulty which seeing metaphysicians feel, in admitting
that the idea of Space is, at bottom, one of time—and that the notion of
extension or distance, is that of a motion of the muscles continued for
a longer or a shorter duration.

(222-3.)

The temptation remains to say what is shown here is only that a man who
has our conception of space can measure distances by the time it takes
to Edition: current; Page: [xlvii] cover them; it does nothing to
suggest that time alone can convey that conception of space to one who
does not have it. Just as Mill’s analysis of the external world provides
us with “possibilities of sensation” external to our actual sensations
only in the same way that the number six is external to the series of
numbers from one to four, so here he seems to offer us extension in one
dimension when we want it in another.

The point at which Mill himself admitted to defeat was in the analysis
of mind rather than matter. The general line that he saw himself obliged
to pursue was what we should expect; if matter was a permanent
possibility of being sensed, the “Ego” should be amenable to analysis as
the permanent possibility of having sensations. Mill’s first concern is
to show that there is nothing in such a phenomenalism to justify charges
of atheism or all-embracing scepticism. If the mind is a series of
mental states, there is no bar to immortality in that: a series can go
on forever just as readily as a substance can. No doubt metaphysicians
have been eager to argue that we must be immortal, on the grounds that
the soul, being a substance, is indestructible, but such arguments, says
Mill, are so feeble that philosophers have increasingly given them up.
The existence of God is equally untouched: “Supposing me to believe that
the Divine Mind is simply the series of the Divine thoughts and feelings
prolonged through eternity, that would be, at any rate, believing God’s
existence to be as real as my own” (192). And the existence of other
minds is as well vouched for on phenomenalist as on substantialist
premises. We know in our own cases that between bodily effects and their
bodily causes there intervene mental events—sensations, motives, and so
on—and we infer inductively that the same thing is true in other cases;
we see bodies like our own and believe on excellent evidence that there
are minds associated with them. “I conclude that other human beings have
feelings like me, because, first, they have bodies like me, which I
know, in my own case, to be the antecedent condition of feeling; and
because, secondly, they exhibit the acts, and other outward signs, which
in my own case I know by experience to be caused by feelings” (191).
Mill thus concludes that Reid’s accusation, that the phenomenalist ends
as a solipsist, fails.

But this is not to say that the phenomenalist position is freed of all
difficulty. The pressure in favour of phenomenalism is the same in the
case of mind as in the case of matter; we have no knowledge of mind as
it is in itself, only of its phenomena. Just like Hume, Mill holds that
what we perceive are the mind’s modifications, such as thoughts,
sensations, desires, and aversions. What we have in the way of evidence
is a stream of experience; is the mind or the self more than such a
stream, therefore? Mill answers that it seems that it must be more. The
reason lies in the nature of memory and expectation. In themselves
memories and expectations are Edition: current; Page: [xlviii] simply
part of the stream of consciousness, but their oddity is that they
essentially involve beliefs, and beliefs of an awkward kind. When we
expect a future experience, we expect something to happen to us, and
when we remember a past experience, we remember that something happened
to us.

Nor can the phænomena involved in these two states of consciousness be
adequately expressed, without saying that the belief they include is,
that I myself formerly had, or that I myself, and no other, shall
hereafter have, the sensations remembered or expected. The fact believed
is, that the sensations did actually form, or will hereafter form, part
of the self-same series of states, or thread of consciousness, of which
the remembrance or expectation of those sensations is the part now
present. If, therefore, we speak of the Mind as a series of feelings, we
are obliged to complete the statement by calling it a series of feelings
which is aware of itself as past and future; and we are reduced to the
alternative of believing that the Mind, or Ego, is something different
from any series of feelings, or possibilities of them, or of accepting
the paradox, that something which ex hypothesi is but a series of
feelings, can be aware of itself as a series.

(194.)

In essence, Mill’s problem is that if matter is a hypothesis that a mind
formulates to account for the regularity of its experience, a unitary
self must be presupposed to do the hypothesizing, and a unitary self
that, furthermore, can view its experience as something regular enough
to need explaining by such a hypothesis. But if my construction of my
experienced world depends on a prior identification of the data of
experience as my sensations and so on, there seems no hope of accounting
for me in the same terms—for, out of what would I construct me? Mill
insists in a long footnote that he merely intends to leave open the
question of what the mind’s nature really is, neither, as some of his
critics have alleged, adopting the “psychological theory” in spite of
the objections, nor accepting the common view of the mind as a substance
(204n-7n). Indeed, says Mill in the main text,

The truth is, that we are here face to face with that final
inexplicability, at which, as Sir W. Hamilton observes, we inevitably
arrive when we reach ultimate facts; and in general, one mode of stating
it only appears more incomprehensible than another, because the whole of
human language is accommodated to the one, and is so incongruous with
the other, that it cannot be expressed in any terms which do not deny
its truth

(194).

This abstemiousness about putting forward any explanation of the
inexplicable did not save Mill from Bradley. In his Ethical Studies
Bradley did his best to kill off the psychological theory with a famous
joke: “Mr. Bain collects that the mind is a collection. Has he ever
thought who collects Mr. Bain?”51 and went on to say of Mill that when
he had “the same fact Edition: current; Page: [xlix] before him, which
gave the lie to his whole psychological theory, he could not ignore it,
he could not recognize it, he would not call it a fiction; so he put it
aside as a ‘final inexplicability,’ and thought, I suppose, that by
covering it with a phrase he got rid of its existence.”52 This judgment
is transparently unjust, but there is something extremely unsatisfactory
about Mill’s agnosticism all the same.

One cannot do the subject justice here, but we may at any rate agree
that Mill could have done more. He could, for example, have explored the
idea that the self can be a serial self, without needing a non-serial
percipient self to give it unity, or that it is a logical construction
which does not require a constructor; he could have pressed the “error
theory” implicit in what he says about the way ordinary language favours
one view of personal identity, and attempted to pull apart the
implications of the language from the bare facts of the world. The fact
remains that he did not.


CAUSATION

Although there are grounds for treating Mill’s attack on Hamilton’s
account of causation in conjunction with discussion of free-will—namely,
that Mill discusses the “volitional” theory of causation while he is
attacking Hamilton, and in the process commits himself to the view that
we have no direct power over our own volitions (298-9)—there is more to
be said for tackling it briefly and on its own. For on causation Mill
adds nothing to his own account in the Logic, whereas on the subject of
the freedom of the will he supplements what he says in the Logic, and in
addition fills out the theory of punishment and the conception of
justice that we find in Utilitarianism and On Liberty. His attack on
Hamilton’s theory of causation is brief and dismissive. The issue was
what we might expect: Hamilton appealed to the innate structure of the
mind, and Mill thought the appeal quite illicit. On this topic
Hamilton’s case was an odd one. For he did not appeal to a positive
intuition of the connectedness of events, nor to anything like Kant’s
synthetic a priori principle of the rule-governed succession of events.
Rather, he appealed to an incapacity of the mind. The incapacity in
question was the mind’s inability to conceive of what he called an
“absolute commencement.” This incapacity, as Mill says, is on Hamilton’s
account not entirely reliable as a guide to how things are, for acts of
the free will are cases of just such an absolute commencement. It does
seem at first, however, the sort of thing on which one might found a
view of causation. That is, we cannot regard any event as an uncaused
happening, because we cannot conceive of any such thing; we must,
therefore, look for Edition: current; Page: [l] the cause of it. The
difficulty lies in Hamilton’s explanation of the nature of the
incapacity. Hamilton does not make any claim for its fundamental status.
He explains it is a case of the general incapacity to imagine that there
could be an increase or decrease in the quantum of existence in the
world. This is, of course, a sort of relative of the principles of the
conservation of energy or the conservation of matter; so read, Hamilton
might be saying that the aim of causal explanation is to show how a
fixed quantity of matter undergoes changes of form. The reason why he
put the problem in this odd way was very probably his scholastic
enthusiasm for the Aristotelian four causes, but Mill was surely right
to say that the only one of the Aristotelian causes which corresponded
to the modern conception of cause was the efficient cause. Hamilton went
on to claim that the effect is the very same thing as the cause,
presumably meaning only that effects must be made out of the same fixed
quantum of matter. This was to ignore the efficient cause in favour of
the material, and, in thus deciding to leave out of account the
changeable element in causation, Hamilton simply left out causation.
“Suppose the effect to be St. Paul’s: in assigning its causes, the will
of the government, the mind of the architect, and the labour of the
builders, are all cast out, for they are all transitory, and only the
stones and mortar remain” (292). In any case, says Mill, it is plainly
absurd to suppose that the law of the conservation of matter is an
original endowment of the mind; until they are taught otherwise, men
believe that when water evaporates, it is annihilated, and do not think
that when wood is reduced to ashes, the missing wood must be somewhere
in some shape or other, even if only as smoke. It therefore looks as if
Hamilton’s interpretation of our incapacity to conceive an absolute
commencement is suicidally ill-adapted to provide a theory of causation.
Had he employed the principle in its most natural sense, as referring to
the inconceivability of an uncaused event, it might have been bald,
though it would have been addressed to the right topic; however, to
employ it, not as a principle about the effects of events upon each
other, but as a principle about the unchangeable quantity of existence
in the world, made it simply irrelevant to the topic in hand.


LOGIC

Mill declines to provide a positive account of causation, on the
entirely proper grounds that he has done more than enough in that line
in the Logic. Instead he turns to Hamilton’s views on logic. Anyone who
wearies of Mill’s hounding of Hamilton through the questions of how we
form concepts, what it is to judge something to be the case, and so on,
will wish that Mill had declined the chase on the grounds that here,
too, he had done enough in the first two books of the Logic. The
question, what is a concept, Edition: current; Page: [li] resolves
itself for Mill into the familiar question whether there are any
abstract ideas; he offers a thumbnail sketch of the three possible views
on universals, declares that Realism is dead beyond hope of revival, and
proceeds to set out the rival attractions of Nominalism and
Conceptualism. The view of the nominalists was that “there is nothing
general except names. A name, they said, is general, if it is applied in
the same acceptation to a plurality of things; but every one of the
things is individual” (302), and this is the view of the mediaeval
nominalists’ successors such as Berkeley. The conceptualists, of whom
Locke is representative, agree that “External objects indeed are all
individual” but maintain nonetheless that “to every general name
corresponds a General Notion, or Conception, called by Locke and others
an Abstract Idea. General Names are the names of these Abstract Ideas.”
(302.) Mill complains of Hamilton that he will not settle for one or
other of these positions, but seems to swing between agreeing with
Berkeley that we simply cannot form ideas of, for example, a triangle
which is neither isosceles nor scalene nor equilateral—in which case he
would be a nominalist—and a manner of talking about “Abstract General
Notions” which is only consistent with conceptualism. Mill himself
settles for nominalism, by explaining that we may have abstractions
without having any abstract ideas.

General concepts, therefore, we have, properly speaking, none; we have
only complex ideas of objects in the concrete: but we are able to attend
exclusively to certain parts of the concrete idea: and by that exclusive
attention, we enable those parts to determine exclusively the course of
our thoughts as subsequently called up by association; and are in a
condition to carry on a train of meditation or reasoning relating to
those parts only, exactly as if we were able to conceive them separately
from the rest

(310).

Attention is fixed by naming the respect in which we are to attend to
whatever it is. Mill insists that words are therefore only signs, and
there can be such things as natural signs; anything which will direct
the attention in the appropriate way will form the basis of
classification and conceptualization. “We may be tolerably certain that
the things capable of satisfying hunger form a perfectly distinct class
in the mind of any of the more intelligent animals; quite as much so as
if they were able to use or understand the word food” (315).

Mill’s eventual aim is to vindicate against Hamilton the doctrine that
there can be a logic of truth as well as a logic of consistency. In the
process he sets out to criticize Hamilton’s account of what is involved
in judgment and reasoning. The two basic complaints that Mill levels
against Hamilton are that his account of judgment appears to make all
true propositions analytic, and that his account of reasoning makes it
impossible to see how one can ever find out something by reasoning. Here
again we are in a Edition: current; Page: [lii] much-trodden field, and
one where there has since Mill’s day been a continuous effort to
disengage questions of logical implication from questions about the
novelty to any particular reasoner of the conclusion he reaches by
deductive inference. In the matter of judgment, Mill had an interest in
insisting on the importance of belief, and thus of the idea of truth. In
editing his father’s Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, he had
remarked on the imperfections of the associationist analysis of belief
in terms of the association of two ideas.53 To believe that the grass is
green and to deny that the grass is green, we need to have the same
propositional content in mind; it is the judgment we make of its being
true to fact or false to fact that is different. In so far as
associating ideas is supposed to be mentally analogous to depicting a
state of affairs, it leaves out what is distinctive about judging that
something is or is not the case; for a picture to become an assertion or
a denial it needs to have something else added to it, namely the
judgment that it is or is not how things are.

Mill takes up the theme against Hamilton with additions. Hamilton had
rashly suggested that judgment was a process of seeing whether one
concept was part of another, though he also claimed that in judgment we
looked to see if two concepts were capable of coexistence or were
mutually repugnant. But this argument he glossed in such a way as to
suggest at any rate that such an inspection yielded what we should
normally think of as a synthetic judgment. We put together such concepts
as water, rusting, and iron, and if they are congruent, reach the
judgment that “water rusts iron.” Mill comments pretty sharply on this
fearful muddle. It confuses judgments about the compatibility of our
concepts with judgments about the coexistence of attributes in the
world, and in any event does not make the necessary move from
contemplating a state of affairs as possible to asserting that it is
actualized.

The discussion is complicated to some degree by the psychological
overtones of any discussion of concepts. Hamilton at times seems to be
wanting to say that an established truth is analytic, in that our
concepts embody everything we associate with that of which they are the
concept; so, only new truths would be synthetic, and they would make us
revise our concepts in such a way that what had been synthetic now
became analytic. This cannot be said to be an attractive doctrine in
general, nor can Hamilton be said to have showed much sign of really
wishing to articulate it; it would mean that a statement such as “all
men are mortal” would be speaker-relative both in meaning and in
epistemological status. For somebody whose concept “man” included
“mortal” it would be analytic, and for somebody whose concept did not,
it would be synthetic. Even then, in Edition: current; Page: [liii]
Hamilton’s account, we are not much further forward, for if concepts are
congruent when propositions are possibly true, and if they are related
as part to whole when they are necessarily true, how are they related
when something is said to be true only contingently? As Mill complains,
the necessary reference to a belief about the world seems to have been
omitted.

Take, for instance, Sir W. Hamilton’s own example of a judgment, “Water
rusts iron:” and let us suppose this truth to be new to us. Is it not
like a mockery to say with our author, that we know this truth by
comparing “the thoughts, water, iron, and rusting?” Ought he not to have
said the facts, water, iron, and rusting? and even then, is comparing
the proper name for the mental operation? We do not examine whether
three thoughts agree, but whether three outward facts coexist. If we
lived till doomsday we should never find the proposition that water
rusts iron in our concepts, if we had not first found it in the outward
phænomena.

(332.)

Mill’s chapter on reasoning is concerned with the problem which had
haunted the Logic, that is, how can reasoning give us new knowledge?
Mill requires a theory of reasoning which accounts for the way in which
we can, by bringing judgments to bear on each other, learn what we could
not know by inspecting them separately. The conventional complaint
against Mill to the effect that he habitually confuses psychological and
logical questions really does seem warranted here, for most of his
objections to Hamilton boil down to the claim that if we move from “all
men are mortal” via “Socrates is a man” to “Socrates is mortal” by
seeing that a concept comprehended under a concept is comprehended under
any concept that comprehends that second concept, then it is impossible
to see how we could move from premises to conclusion. Did we once have
the greater concept clear in our mind, subsequently forget part of it,
and then recall it (343-5)? Mill produces what he takes to be a
conclusive refutation of the “conceptualist” view that reasoning is
eliciting the implications of concepts, when he offers geometrical
reasoning as a plain case of achieving new knowledge of things rather
than merely of concepts by a process of reasoning alone.

Here are two properties of circles. One is, that a circle is bounded by
a line, every point of which is equally distant from a certain point
within the circle. This attribute is connoted by the name, and is, on
both theories [that is, Nominalism and Conceptualism], a part of the
concept. Another property of the circle is, that the length of its
circumference is to that of its diameter in the approximate ratio of
3.14159 to 1. This attribute was discovered, and is now known, as a
result of reasoning. Now, is there any sense, consistent with the
meaning of the terms, in which it can be said that this recondite
property formed part of the concept circle, before it had been
discovered by mathematicians? Even in Sir W. Hamilton’s meaning of
concept, it is in nobody’s but a mathematician’s concept even now: and
if we concede that mathematicians are to determine the normal concept of
a circle for mankind at large, mathematicians themselves did not find
the ratio of the diameter to the circumference in the concept, but put
it there; and could not have done so until the Edition: current; Page:
[liv] long train of difficult reasoning which culminated in the
discovery was complete.

(346-7.)

This discussion, of course, ties in with Mill’s account of geometry in
the Logic, with its insistence that geometry was not about definitions
but about the things picked out by the definitions.54

Mill goes on to criticize Hamilton’s account of logic in terms which the
preceding discussion would lead us to expect. Hamilton intended, so far
as one can see, to describe logic as a purely formal science, and to
explain the domain of what we should now call philosophical logic as
that of the analysis of the mental operations necessary for valid
thinking and inference—concept formation, definition, and so on. But
this is notoriously an area in which the absence of an adequate notation
hindered all efforts at distinguishing clearly between formal and
material considerations. Mill, moreover, was an unabashed primitivist in
such matters. He complained in the Examination that Hamilton’s attempt
to explicate the law of noncontradiction by such formulae as “A=not-A=0”
or “A-A=0” was merely a “misapplication and perversion of algebraical
symbols” (376), and his letters reveal that he had no inkling of the
importance of the work of Boole.55 In the absence of an adequate
notation, it is difficult to develop a coherent account of what is meant
by restricting the notion of logic to formal considerations. Mill is
wholly successful in showing that Hamilton made a fearful chaos of it.
What everyone since has found less convincing is Mill’s positive account
of a logic which should be wider than the logic of consistency. It is
not that his fundamental position is incoherent, though it is loosely
stated.

If any general theory of the sufficiency of Evidence and the legitimacy
of Generalization be possible, this must be Logic κατ’ ἑξοχήν, and
anything else called by the name can only be ancillary to it. For the
Logic called Formal only aims at removing one of the obstacles to the
attainment of truth, by preventing such mistakes as render our thoughts
inconsistent with themselves or with one another: and it is of no
importance whether we think consistently or not, if we think wrongly. It
is only as a means to material truth, that the formal, or to speak more
clearly, the conditional, validity of an operation of thought is of any
value; and even that value is only negative: we have not made the
smallest positive advance towards right thinking, by merely keeping
ourselves consistent in what is, perhaps, systematic error.

(369-70.)

Here, evidently, Mill divides general logic into what one might call the
realm of inductive support on the one hand, and the realm of deductive
Edition: current; Page: [lv] implication on the other. The general
principle that deductive arguments are conclusive because there is no
way to affirm their premises and deny their conclusions without
self-contradiction is one which Mill seems to adopt for himself. The
so-called principle of non-contradiction, says Mill, “is the principle
of all Reasoning, so far as reasoning can be regarded apart from
objective truth or falsehood. For, abstractedly from that consideration,
the only meaning of validity in reasoning is that it neither involves a
contradiction, nor infers anything the denial of which would not
contradict the premises.” (378.) Yet Mill does not want to draw such a
sharp line between inductive and deductive arguments as either his
opponents at the time or his successors now would do. The suggestion,
even in the quotation immediately above, is that where objective truth
or falsehood is in question, there is a sense of “validity” other than
that employed in deductive reasoning. And that in turn suggests another
heretical doctrine, that Mill thinks of the relation between premises
and conclusions as relations of evidential support; some evidential
support is so good that when we see plainly what we are saying we see
that we should contradict ourselves by simultaneously asserting the
premises and denying the conclusion. But instead of concluding that
induction and deduction are wholly different operations, Mill inclines
to the view that there is no real inference in deductive arguments.

The twentieth-century reader’s unease at all this must be a good deal
increased by two passages which betoken the same unwillingness to give
any weight at all to the formal/material distinction. Mill seems at
first to see that there is something odd about the so-called law of
identity which, he agrees, lies at the basis of all reasoning, though it
is not clear what it is that he dislikes. At one point he suggests that
the law of identity amounts to saying that a statement true in one form
of words remains true in another form of words bearing the same meaning.
To elucidate the law, says Mill, we need very much more than a statement
like “A is identical with A.” We need, indeed,

a long list of such principles as these: When one thing is before
another, the other is after. When one thing is after another, the other
is before. When one thing is along with another, the other is along with
the first. When one thing is like, or unlike, another, the other is like
(or unlike) the first: in short, as many fundamental principles as there
are kinds of relation. For we have need of all these changes of
expression in our processes of thought and reasoning.

(374.)

If the law of identity is fundamental in reasoning, it must be a general
licence “to assert the same meaning in any words which will,
consistently with their signification, express it” (374). This suggests
that Mill does not think that identity is a property of things, but
wishes to gloss it in terms of the equivalence of propositions. But he
ends by admitting to some Edition: current; Page: [lvi] uncertainty
whether the fundamental laws of logic are really necessities of thought
or merely habits which we have acquired by seeing that these laws apply
to all phenomena. That they do apply to phenomena, Mill certainly says
here. Speaking of the laws of identity, contradiction, and excluded
middle, he says,

I readily admit that these three general propositions are universally
true of all phænomena. I also admit that if there are any inherent
necessities of thought, these are such. I express myself in this
qualified manner, because whoever is aware how artificial, modifiable,
the creatures of circumstances, and alterable by circumstances, most of
the supposed necessities of thought are (though real necessities to a
given person at a given time), will hesitate to affirm of any such
necessities that they are an original part of our mental constitution.
Whether the three so-called Fundamental Laws are laws of our thoughts by
the native structure of the mind, or merely because we perceive them to
be universally true of observed phænomena, I will not positively decide:
but they are laws of our thoughts now, and invincibly so. They may or
may not be capable of alteration by experience, but the conditions of
our existence deny to us the experience which would be required to alter
them.

(380-1.)

Mill’s last encounter with Hamilton on the logical front concerns two
doctrines on which Hamilton very much prided himself. These are the
claim that we can and should distinguish between syllogisms taken in
“extension” and taken in “comprehension,” and the doctrine of the
quantification of the predicate. Mill is very fierce against the first,
but mostly because he thinks Hamilton failed to see that the extension
of a class is no clue to the meaning of a class name. Thus the meaning
of “table” is explained by the attributes in virtue of which tables are
such; anyone who knows what they are knows what “table” means and what a
table is. The number of things which happen to be tables is neither here
nor there; to know that they are tables requires that we know the
attributes of tables already, and once we know that, we know all there
is to be known about the meaning of the word “table.” Whether this view
entails that there is no light to be cast on the syllogism by treating
it in terms of the calculus of classes is debatable. Mill follows
Hamilton into a fog of visual imagery. According to Hamilton, says Mill,
we should think of “all oxen ruminate” as meaning “If all creatures that
ruminate were collected in a vast plain, and I were required to search
the world and point out all oxen, they would all be found among the
crowd on that plain, and none anywhere else. Moreover, this would have
been the case in all past time, and will at any future, while the
present order of nature lasts.” (387.) Mill’s objection is not that this
is not implicit in the proposition, but that such a claim is not what is
present to the mind. What is present to the mind is that two attributes
are conjoined.

Hamilton is now best remembered for his doctrine of the quantification
of the predicate. This is not to say that he is kindly remembered for
it; it is little more than a curiosity of the history of logic, and
Hamilton’s own Edition: current; Page: [lvii] version of it has been
described as presented with “quite fantastic incompetence.”56 The most
that anyone now tries to do is rescue Hamilton from such charges. It is,
however, hard to see quite what Hamilton was trying to add to the
traditional theory of the syllogism, the more so because his later
elucidations of the doctrine, produced in the heat of controversy with
De Morgan, not only diminish the claims of the doctrine in respect of
the number of new forms of proposition added to the traditional square
of opposition, but, as De Morgan pointed out, render invalid syllogisms
he had earlier claimed as valid. Mill does not tackle Hamilton on these
technical issues. Rather, he challenges him on his claim that the
quantification of the predicate is a principle of mental hygiene.
Hamilton appeals to “the self-evident truth,—That we can only rationally
deal with what we already understand, determines the simple logical
postulate,—To state explicitly what is thought implicitly.”57 The
postulate is a fairly ludicrous piece of advice; conversation would be
impossible if we said everything we thought.

The true place of the doctrine of the quantified predicate lies in the
theory of the syllogism, and particularly in the area of Aristotle’s
claims about the permissible and impermissible forms of proposition.
Hamilton’s claim that we can quantify the predicate makes good sense in
the case of affirmative propositions like “all x is y” or “some x is y,”
where we can give clear meaning to “all x is some y” and “all x is all
y,” and again to “some x is all y” and “some x is some y.” Even here
there is trouble lurking, since “all x is all y” may be interpreted
either as “every x is every y”—which is true if there is only one x,
only one y and x is y—or as a class-proposition to the effect that
everything in x is in y and vice versa. Hamilton plainly wanted to read
it as a class proposition, and only so could it give the required
meaning to what he called “parti-partial negatives” like “some x is not
some y,” where he wanted to admit as possible propositions even “some A
is not some A” as in “Some animal (say, rational) is not some animal
(say, irrational).”58 Then when pressed by his critics, he added the
doctrine that some meant, not some at least, but some only, and this
move collapsed the particular affirmative and particular negative
propositions of the traditional square of opposition into each other, so
destroying the claim that with the quantified predicate we achieve eight
distinct forms of proposition, which can be put into four pairs of
contradictories in the usual way.

The whole subject of how to interpret the quantification of the
predicate in the case of negative propositions is bedevilled by the
awkwardness of the verbal formulae involved, and it is no wonder that
Hamilton and De Morgan argued at cross-purposes for the better part of
twenty years. Edition: current; Page: [lviii] However sympathetic to the
quantification of the predicate one may feel, it seems clear that most
of what Hamilton hoped to achieve is much more readily achieved by
resorting to Euler circles. With the aid of these and the predicate
calculus it is possible to spell out several versions of what is implied
by Hamilton’s claims. No point which can readily be related to
Hamilton’s thought is served by so doing, and, because syllogistic logic
is of interest to most modern logicians for what it suggests about the
capacity of mediaeval logicians to anticipate twentieth-century
controversies, rather than for more directly instructive reasons,
Hamilton’s muddles, late in the day, are unexciting stuff. One can say
on Hamilton’s behalf that the theory of the quantification of the
predicate opens up an interesting area of logic, which remained largely
inaccessible until a more adequate notation was developed. The later
history of the subject runs through De Morgan’s speculations about the
“numerically definite” syllogism and on to twentieth-century work on
“the logic of plurality.” But to all this Mill had no contribution to
offer, and Hamilton rather a small one.

On the issues as he saw them Mill’s demolition of Hamilton’s claims for
the doctrine is brief, lucid, and complete. He objects to Hamilton’s
rewriting of some as “some only”; although Hamilton may be right that
there is a sous entendu of conversation to the effect that if I have
seen, and know that I have seen, all your children, I should not remark
merely that I had seen some of them, this fact is no reason to clutter
up the theory of the syllogism (400-1). “Some A is B” is a single
judgment, says Mill, and the predicate calculus would no doubt be
thought to be on his side in formalizing it as ∃x(Ax & Bx), but “some
only of A is B” is a compound judgment, and here, too, the modern
formula would give Mill comfort, for it would be ∃x(Ax & Bx) & ∃x(Ax
& -Bx). The same doubling up is required also when we attempt to
quantify the predicate in the case of universal affirmatives. So, says
Mill, Hamilton is not asking us to make explicit what is already
implicit, since what he says is implicit (that is, in our minds already)
is nothing of the sort. The Hamiltonian rewritings merely substitute two
judgments for one. Mill adds a footnote to explain that we individuate
judgments by way of seeing what quaesitum we answer, and he quotes one
of Hamilton’s own authorities to the effect that the “cause why the
quantitative note is not usually joined with the predicate, is that
there would thus be two quæsita at once; to wit, whether the predicate
were affirmed of the subject, and whether it were denied of everything
beside” (400n-1n). Mill’s conclusion is what one would expect:

The general result of these considerations is, that the utility of the
new forms is by no means such as to compensate for the great additional
complication which they introduce into the syllogistic theory; a
complication which would make it at the same time difficult to learn or
remember, and intolerably tiresome both in the Edition: current; Page:
[lix] learning and in the using. . . . The new forms have thus no
practical advantage which can countervail the objection of their entire
psychological irrelevancy; and the invention and acquisition of them
have little value, except as one among many other feats of mental
gymnastic, by which students of the science may exercise and invigorate
their faculties.

(403.)

Given that Hamilton’s claims had been for the psychological and
theoretical merits of the doctrine, it is hard to blame Mill for not
going out of his way to find a more plausible and persuasive version of
the doctrine to criticize.


FREEDOM OF THE WILL

The last issue on which we shall see how Mill takes Hamilton to task is
that of the freedom of the will. As we should imagine, the Philosophy of
the Conditioned found the questions of how the will determined action,
and how the will was itself moved (if not determined) to act, the
occasion for a riot of declared nescience. Mansel, whose commitment to
the unanswerability of ultimate questions was stronger than Hamilton’s,
placed the question whether and in what way the will was free on the
list of topics where philosophy proceeded by denying the intelligibility
of the claims of reductionists, materialists, and necessitarians, rather
than by defending an articulated account of the nature of the will and
its free operation. But it was, if anything was, the central issue on
which he proposed to stand and fight. For Mansel, the two opposing
armies were those of the philosophy of Personality on the one side and
those of Necessity on the other, and, although he did not do anything to
defend this view of the nature of the battlefield or his own place in
the ranks of the personalists in The Philosophy of the Conditioned, the
opposition itself appears plainly enough almost throughout his Bampton
Lectures.59 Mill attacks some of the obiter dicta in Mansel’s
Prolegomena Logica, but in criticism he sticks pretty closely to
Hamilton. However, for most readers, Mill’s positive views provide the
interest of the chapter, for Mill commits himself to a number of views
on punishment, the nature of justice, and the analysis of responsibility
which outraged his critics at the time, and which still are live
philosophical positions.

Mill says, rather plausibly, that Hamilton’s account of the freedom of
the will is central to the whole Philosophy of the Conditioned. Hamilton
brings the supposed incapacity of the human mind to conceive an
“absolute commencement” into head-on conflict with our apparently
intuitive conviction that we are free agents, whose acts of will are
indeed absolute commencements. Hamilton’s Philosophy of the Conditioned,
moreover, denied the teachings of common sense on the freedom of the
will. Where Edition: current; Page: [lx] Reid had come close to Dr.
Johnson’s famous assertion that “we know our will is free, and there’s
an end on’t,”60 Hamilton thought we knew nothing of the sort. Even Reid
had agreed that people act from motives; a motive must in some fashion
determine the action—even if the motive was not a direct cause of
action, it was surely one of the co-operating causes which determined
the will, and the will in turn was the direct cause of the action (444).
Mill gratefully acknowledges Hamilton’s assistance in repudiating Reid’s
common-sense position, though he does so in a somewhat barbed fashion:
“Sir W. Hamilton having thus, as is often the case (and it is one of the
best things he does), saved his opponents the trouble of answering his
friends, his doctrine is left resting exclusively on the supports which
he has himself provided for it” (445). But the freedom of the will is
central to Hamilton’s metaphysics in more than providing a paradigm of
the conditioned nature of thought, and in more than providing a point at
which Hamilton’s distinctive views emerged clearly by contrast with
those of Reid. For Hamilton’s theology rested on human freedom. In
effect, he held that the existence of a non-natural origin of action was
the chief ground for supposing that there was a personal Creator, rather
than, say, a material First Cause or a Platonic Form, at the origin of
the universe. It is not just that the human personality provides, and
has to provide, the model in terms of which we imagine God to
ourselves—this was the burden of Mansel’s case—it is that unless human
agency is somehow outside the ordinary natural course of events, there
is no reason why the universe should not be thought of as having a
wholly natural origin.

Mill does not so much argue against this view, though he does do so, as
complain about the wickedness of resorting to such arguments at all:

the practice of bribing the pupil to accept a metaphysical dogma, by the
promise or threat that it affords the only valid argument for a foregone
conclusion—however transcendently important that conclusion may be
thought to be—is not only repugnant to all the rules of philosophizing,
but a grave offence against the morality of philosophic enquiry

(438-9).

The only thing about Mill’s attack on Hamilton’s theology that is of
much philosophical interest is negative. Mill does not suggest that a
(really or only apparently) contracausal freedom of agency could have
appeared in the world by purely natural processes. He insists instead
that Hamilton’s argument for the existence of God is a poor one compared
with his own favoured argument, that from design (439).61 And he argues
against Hamilton that a necessitarian or determinist could believe in
God as a First Edition: current; Page: [lxi] Cause with no more
difficulty over the First Cause’s own origins than the libertarian had.
But he does not suggest anything like the kind of theory of emergent
properties which might explain the way in which a sufficient degree of,
say, neurological complexity and brain capacity causes a change of kind
in the determination of action without introducing supernatural causes.
The fact has a certain historical interest in showing how little Mill
had absorbed of the evolutionary theory which would so naturally have
provided him with just such an explanation.

All this, however, is almost by the way. For Mill’s aim is to present
the positive case for necessitarianism or—since he rejected the idea of
any “must in the case, any necessity, other than the unconditional
universality of the fact” (446)—what he preferred to call determinism.
The determinist holds no more complicated a belief than that human
actions are not exempt from the causality in terms of which we explain
all other phenomena. He hold that “volitions do, in point of fact,
follow determinate moral antecedents with the same uniformity, and (when
we have sufficient knowledge of the circumstances) with the same
certainty, as physical effects follow their physical causes” (446). Mill
encourages us to test the belief against evidence, both individual and
social, and assures the reader that it is confirmed by the
predictability of people’s behaviour. Mill, like empiricists before and
after him, assumes rather readily that all prediction rests upon
knowledge of physical causes. There is no such thing as real
unpredictability, no genuine indeterminacy in the facts; all there is is
the residual ignorance of the observer. “The cases in which volitions
seem too uncertain to admit of being confidently predicted, are those in
which our knowledge of the influences antecedently in operation is so
incomplete, that with equally imperfect data there would be the same
uncertainty in the predictions of the astronomer and the chemist” (446).
Such uncertainties do not induce the scientist to abandon his belief in
the universal reign of causality, and they ought not to induce anything
of the sort in human affairs: “we must reject equally in both cases the
hypothesis of spontaneousness . . .” (446).

Hamilton had expressed uncertainty about the revelations of
consciousness on the subject of free will. Mill thinks that this is
proper, because the only unchallengeable deliverances of consciousness
are those where there really is no room for error—whatever I now feel, I
really do now feel, and cannot think I do not. But freedom is not a
matter of current feeling; it is a hypothesis, namely, the hypothesis
that I could have done something other than what I actually did do. As a
counterfactual, its content is ex hypothesi not present to
consciousness; so consciousness simply cannot tell us that we are free.
Although Mill half credits Hamilton with this realization, he argues
that Hamilton sometimes lapses into saying we intuit our own
freedom—inconceivable though it is on his own account to do so—and
Edition: current; Page: [lxii] argues that, more interestingly, Hamilton
holds that what we intuit is not our freedom but rather our moral
responsibility, in which freedom of the will is implicit. This
introduction of the concept of responsibility gives Mill the opportunity
to leave Hamilton’s case on one side, and to return to the argument with
the Owenites which dominates the discussion of freedom and necessity in
Book Six of the Logic. Mill wishes to distinguish his own, determinist
doctrine from two species of Fatalism. The first is pure or Asiatic
fatalism, which “holds that our actions do not depend upon our desires.
Whatever our wishes may be, a superior power, or an abstract destiny,
will overrule them, and compel us to act, not as we desire, but in the
manner predestined.” (465.) The second doctrine is that of Owenite
fatalism, or “Modified Fatalism”:

our actions are determined by our will, our will by our desires, and our
desires by the joint influence of the motives presented to us and of our
individual character; but that, our character having been made for us
and not by us, we are not responsible for it, nor for the actions it
leads to, and should in vain attempt to alter them

(465).

The doctrine Mill held against both varieties of fatalism was not
fatalist, merely determinist: that

not only our conduct, but our character, is in part amenable to our
will; that we can, by employing the proper means, improve our character;
and that if our character is such that while it remains what it is, it
necessitates us to do wrong, it will be just to apply motives which will
necessitate us to strive for its improvement, and so emancipate
ourselves from the other necessity

(466).

The Owenites had argued from their position of modified fatalism that it
was unjust to punish people, or, which was in their eyes, though not in
everyone’s, the same thing, that punishment was ineffective as a means
of social control and therefore amounted to gratuitous cruelty. The
reason why their views on punishment mattered to Mill in the Examination
was perhaps rather different from the reason why they mattered when he
was writing the Logic. In his youth, Mill had obviously been very
vulnerable to the accusation that his character had been made for him,
and not by him, and that he was an artefact of James Mill’s designing.
The argument in the Logic is directed almost entirely to showing that we
can improve our characters, that we are not the helpless slaves of
antecedent circumstances, and can choose to become something other than
we have so far been brought up to be. The discussion in the Examination
is less passionate. It takes off from the fact that, on Mill’s analysis,
the idea of responsibility is wholly bound up with the idea of
punishment. To show that there is an analysis of responsibility
consistent with determinism is, in effect, to show that there is such a
thing as just punishment in a determinist world.

Edition: current; Page: [lxiii]
Mill accepts that it is unjust to punish people for what they cannot
help, or when they could not have acted otherwise than they did. But his
analysis of what we mean when we say that a person could have acted
otherwise rephrases the statement, in the classical empiricist mould, as
a claim that the person would have acted otherwise if he or she had so
chosen. That all else could have remained unchanged, and that the person
in question should have acted differently, is what Mill denies. When
Mansel says that we know that we could have acted differently, even if
everything else had been the same, Mill agrees, “though the antecedent
phænomena remain the same: but not if my judgment of the antecedent
phænomena remains the same. If my conduct changes, either the external
inducements or my estimate of them must have changed.” (448n.) We cannot
act against our strongest motive, so freedom must consist in being able
to act according to it. Mill goes on to claim that this kind of freedom
is entirely consistent with determinism—as it evidently is—and that it
is entirely consistent with holding ourselves and others responsible for
their actions. Mill begins by insisting that “Responsibility means
punishment” (454). He distinguishes at once between two different ways
in which we may be said to be liable to punishment.

When we are said to have the feeling of being morally responsible for
our actions, the idea of being punished for them is uppermost in the
speaker’s mind. But the feeling of liability to punishment is of two
kinds. It may mean, expectation that if we act in a certain manner,
punishment will actually be inflicted upon us, by our fellow creatures
or by a Supreme Power. Or it may only mean, knowing that we shall
deserve that infliction.

(454.)

Mill sees that it is the idea of deserving punishment which needs
explaining. Expecting to suffer is very obviously consistent with a
complete absence of free will.

Mill, in essence, provides a naturalistic theory of punishment. If a
society has some sense of right and wrong, then those who cultivate
anti-social dispositions, and threaten the security and well-being of
everyone else, will naturally be thought to be behaving wrongly, and
will be objects of fear and dislike to everyone else. They will
therefore be left out of the distribution of common benefits and will
have whatever measures of self-defence others think necessary employed
against them. The wrongdoer

is certain to be made accountable, at least to his fellow creatures,
through the normal action of their natural sentiments. And it is well
worth consideration, whether the practical expectation of being thus
called to account, has not a great deal to do with the internal feeling
of being accountable; a feeling, assuredly, which is seldom found
existing in any strength in the absence of that practical expectation.

(455.)

Edition: current; Page: [lxiv]
Now it is noticeable here that Mill introduces a consideration which
haunts the subsequent discussion of punishment much as, with its
contractual overtones, it haunts Mill’s account of justice in
Utilitarianism and much as it haunts On Liberty. This is the suggestion
that society is founded on some sort of implicit agreement about the
reciprocity of good and evil; we get security against the attacks of
others in return for our forbearance, and we are punished when we break
this agreement. Being practically held to account is a way of having the
reciprocal nature of social agreement brought home to us. People who
never enter into egalitarian relations cease to have notions like “fair
play” in their moral lexicon. The importance of some such conception of
justice as fairness is not much developed anywhere in Mill’s work,
though it emerges in Mill’s interpretation of what utility requires.
Here it emerges in what he says about the retributive element in
punishment, and in a rather Kantian interpretation of the connection
between punishment and the good of the criminal himself.

The main aim of Mill’s account, however, is to show how punishment is
not shown to be unjust on determinist interpretations of it. After
arguing, rather neatly, that even if we believed that the “criminal”
class consisted of creatures who had no control at all over their
noxious behaviour we should endeavour to control them by measures very
like what we now call punishment, he confronts head on the opponent who
says that all this is beside the point. The root of the difficulty is a
question of justice: “On the theory of Necessity (we are told) a man
cannot help acting as he does; and it cannot be just that he should be
punished for what he cannot help” (458). Mill’s first response to this
is at least odd, at worst catastrophic. He says that the claim that the
criminal could not help it needs qualification; if he is of vicious
temperament, the criminal cannot help committing the crime, but if “the
impression is strong in his mind that a heavy punishment will follow, he
can, and in most cases does, help it” (458). On this view the threat of
punishment is a countervailing motive, which so to speak pushes the
criminal in the opposite direction to that in which his criminal
character pushes him. Mill’s critics all saw that there was something
very wrong here, but nobody seems to have pointed out that, on Mill’s
analysis, anyone who commits a crime can always make precisely the claim
that Mill is trying to rebut. If he cannot help doing wrong when he is
not threatened, the proper conclusion to draw is that when he is
threatened and still offends, those who have threatened him have not
done so effectively. If he could not help it, unthreatened, how can he
help it, inadequately threatened?

Mill’s great concern to show that we are responsible for our characters
may be thought to indicate some awareness of the trouble he had caused
himself. The criminal who explains to the court that it is unfortunate
that he has such a bad character, but that once he had it, it
overwhelmed all the Edition: current; Page: [lxv] threats the law was
prepared to utter, could be told that he had no more business going
around with a bad character than he would have had going around with a
loaded revolver. The retort, however, will not do much to save Mill’s
case. Anyone who is faced with that argument can simply respond by
saying that without a sufficient motive to improve his character he
could not improve it; given the initial badness of his character, it was
no use looking to any internal motive for change; and as for the absence
of an external motive, how could he be blamed for that? Mill, indeed,
does not linger on the question of the agent’s motives. He turns rather
to the question of what makes punishment just. In explaining this, he
gives hostages both to fortune and to Kant. Punishment has two proper
goals, the good of the criminal and the defence of the just rights of
others. If punishment is not inflicted to protect the just rights of
others, it is mere aggression on the individual punished. But, many of
Mill’s readers might wonder, how can he argue that a proper purpose of
punishment is to do the offender good? Is not On Liberty devoted to
denouncing precisely such a claim? And when Mill says: “To punish him
for his own good, provided the inflictor has any proper title to
constitute himself a judge, is no more unjust than to administer
medicine” (458)—is this not in flat contradiction to his attacking
Whewell for suggesting that the law on quarantine was for the sufferer’s
own good?62 Mill responds to this charge in a long footnote. He seems to
see only part of the point, for he begins by saying that of course we
punish children for their own good, and we may treat “adult communities
which are still in the infantine stage of development” in the same way;
but he seems to draw back a little over adult offenders. “And did I say,
or did any one ever say, that when, for the protection of society, we
punish those who have done injury to society, the reformation of the
offenders is not one of the ends to be aimed at, in the kind and mode,
at least, of the punishment?” (459n.) There is here, perhaps, a
suggestion to the effect that Mill accepts Kant’s view that nobody can
be punished simply to do him good, but that once he forfeits his right
to immunity from all punishment, we may properly consider how to reform
him when we consider what punishment to inflict.

The same awkwardness emerges when Mill talks of the legitimate defence
of our just rights as a ground of punishment. Looked at from society’s
point of view, it is just to punish offenders who transgress the rights
of others, “as it is just to put a wild beast to death (without
unnecessary suffering) for the same object” (460). To say this seems
precisely to ignore the whole question of the distinction between
punishment applied to free moral agents and mere measures of social
control applied to non-human Edition: current; Page: [lxvi] creatures.
But then Mill moves on to the question of whether the criminal can
complain of being treated unjustly, and says that the crucial element in
holding ourselves responsible for our actions lies in our recognizing
that other people have rights. Doing so is, in essence, placing
ourselves at their point of view, and if we do so we shall see that
there is no injustice in their defending themselves against any
disposition on our part to infringe those rights. Once again, the
importance of equality emerges in the observation that we shall more
readily recognize the justice of their defending their rights by
punishing offences against them, the more often we have ourselves stood
up for our own rights in this way. Something much nearer an appeal to
fairness than to simple utility is evidently at stake.

Thereafter, Mill’s account is very like Hume’s or, indeed, one may say,
like most empiricist accounts. Mere retribution is of no value, and
would amount to gratuitous cruelty; something like retribution is
warranted, as a way of satisfying the natural hostility and outrage
which criminal acts arouse in us, but such a justification is
instrumental, a case of means-ends argument, and not an appeal with
arithmetical overtones to fitness or to an eternal justice. The
means-ends arguments for punishment reinforce the determinists’ case,
for it would evidently be both silly and cruel to inflict punishment
where it could not modify behaviour, or to threaten it where it could
not do so in prospect. Mill appeals to the same considerations to
explain why we should punish only the guilty. If we are aiming to deter
people from committing crimes, there is no point in punishing those who
have not committed crimes, since there is then no basis for an
association of ideas between the crime on the one hand and the
punishment on the other.

It goes without saying that Mill raises all sorts of issues that have
not been tackled here. The general implausibility of his analysis of
responsibility has been argued at length in various other places, and
almost every point he makes about motivation, about the justification of
punishment, and about the compatibility of freedom and determinism has
been the subject of exhaustive, but still quite unexhausted controversy
for the past hundred years. A review of these arguments is not necessary
here. Two negative points will suffice. It is worthy of notice that Mill
does not seem to see that his opponents are groping, even if only dimly,
towards the crucial point that what we call punishment is very far from
being a means of social control of an obviously utilitarian kind. Why,
for example, do we not endeavour to remodel the characters of those who
have not yet offended, but who are likely to? Why do we not set
penalties for offences for maximum deterrence at minimum cost? So
effective would capital punishment be if threatened for parking offences
that it is doubtful if more than one or two persons a year would be
executed in the whole United States, yet the idea seems absurd. Mill has
nothing to say about this issue, perhaps because he takes Edition:
current; Page: [lxvii] for granted constraints on the utilitarian
calculus which are of rather doubtfully utilitarian origin. Secondly, it
is worth noticing that the two places where the Examination is at its
most interesting and least persuasive are where Mill discusses personal
identity and where he analyzes individual responsibility. The reason is
easy enough to point to, and extremely hard to explicate. In essence,
Mill’s epistemology requires us to treat our own selves and our own
behaviour as if they are external objects and the behaviour of external
objects. We can, of course, treat other persons in this “external” or
third-person fashion; we can treat some parts of our past in this way,
and, up to a point, our own distant futures. The wholesale assimilation
of the first-person and third-person view of the world looks much more
problematic. If it is essentially an incoherent project, we should
expect the incoherence to appear just where it does in the Examination,
that is, when our view of our own identity is being assimilated to our
view of the identity of other persons and objects, and when our control
over our own activity is being assimilated to the control we may
exercise over things and over other persons. If readers of the
Examination are unlikely to find it quite such an exemplary work of
empiricist self-criticism as Hume’s Treatise of Human Nature, it will,
at least in these respects, stand the comparison.

Edition: current; Page: [lviii] Edition: current; Page: [lix]


Textual Introduction

JOHN M. ROBSON


I.: BACKGROUND

an examination of sir william hamilton’s philosophy is in several
respects exceptional among Mill’s works. Although he devoted several
major essays (such as “Bentham” and “Coleridge”), and one book (Auguste
Comte and Positivism—originally a pair of essays) to individuals, only
here did he subject an author’s texts to a searching and detailed
analysis, sustained by an admitted polemical intent. Only part of the
work is devoted to an exposition of Mill’s own views, and a few passages
at most could be said to provide the kind of synthesis so typical of his
other major writings. The kinds of revisions revealed by collation of
the editions are also unusual in two related respects: a much higher
proportion than in his other works is devoted to answering critics; and
far more of the changes are in the form of added footnotes than is usual
for him. Another difference is that the response to the book was
immediate and strong: it elicited more reviews and critical replies in a
short period of time than his Principles of Political Economy, System of
Logic, and even On Liberty. Published in 1865, the first edition (of
1000 copies) sold out so quickly that a second edition was prepared
within a couple of months, and a third edition, which was published two
years after the first, would have appeared sooner had Mill not wished to
answer his critics fully and at leisure. A fourth edition, the last in
his lifetime, appeared in 1872 only five years after the third, and the
work continued in demand for about twenty years.1

As will be shown below, the evidently controversial nature of the
argument Edition: current; Page: [lxx] explains much of the demand for
the Examination; to some extent, however, Mill himself became more
widely known at this time. His election campaign of 1865, though it came
after both the first and second editions, must have increased the sales
to troubled opponents as well as supporters. Also, the extraordinary
interest in his other writings in these years added to, as well as
reflected, his new prominence.2

The content and form of the argument is best seen against at least a
brief outline of Mill’s interest in and acquaintance with Hamilton’s
writings—they did not meet one another or, evidently, correspond. Sir
William Hamilton (1788-1856), like Mill, was widely known long before
any writings appeared under his name; indeed, unlike Mill, he began
publishing significant articles anonymously only in his early forties.
Described in 1814 to De Quincey by John Wilson as a “monster of
erudition,”3 and remembered as a student at Oxford for his unexampled
knowledge of obscure commentators on the Classics, he was elected
Professor of Civil History at Edinburgh in 1821, but can hardly have
become famous in that capacity, as the emolument soon ceased and he
stopped lecturing. In 1829 appeared the first of his fifteen articles in
the Edinburgh Review, his review of Cousin; one can probably assume that
the tribal telegraph began to send the message that Hamilton was “coming
out,” and Mill in London may soon have known; the Cousin review,
coincidentally, appeared in the same number (Vol. L, October, 1829) as
the third of Macaulay’s attacks on James Mill and Utilitarianism, and so
it is almost certain that the younger Mill saw it, even if he did not
know who had written it. In any case, the earliest extant reference
comes in a letter from Mill to Carlyle of 2 August, 1833, in which he
mistakenly assumes that Sir William Hamilton is the “strangest old
schoolman (in a new body only forty years old)” to whom Carlyle had
talked in the preceding winter. Mill’s assumption may have been founded
on knowledge that Hamilton was the author of the erudite (but
undoubtedly not to Mill persuasive) “Recent Publications on Logical
Science” in the Edinburgh for April, 1833. Carlyle corrected Mill,
saying that he had meant “a ganz ausgestorbener Mann,” considerably
inferior to Hamilton, whom he also had met.4 It seems very likely that
in the next year, after moving to London, Carlyle is referring to the
proposed London Review and to Mill when he writes to Hamilton to say
that there is talk of founding “a new Edition: current; Page: [lxxi]
periodical, gn another than the bibliopolic principle, with intent to
show Liberalism under a better than its present rather sooty and ginshop
aspect,” and that having been asked whether Hamilton might write for it,
had “answered, Possible.” Hamilton, a strong Whig, writing later to
Sarah Austin, indicates cautious interest in such a connection, but says
his help could at best be occasional: “. . . I am too much occupied with
matters apart from all popular interest, and have in the ‘Edinburgh
Review’ an outlet more than sufficient for any superfluous energy with
which I may be distressed.”5 In the event, Hamilton did not contribute
to the London Review (or the London and Westminster), but one may assume
that Mill was aware of him from this time on, and would know of his
widely discussed election to the Chair of Logic and Metaphysics at
Edinburgh in 1836. Mill, however, makes no direct allusion to Hamilton
until 1842, when, having virtually finished his Logic, he speculates
that, if John Austin does not review it for the Edinburgh, it is likely
that Hamilton will, in a manner “hostile, but intelligent.”6 Still
Hamilton had not published a book, but in 1846, ten years later than he
had anticipated, his edition of Thomas Reid’s Works appeared, packed
with his own footnotes and supplementary dissertations (the latter oddly
and confusingly incomplete, as we shall see). Though he had suffered a
severe stroke in 1844, he continued to lecture, and in 1852 published a
collection of his review articles, Discussions on Philosophy and
Literature, Education and University Reform. Mill, who owned the second
edition (1853), obviously read it soon after its publication, for he
added references to it in the fourth edition of his Logic (1856, the
year of Hamilton’s death). In 1859 Mansel’s two-volume edition of
Hamilton’s Lectures on Metaphysics appeared, followed in 1860 by the
companion two-volume Lectures on Logic.7


II.: THE WRITING OF THE EXAMINATION

at this point, one may cite Mill’s account in his Autobiography of his
reasons for turning to Hamilton’s philosophy as a subject. (This
account, it should be noted, was written in 1869-70, that is, in the
years between the Edition: current; Page: [lxxii] third and fourth
editions of his Examination.) He was at that time seeking a subject,
feeling, apparently, that he had completed, at least for the time being,
all he was able to do of the writing programme he and Harriet had agreed
on in the 1850s.8 In particular, Considerations on Representative
Government (first and second editions) and Utilitarianism (in its
periodical form) had appeared in 1861, and The Subjection of Women,
presumably in almost its final form, had been put aside in readiness for
a more propitious occasion for publication. He wrote in Avignon in
January, 1862, “The Contest in America,” and, after a seven-month trip
to Greece and Turkey, in September (one must assume) composed, back in
Avignon, a review of Cairnes’s The Slave Power.9

In the Autobiography, after mentioning the latter article, he says that
the Examination was his “chief product” during the “next two years.” He
had, however, begun serious study and consideration of Hamilton a year
earlier, when he read Hamilton’s Lectures (which he erroneously dates as
1860 and 1861) “towards the end of the latter year, with a half formed
intention of giving an account of them in a Review”;10 in fact, he wrote
to Alexander Bain in November, 1861, saying that he intended to “take up
Sir William Hamilton,” and try to make an article on him for the
Westminster Review.11 However, he soon decided (actually, within about a
month)12 that to do so “would be idle,” for “justice could not be done
to the subject in less than a volume.” But should he write such a work?
On reflection, he thought he should. As he indicates, up to this time he
“had not neglected” the Discussions in Philosophy,13 though he had
postponed study of the “Notes to Reid” because of “their unfinished
state. . . .” Actually, it was not the “Notes” (Hamilton’s erudite and
lengthy footnotes to passages in his edition of Reid), but the
“Supplementary Dissertations” added at the end of the volume that were
incomplete.

The story is a very pecular and confusing one: for reasons that are
inadequately given by Mansel in the sixth edition or by Veitch in the
Memoir of Sir William Hamilton, the first edition, prepared by Hamilton
Edition: current; Page: [lxxiii] himself, breaks off (as Mill indicates,
3 below) in the middle of a sentence in Note D*** of the
“Dissertations,” on 914; stereotyped editions appeared in the same form
until 1863 (seven years after Hamilton’s death), when a sixth (also
stereotyped) edition, prepared by Mansel, had a completion (after an
insertion in square brackets) of Note D***, and further material.14
Though intriguing as a bibliographic puzzle, this curiosity would not be
worth dwelling on here, had not Mill contributed to the difficulty by
mentioning (33n), in a passage added in his fourth edition (1872), that
his attention had been drawn to a section (Note N, itself “unfortunately
left unfinished”) in “the posthumous continuation” of the
“Dissertations,” and so suggesting, in conjunction with his earlier
remark that the work was incomplete, that he had not seen the sixth
(expanded) edition of Reid’s Works until he was preparing his own fourth
edition. And Mill added in 1872 another note (255n) quoting from the
additional material, again hinting that he had just come across it.
However, Mill in fact was aware of the sixth edition when he wrote the
Examination, for he quotes from the added material in his first edition
(1865), mentioning that the passage comes from “one of the fragments
recently [i.e., in 1863] published by his editors, in continuation of
the Dissertations on Reid” (117). And, referring to Note D***, he says
in the first edition, “this Dissertation . . . originally broke off
abruptly, but the conclusion . . . has recently been supplied from the
author’s papers . . .” (251n). Indeed, the first reference in the
Examination includes the observation that the “Dissertations” leave off,
“scarcely half finished,” in midsentence; to make this judgment, he must
have had the other “half” before his eyes.

In any case, it would seem likely that Mill did not carefully study
Hamilton’s edition of Reid until after his reading of the Lectures in
late 1861. That reading was to him disappointing, for the Discussions,
containing Hamilton’s “vigorous polemic against the later
Transcendentalists, and his strenuous assertion of some important
principles, especially the Relativity of human knowledge,” had attracted
Mill’s sympathy and admiration, much as he realized the difference
between himself and Hamilton concerning the bases of mental
philosophy.15 “His Lectures,” says Mill,

and the Dissertations on Reid dispelled this illusion: and even the
Discussions, read by the light which these threw on them, lost much of
their value. I found that the Edition: current; Page: [lxxiv] points of
apparent agreement between his opinions and mine were more verbal than
real; that the important philosophical principles which I had thought he
recognised, were so explained away by him as to mean little or nothing,
or were continually lost sight of, and doctrines entirely inconsistent
with them were taught in nearly every part of his philosophical
writings. My estimation of him was therefore so far altered, that
instead of regarding him as occupying a kind of intermediate position
between the two rival philosophies, holding some of the principles of
both, and supplying to both powerful weapons of attack and defence, I
now looked upon him as one of the pillars, and in this country from his
high philosophical reputation the chief pillar, of that one of the two
which seemed to me to be erroneous.16

Mill goes on, in a passage of intensity and force, to explain why
Hamilton, a man of “imposing character” and “great personal merits and
mental endowments,” came to embody for him his most resolute enemies,
the Intuitionists (he makes special reference to Mansel, paraphrasing
his attack in the Examination on the immorality of Mansel’s view of
God), and so to justify “a thorough examination of all [Hamilton’s] most
important doctrines, and an estimate of his general claims to eminence
as a philosopher.” Or, in stronger language: “there ought to be a
hand-to-hand fight between [the school of Intuition and the school of
Experience and Association], . . . controversial as well as expository
writings were needed, and . . . the time was come when such controversy
would be useful.”17 As he had said to Bain in December, 1861, after
having “studied all Sir W. Hamilton’s works pretty thoroughly”: “The
great recommendation of this project is, that it will enable me to
supply what was prudently left deficient in the Logic, and to do the
kind of service which I am capable of to rational psychology, namely, to
its Polemik.”18 Much the same attitude was conveyed to George Grote on
10 January, 1862:

My meditations on Sir W. Hamilton’s work have shaped themselves into an
intention that an examination of his philosophy considered as
representative of the best form of Germanism, shall be the subject of
the next book I write: for it cannot be done in anything less than a
book, without assuming points which it is of great importance to prove.
I have tolerably settled in my own mind what I have got to say on most
of the principal points.19

Presumably he put aside Hamilton during the long trip to Greece referred
to above, but with characteristic energy and thoroughness he was back at
the task before the end of the year, mentioning in December to Theodor
Gomperz his interest in Gomperz’s work on the principle of
contradiction, Edition: current; Page: [lxxv] for he had “commenced
writing something to which a full understanding of that subject is
indispensable,” and he had not yet thoroughly mastered it.20 Bain says
(without specific dates) that Mill, who was regularly corresponding with
him at the time, “read all Hamilton’s writings three times over; and all
the books that he thought in any way related to the subjects treated
of.”21 These included, by early 1863, Mansel’s Limits of Religious
Thought (a “detestable, . . . absolutely loathsome book”) and (re-read)
Ferrier’s Institutes.22 The year of 1863 was not busy by Mill’s
standards, his only major article being “Austin on Jurisprudence” in the
October Edinburgh, and the only edition being the first book version of
Utilitarianism. He spent April and May in Avignon, and then spent the
next months in London (with a few days botanizing); he was busy enough
socially in those months to express relief to Gomperz on 5 July that his
life was “about to relapse into its usual wholesome tranquillity,”
adding: “. . . I have been enabled to have a few days work at my book on
Hamilton with which I now mean to persevere steadily.”23 Returning to
Avignon in early September, he was able to tell John Chapman on 5
October that, having finished his review of Austin, he was “at present
chiefly writing on metaphysics.”24 To Bain he said on 22 November that
he had finished the Edition: current; Page: [lxxvi] book, “as far as
regards the first writing,” and would not start rewriting until he had
seen Bain’s more “matured form” of the analysis of primary qualities
(i.e., in the second edition of his The Senses and the Intellect).25 And
again, on 4 December, he reports to Henry Fawcett: “. . . I have had
little time to think on any scientific subject except Metaphysics, on
which I am making good progress in the work I am about.”26

It is probably to the work of this period that Mill and Bain refer as
occasioning Mill’s decreased respect for Hamilton after the careful
study of his writings. Mill says: “As I advanced in my task, the damage
to Sir W. Hamilton’s reputation became greater than I at first expected,
through the almost incredible multitude of inconsistencies which shewed
themselves on comparing different passages with one another.”27 Bain’s
version is similar: “His picture of Hamilton grew darker as he went on;
chiefly from the increasing sense of his inconsistencies. He often
wished that Hamilton were alive to answer for himself.”28 This
coincidence is not surprising, of course, for Bain had the Autobiography
by him, as well as Mill’s letter of 22 November, 1863, in which the tone
is even sharper:

I was not prepared for the degree in which this complete acquaintance
lowers my estimate of the man & of his speculations. I did not expect to
find them a mass of contradictions. There is scarcely a point of
importance on which he does not hold conflicting theories, or profess
doctrines which suppose one theory while he himself holds another. I
think the book will make it very difficult to hold him up as an
authority on philosophy hereafter. It almost goes against me to write so
complete a demolition of a brother-philosopher after he is dead, not
having done it while he was alive—& the more when I consider what a
furious retort I shd infallibly have brought upon myself, if he had
lived to make it.29

In fact this letter gives us the best picture of Mill’s progress.
Enclosing a table of contents (now lost), he says that on all these
heads he has “written chapters which are not unfit to print even now,”
though he is, on the basis of “a third consecutive reading of Hamilton’s
philosophical writings from beginning to end,” making “notes for
additions & improvements” on the “blank pages” (i.e., the versos) of the
manuscript. And he continued with Edition: current; Page: [lxxvii] his
reading, asking Bain for information about Immanuel von Fichte, Vogt,
and Moleschott (none of whom, incidentally, was demonstrably to
influence his views).30

The next year, 1864, also saw little publication by Mill, with no major
essays or new works, only the second edition of Utilitarianism and the
third of On Liberty appearing (both with the most trivial of revisions),
and it may reasonably be argued that most of his working time in the
first half of the year was given to rewriting the Examination, both in
Avignon and London.31 Writing to Bain on 18 March, 1864, to thank him
for the second edition of his The Senses and the Intellect, Mill says
that the “remaining portion” of the Examination will—presumably as a
result of Bain’s work—“now be plain sailing.” And, after discussing
related matters at length, he concludes by saying that he hopes to have
“at least some chapters of the Hamilton in a state to shew” to Bain in
June.32 He notified Gomperz in June that, after hard work, the book was
“well advanced towards completion,”33 and he was able to let Bain read
“the finished MS. of a large part of the book,” on which Bain made “a
variety of minor suggestions,” and Mill “completed the work for the
press the same autumn.”34 Though we do not know when he approached
Longman, by late October he told Augustus De Morgan that he anticipated
publication in the spring of 1865,35 and his attention had turned to his
articles on Comte, which were finished in February, and appeared in the
Westminster for April and July, 1865.

The Examination was published in an edition of 1000 copies on 13
Edition: current; Page: [lxxviii] April,36 and by the end of the month
had sold four hundred copies;37 a second edition also of 1000 copies was
called for, revised, printed, and published by 24 July.38 As the
surviving correspondence and the printed record demonstrate, Mill soon
was engaged in replying to friend and foe, and the debate, private and
public, continued for some years. He wrote, during its later phase:

It was my business however to shew things exactly as they were, and I
did not flinch from it. I endeavoured always to treat the philosopher
whom I criticized with the most scrupulous fairness; and I knew that he
had abundance of disciples and admirers to correct me if I ever
unintentionally did him injustice. Many of them accordingly have
answered me, more or less elaborately; and they have pointed out
oversights and misunderstandings, though few in number, and mostly very
unimportant in substance. Such of those as had (to my knowledge) been
pointed out before the publication of the latest edition (at present the
third) have been corrected there, and the remainder of the criticisms
have been, as far as seemed necessary, replied to.39

The year 1865 having been extremely busy for Mill, 1866 was even more
demanding, as his parliamentary duties, which for him meant constant
mental as well as physical presence, speeches, and heavy
responsibilities outside the House in connection with the Jamaica
Committee and the Hyde Park riots, occupied a great deal of his time. In
that year also his “Grote’s Plato,” a short book in itself, appeared, as
did the slightly revised second edition of Auguste Comte and Positivism.
But he found time to read and consider the responses to the Examination,
and to report on them to Grote40 and to Bain, the latter of whom says
that Mill, after the close of the session in August, and a subsequent
tour of the Alps and Pyrenees, settled down in Avignon to write his
Rectorial Address for St. Andrews, and “to answer the attacks on
Hamilton for the third edition; both which feats he accomplished before
the opening of the session of 1867”41 in February. Mill Edition:
current; Page: [lxxix] was aware of the need for a third edition in
April of 1866,42 but (with Longman’s concurrence) decided not to rush
the rewriting,43 and had “got through fully three fourths of the
revision” by the end of the year.44 Though the edition (again of 1000
copies) was not published until May,45 it seems likely that, as Bain
says, he had finished the revision before his return to London for the
session, because early in February he told W. G. Ward, towards whom he
always showed more than courtesy, that he would not be able in the
revision to take account of Ward’s “Science, Prayer, Free Will, and
Miracles,” even if he immediately saw proof of it.46

The volume continued to sell, though more slowly: as Longman Division
Books show, by June, 231 copies were disposed of, and in the next twelve
months, till June, 1868, another 232. In the following twelve-month
periods 162, 161, 141, and 148 were sold, so that by June, 1872 (what
with some wastage and copies otherwise distributed), there were only
twenty-seven copies left.

Further replies and discussions appeared in these years, and the French
translation by Cazelles, published in 1869, brought forth notices in
France. Mill proceeded with the substantial task of replying to critics,
presumably reading and pondering the responses as they appeared. When he
turned his hand to the actual revision we do not know, it being likely
that, as usual, he waited until it was evident that a new edition was
needed, which, as the account books suggest, was probably during 1871,
there being only 176 copies on Longman’s hands by June of that year. In
any case, he wrote to Cairnes in April of 1872 to say that, as well as
rereading and (to our regret) culling old letters, he had been
“correcting proofs for new editions” of the Logic (the eighth, which
appeared in July) and the Examination (the fourth, our copy-text, which
appeared in October).47


III.: THE REVISIONS

commenting on mill’s replies in the third edition “to the host of
critics” who had assailed the Examination, Bain says, with justice: “The
additional scope given to the author’s polemical ability greatly
enhanced the interest Edition: current; Page: [lxxx] of the book.”48
Indeed the temper, the tone, and to a significant extent the focus of
the work were altered by the revisions in the third and fourth editions.
As is so often the case, Mill’s own comments in his Preface to the third
edition (and those added there in the fourth) give no clear guidance to
his rewriting and imply that much less took place than is the actual
case. In 1867 he wrote:

Where criticism or reconsideration has convinced me that anything in the
book was erroneous, or that any improvement was required in the mode of
stating and setting forth the truth, I have made the requisite
alterations. When the case seemed to require that I should call the
reader’s attention to the change, I have done so; but I have not made
this an invariable rule. Mere answers to objectors I have generally
relegated to notes. . . . A slight modification in a sentence, or even
in a phrase, which a person unacquainted with the former editions might
read without observing it, and of which, even if he observed it, he
would most likely not perceive the purpose, has sometimes effaced many
pages of hostile criticism.

(cvi.)

And in the fourth edition he calls attention only to the two corrections
deriving from Veitch and a reply to Ward (see the discussion below).

The changes were very considerable indeed. Using the crudest of
measures, the number of pages,49 to give a sense of the amount of
change, one finds that the first and second editions are of the same
length, 560 pages of text.50 The third, however, has 633 pages (an
additional 73, or 13 per cent), and the fourth has 650 (a further 17
pages, or 3 per cent). This measure even on its own terms seriously
underestimates the amount of addition, for much of the new material—far
more than in any other of Mill’s heavily revised works—is in footnotes,
set in very small type with minimal leading.51

Substantive variants. As the account just given would indicate, the
second edition was very little revised. Of the total of almost five
hundred substantive variants in all editions, fewer than forty occurred
in the second edition, almost all of them being very minor revisions of
wording in the text. The great bulk of the changes, some 345, or just
over 70 per cent, were Edition: current; Page: [lxxxi] made in the third
edition, and of these nearly one-third were added footnotes or parts of
footnotes. The fourth edition accounts for the remaining one hundred odd
variants, with an even larger proportion (about two-fifths) being either
added footnotes or parts of footnotes (the latter being here more
significant than in the third edition, as Mill responded to criticisms
of replies he had added in notes in 1867).

For purposes of comparison as well as analysis, one may classify the
variants into four groups: (1) major alterations, involving changes of
opinion, the introduction of new information, and responses to
criticism; (2) changes resulting from the passage of time; (3)
qualifications and clarifications of a minor kind, generally involving
semantic shifts; and (4) minor changes in syntax, changes entailed by
other changes, italicization, terminal punctuation, and merely
referential footnotes. In Mill’s other works one finds, as would be
expected, a great preponderance of changes of the third and fourth
kinds; in the Examination, however, there are as many of the first kind
as of the fourth (just over 180 in each case), comparatively fewer of
the third kind (120), so typical of Mill elsewhere, and only a handful
(8) of the second kind. What may appear strange about this pattern
disappears on closer inspection: the vast majority of the type (1)
changes (two-thirds of which occur in notes) are responses to critics of
a kind rare even in the Logic and the Principles. The paucity of type
(2) changes of a simple sort is explained by the relatively short time
(seven years) from the first edition to the last in Mill’s lifetime, and
by the nature of the text, which is such as virtually to preclude
comments that would be affected by the passage of a few years. As to the
slightly smaller percentage of type (3) changes, it may be noted that
while such changes are found in virtually everything republished by
Mill, the greatest volume of them occurs in editions revised in the
early 1850s.

The distribution of the changes within the work is informative, but
before turning to such questions it is worth citing a few examples to
illustrate in general the sort of revision that Mill engaged in, and to
call attention to some features that might otherwise not be strongly
evident. As indicated above, most of what have been counted as type (1)
changes are in response to criticism. As an illustration of those
occurring in footnotes, one may cite 32n-3n, added in the third edition
like most of the other notes not found in the first edition, where Mill
quotes Alexander Fraser in support of his position, as against Mansel
and the anonymous reviewer in the North American Review, and goes on to
differ from Fraser’s interpretation of Hamilton. The note includes
(32t-t) a variant arising from a type (3) revision (a qualification) in
the fourth edition, and concludes with a lengthy passage added in the
fourth edition, arising from the continuation of Hamilton’s
“Dissertations on Reid” having been called to Mill’s attention (a matter
Edition: current; Page: [lxxxii] discussed at lxxiii above). This note
is typical of others in its length, in its dealing with more than one
critic (and issue), and in its containing elements from both the third
and fourth editions.

Of the major changes that occur in the text rather than the notes,
several may be cited to illustrate different motivations and results.
Very few passages were deleted; one of the longest instances (as usual,
deriving from the third edition) occurs at 19e—but in fact the deletion
is only seemingly made, for, in revised form, most of the text is used
in the long addition, 20g-g22, which shows Mill responding to the
criticisms of John Cunningham and Mansel. (An actual deletion of
considerable length will be seen at 189f.) Another long addition in the
text, exceptional in its length, but again typical in dealing with more
than one critic (four in this case) and deriving from the third edition,
will be seen at 24m-m32. An interesting example of a more temperate or
cautious judgment is seen at 82n, where (discussing Hamilton’s views of
antinomies) Mill originally commented: “I think he has failed to make
out either point”, but in the third edition deleted the sentence.
Actually this change is related to others occurring later in the chapter
(see 88n and 87c-c), where the justification will be found. (The
footnote on 81 is one of the few where Mill mentions what he had said
“in the first edition”; actually in these cases—which are not full
retractions—the matter appeared in both the first and second editions.)

Most of these examples, as mentioned above, relate to criticism, though
seldom does Mill admit to actual mistakes in fact or judgment (in the
last example, he refers merely, 88n, to “an over-statement”); there are
a few places, however, where he makes—not in a full spirit of
repentance—revisions. His controversy with John Veitch, Hamilton’s
biographer, to which further reference will be made below, led to Mill’s
admission in the Preface to the fourth edition (cvii-cviii below) that
he had made two “errors” which, though they did not “affect anything of
importance in the criticism” of Hamilton’s interpretation of Aristotle,
needed correction. These may be seen in Mill’s last chapter, at 503k-k
and 503n, in the first of which Mill silently added “by the editors,” in
response to Veitch’s complaint that Hamilton was not guilty of mistaking
the meaning of an Aristotelian term, his editors having searched out a
passage to bear out his text. The second of these changes is almost
parallel, except that here Mill mentions Veitch and the accusation, and
goes on to say that the editors “would have done more wisely by making
no reference, than one which so totally fails to support the inference
drawn from it” (503n).52 Another interesting correction will be seen at
143n and p-p: Mill, as always, had assumed that in mentioning Herbert
Spencer he would give no offence; Spencer, as always, Edition: current;
Page: [lxxxiii] took offence; and Mill, as always, hastened to
apologize—without giving very much away.

Another kind of variant included in type (1) reflects Mill’s work on his
other writings. Most evident here are additions bearing a relation to
his “Bailey on Berkeley’s Theory of Vision” and “Berkeley’s Life and
Writings.”53 The former appeared in Dissertations and Discussions, Vol.
II, which Mill revised for its second edition (March, 1867), just before
completing his revision of the Examination for its third edition (May,
1867). It is therefore reasonable to assume that the adding in the third
edition of 178a-a was the result of his having just looked carefully
over this article, especially if one compares 178a-a with pages 249-50
and 255 of the article.54 Similarly, the later article, “Berkeley’s Life
and Writings” (published in November, 1871), was fresh in Mill’s mind
when he revised the Examination for its fourth edition (1872), and
surely one may assume that his reading for that article is reflected in
the additions in 1872 seen at 163g-g and 230s-s (with the second, cf.
“Berkeley’s Life and Writings,” 456-7). A variant connected in subject
matter with these is of a slightly different sort: in the third edition
a reference was added 236z-z to Thomas Nunneley’s On the Organs of
Vision, published in 1858, which (given that date) Mill could have
mentioned (it would have been apposite) in revising “Bailey on Berkeley”
(see, e.g., 263-5 of that article) in 1867, but did not. Nunneley is
mentioned, however, in the passage (454-7) of “Berkeley’s Life and
Writings” that treats of the same issue.

A regrettably frequent source of confusion for readers wishing to
identify or check Mill’s references may be illustrated by 85n, added in
the third edition, and modified in three places in the fourth. The note
begins: “Mr. Mansel replies (p. 134) . . .”55—but Mill does not here say
to which of Mansel’s works he refers (he quotes from four in the
Examination). Admittedly, if readers knew that the note had been added
in 1867 they would have been likely to guess that Mill was citing The
Philosophy of the Conditioned, which appeared in 1866 as a reply to the
Examination. Even if that guess had been correctly made, however, the
reader would hardly suspect that the final two sentences of the note
were added in 1872 (see 85v-v), and the reference therein (“Mr. Mansel
says we do . . .”) is to Mansel’s reply to Mill’s third edition in his
“Supplementary Remarks,” in the Contemporary Review for September, 1867.
(Compare the long footnote, Edition: current; Page: [lxxxiv] note,
76n-7n, where Mill in the fourth edition, without notice, sandwiches
between two passages of the third edition three sentences, including a
quotation, referring simply to Mansel’s “rejoinder”—i.e., again the
essay in the Contemporary Review.) Similar problems must have beset
careful readers when Mill does not indicate that he is referring to two
of McCosh’s works at, for example, 75n, where there is a footnote
compounded of 1867 and 1872 passages, in which, again, neither title is
given.

Actually Mill was aware (how could he not have been?) of the
desirability of indicating that certain passages had been added
subsequent to the first publication. He wrote to Augustus De Morgan in
1865: “I have sometimes thought I ought to have some mark for
alterations and additions. But one could scarcely give distinctive marks
to all the successive strata of new matter, and a mere note of
distinction from the edition immediately previous would not answer the
[purposes of] those readers who only possess a still earlier one.”56 In
the third edition of the Examination he in fact made a much less than
half-hearted attempt, and, alas, a misleading one, to indicate added
footnote material. Of the more than one hundred footnotes or parts of
footnotes that were added to the third edition, some ten are parts of
notes, and of these four appeared in 1867 between square brackets.57 And
in 1872, of some twenty parts added to notes, five were placed between
square brackets.58 Unfortunately, not only is the device used
sporadically for parts of notes and not at all for full notes and the
text, but also it is unexplained and confusing (there is no distinction,
for example, in the fourth edition between additions made in 1867 and
those made in 1872). Even assuming that Mill intended to indicate only
additions within footnotes that he considered important (and here one
would want to challenge his judgment), examination reveals problems. For
example, in the footnote that appears below on 71-4, the paragraph on
72n, running “Hardly . . . spare.” and that on 74n, running “The
‘Geometry of Visibles’ . . . truths.” were added in 1867 as the
contiguous concluding paragraphs to a note found in the first and second
editions; Mill placed square brackets around them. However, in 1872 he
added six paragraphs between those two, placed square brackets around
those added in 1872, and deleted those around the two added in 1867. So
the indication of the earlier addition (an indication he evidently
thought important in 1867) is lost, even to anyone trying to understand
the device, and such a person would also, at least prima facie, Edition:
current; Page: [lxxxv] assume that the unbracketed portions of the note
all date from the same edition. Another confusing instance is that at
93n-4n, where the square brackets were added in 1872 to a passage
introduced in 1867 without brackets; uniquely, the brackets here
evidently signal the rewriting that occurred for the fourth edition.59

Some of the type (1) changes, it will be noted, entail other changes,
which have been counted as type (4). An example is to be found at
154c-c, where in 1872 an addition to the footnote of a needed
explanation of Mill’s judgment that a particular element in Kant’s
reasoning is “strangely sophistical” resulted in the deletion of that
characterization from the text (154b).60 Similarly, the footnote added
in 1867 to 266 (a response to Mahaffy’s argument), entailed (as Mill
therein explains) the addition of “persistent” to the text (266i-i).61
It need hardly be mentioned that many additions and revisions,
especially the longer ones, brought with them referential footnotes,
which similarly have been counted as type (4) variants (see, e.g., 24n,
which results from 24m-m32).

Before leaving the type (1) variants, one may mention a few of a minor
kind. One of these shows Mill as sharing the frailties of most people:
on 386, in an illustrative logical example, he (carelessly?) said, “A
dolphin is a fish”; sometime before the third edition the error was
caught, and “herring” swam into the dolphin’s place. And finally, the
added reference in 1867 to Whately’s Logic at 410a-a may indicate that
he had again looked at that work so important in his mental history—or,
of course, someone such as Alexander Bain (then working on his own
Logic) may have mentioned the appositeness of the citation.

Type (2) changes, that is, those resulting from the passage of time,
being rare in the Examination, may be dealt with briefly. One obvious
type, reflecting a changed status (or a change in Mill’s knowledge of
status) may be seen at 92d-d, where “Mr. Calderwood” becomes “Dr.
Calderwood” in 1867, and at 164k-k and 165l-l, where Ward’s doctorate is
similarly recognized in 1872.62 The reasons for other changes of this
type are less easy to Edition: current; Page: [lxxxvi] establish: at
116f a reference to his father changes in 1867 from “Mr. Mill” to simply
“Mill”;63 and in 1872 at 216f, “Professor Bain, of Aberdeen,” loses his
institutional identification.64 It is also puzzling to see that Mill
added an apposite reference (217h-h) to his Auguste Comte and Positivism
(published in 1865) in 1872, rather than in 1867.65 The added reference
in 1872 to Cazelles’s writings at 250a-a is easier to explain—at least
until one tries (in our case almost in vain) to identify exactly which
published (rather than proposed) works Mill intends. An example of the
interesting kind of type (2) change found frequently in the Logic is
seen at 422d-d, where Mill mentions, in 1867, that there had been
“developments of the doctrine of the Unity of Force” since Hamilton’s
death.

Moving to type (3) changes, those involving qualifications, we may begin
with one very typical of Mill’s revisions: at 280g-g, in the second
edition, he added the words “appear to” in the passage asserting that
Pasteur’s “important experiments . . . appear to have finally exploded
the ancient hypothesis of Equivocal Generation. . . .”66 Other examples
of his continuous search for the precisely correct way of expressing
uncertainty are quite common: see, for example, 8e-e, f-f, g-g, where in
1867 “we should know” becomes “we might know”, and “since the new
impressions would doubtless be linked with the old” becomes “if the new
impressions were linked with the old”. For further illustration of
Mill’s habit of mind, see 183k-k (“unintentional” added before
“sanction” in 1867), 188c-c (“an even” substituted in 1872 for “a much”
before “more unqualified manner”, in what may be called a combined
precept and example as Mill tries to avoid the imputed sin), 213b-b
(“(as I believe, with nearly all philosophers)” modified Edition:
current; Page: [lxxxvii] to “as I believe (with the great majority of
philosophers)”), and 237a (the removal of “fully” in 1867, in a change
whose significance becomes apparent when one reads 237n-8n, also added
in 1867). The example at 397f-f is interesting in that it shows a
reversion to an earlier reading of a single word which might be taken
(on that ground as well as on the ground of sense) as a typographical
error (and is so questioned in the variant note), but which could
represent a hesitancy over a legitimate choice of words (“subject” was
altered to “object” in the second edition, with “subject” being restored
in the third).

A type (3) change of a significant kind, representing a search after
more precise expression of a concept, may be seen at 220i-i, where Mill
says (in 1865) of Brown and others who held the psychological theory:
“Their argument is not, as Sir W. Hamilton fancied, a fallacious
confusion between two meanings of the word length, but an identification
of them as one”, and (in 1867), substituting a semi-colon for the last
comma, replaces the last clause with: “they maintain the one to be the
product of the other.”67 Compare, as a type, 141m-m, where the original
wording, “the time at which memory commences”, was altered (in the
fourth edition) to the more accurate, “the time to which memory goes
back”. Another slight example of the kind found in larger number in
works more often revised by Mill is seen in the double change at 178c-c:
here Mill originally wrote, “there is in our perceptions”; in the second
edition he altered the wording to “there is involved in our
perceptions”; and he settled, in the third, for “there is concerned in
our perceptions”.

One final illustration of type (3) changes points again to Mill’s
frequent tempering of judgments in what, at this stage in the
controversy and in his career, cannot be seen as mere caution. At 480d-d
he first published his opinion of a blunder in this form: “If Sir W.
Hamilton could think so, his ignorance of the subject must have been
greater than can be imputed to any educated mind, not to speak of a
philosopher.” In 1867, rewriting of the first part of the sentence
produced a still stern, but less particular and insulting condemnation:
“to think so would require an ignorance of the subject greater than can
be imputed to any educated mind, not to speak of a philosopher.”

There is no need to dwell on the type (4) variants, which on the whole
reflect the sort of revision in which anyone engages who tries to make
syntax more transparent and emphasis more obvious. A few, however, may
be cited, just to suggest the effect of such fine tuning, and to show
that some are not entirely trivial. At 175g-g the change (one of the
rare second-edition Edition: current; Page: [lxxxviii] variants) from
“nothing different in it from his own” to “nothing in it different from
his own” clearly makes the sentence easier to read. Throughout the
volume Mill habitually uses the first-person singular, and seems to have
been more careful than many of his “cotemporaries” in saving the
first-person plural for editorial (as well as normal) usage: it is
therefore slightly surprising to find “we” at 136i-i, but not at all
surprising to see that “I” replaced it in 1867. Simple removal of
unnecessary emphasis is seen at 6a-a and 7d-d, where italics were
removed from “outside” and “something” in 1867. One variant of moot
significance—it could even be considered a type (1)—is found at 458r-r,
where “On the theory of Necessity (we are told) man cannot help acting
as he does” is modified by the perhaps trivial and perhaps important
insertion of “a” before “man”.68

A major problem for editors (though not for most more fortunate folk)
lies in deciding which changes in a text should be seen as minor
variants and which as printer’s errors.69 Some examples where the latter
choice was made are 119.31 and 35,70 348.11,71 382.14,72 478.2173 and
483.19.74 Examples of the former choice, that is, where the evidence
and/or sense suggest that a variant reading is useful (even when, in
some cases, a typographical error is almost certain), are 42q-q,
306a-a,75 289b-b, and 382f-f.76 It is virtually Edition: current; Page:
[lxxxix] certain that the printer misread Mill’s hand in places, but in
general it seems wisest to adopt the conservative principle of retaining
what appears in the printed text, except where there is strong evidence;
some such cases of caution are revealed if one looks at the collation of
Mill’s quotations with their sources, as at 203n.5 and 8, where the
compositor read (and we print) “any,” where O’Hanlon, whom Mill is
quoting, has “my.” A pair of typographical errors deserve mention
because they signal the existence of two states of Gathering K in the
fourth edition: in the correct state, at 103.35 the reading is “But if
what I am told”, and at 104.19, “Is it unfair . . .?”; in the incorrect
state (probably the second, resulting from the forme being pied), the
readings are “But if what am I told”, and “It is unfair . . .?” (There
are other, non-substantive, indications of resetting in the gathering.)

Accidental variants. The pattern of changes in punctuation does not
match that of the substantives, for the largest number (over 190) occurs
in the second edition, the great bulk being, as expected, the deletion
of a comma or a pair of commas (72 cases, the most numerous kind of
change overall) or the addition of a comma or a pair of commas (34
cases). Considering only types of change where there are at least ten
instances, one finds in the second edition twenty-six places where a
semi-colon was substituted for a colon, and nineteen places where the
reverse change occurs. In fourteen instances Mill reduced an initial
capital letter to lower case.

In the third edition there are about 170 changes in punctuation and
initial capitalization, markedly fewer in relation to the accidental and
substantive changes in the second and fourth editions, when judged by
the pattern in Mill’s other works. The reason may be that none of his
other heavily revised writings received their most thorough reworking
this late in his life, or without his wife’s assistance, and that, with
so much of the substantive revision consisting of added footnotes, Mill
scrutinized the text less carefully—or it may be that, by his judgment
at least, the second edition was quite well punctuated—or, indeed, the
explanation may lie, at least in the main, in the habits and
predelictions of the compositors of this and other of Mill’s works. In
any case, the third edition reveals again as the most Edition: current;
Page: [xc] frequent changes the addition (52 instances) or deletion (51
instances) of individual or paired commas; next most frequent are the
lowering of initial capitals (19 instances), though here initial letters
are raised eleven times; and in ten instances a semi-colon replaces a
colon. In seven instances of various kinds the changes have been judged
to be typographical errors.

The fourth edition reveals some 150 changes of these kinds, the most
interesting fact about them being that forty are of the sort we have
considered as typographical errors (and so in these cases we have in our
text adopted the reading of the third edition). Of the total, the
addition (27 instances, four read as typographical errors) and deletion
(62 instances, 19 read as typographical errors) of individual or paired
commas again predominate; continuing the general pattern of lightening
punctuation, in fifteen cases (three seen as typographical errors)
semi-colons replace colons; in raw scores, raising and lowering of
initial letters tie with ten instances each, but nine of the latter, as
against two of the former, appear to be typographical errors.77

The spelling changes provide, as is usual in Mill’s texts, more
opportunity for speculation than grounds for judgment, especially in the
absence of manuscripts and proof. The most common alterations are from
“s” to “z” (and the reverse) in verbals, and of initial “i” to “e” (and
the reverse). Of the first of these, the treatment of “cognize” (and its
cognates) will illustrate Mill’s (or someone else’s) indecision: in the
third edition, in one instance “s” becomes “z”, while in another “z”
becomes “s”; in the fourth edition, in three cases “s” becomes “z”,
while in two the reverse change occurs; in two passages added to the
text, one in the third and one in the fourth edition, the former uses
the “z” form (which is retained in the fourth edition), while the latter
uses the “s” form. Changes from “e” to “i” (and the reverse) include six
cases (four in the second edition, two in the third) where “enquiry” (or
one of its cognates) becomes “inquiry”, two (one in the second edition,
one in the fourth) where cognates of “inclose” become “enclose”, and the
alteration in the third edition (one instance each) of “intangle” and
“indorse” to “entangle” and “endorse”. As to the vexing question of
final single or double “l”, in four cases (on the same page) in the
second edition “recall” became “recal”, and the same change is found
twice in the third edition and once in the fourth—but also in the fourth
the four “recal”s of the second edition reverted to the “recall” of the
first. (The one use of “foretel” persists through all editions, and
“dispel”, added in the third edition in one place, remains in the
fourth.) There seems no clear guidance as to whether or not Mill
preferred a hyphen after the prefix “co”, except in “coexist” and its
cognates, where the clearly dominant form is without the hyphen; also it
Edition: current; Page: [xci] seems doubtful to assume that he came to
prefer “phenomenon” to “phænomenon”, because, although the former is
adopted once in each of the third and fourth editions where a change
occurs, as well as in more than ten passages added in those editions,
the latter form persists. All in all, it seems wise to conclude that
many, though not all, of the changes reflect the preferences of
compositors rather than of Mill.

Mill’s references and sources. As the Bibliographic Index (Appendix D)
reveals, there are direct or indirect references to about 190 works in
the Examination, and over 80 references to persons not specifically as
authors. Of the cited works, nearly 60 per cent are quoted, the bulk of
the quotations coming, of course, from the writings of Hamilton. There
are references to, and quotations from many of, twenty-two books or
reviews prompted at least in part by Mill’s attack on Hamilton, and Mill
refers to five of his own writings (usually because they were mentioned
by his critics). One interesting finding is that of the works Mill cites
when controverting Hamilton’s view of contrariety, having, he says,
“only looked up the authorities nearest to hand” (412-13), the London
Library has copies of eight which he had known from youth.78

For the most part his treatment of his sources is fair, and
transcriptions reasonably accurate, but of course his judgments were
polemical, and much resented by members of the other “school” of
philosophy. A good deal of the argument is carried on, as is common in
the genre, by quotation and counter-quotation, so the proportion of
quoted matter is much higher here than in Mill’s other major works.79
Mill made a genuine attempt to answer his critics, but he was as little
sympathetic to some of them as they were to him, and so it is misleading
to estimate either the strengths or the weaknesses of his opponents (or
even his allies) by his citations in the Examination. A few specific
instances may be mentioned, partly at least for their curiosity.

The changes Mill made in the fourth edition as a result of Veitch’s
criticisms have already been touched upon, but the matter merits a few
further words, for Mill chose to ignore most of what Veitch had to say.
The justification is in a letter to Bain:

Mr Veitch sent me a copy of the Life of Hamilton. His replies to my
strictures are so Edition: current; Page: [xcii] very weak (Mansel &
water, with an infusion of vinegar) that I shall hardly [feel] any need
of giving them the distinction of a special notice; except that I am
bound to admit that the passage of Aristotle which H. seemed to have
misunderstood, was not indicated by any reference of his own, but of the
editors. That is quite sufficient for my purpose; since Mansel at least
has learning, & that passage of Aristotle was I suppose, the nearest he
could find to bearing out what Hamilton said. But after all H. must have
known what A. meant by ἐνεργεια. I agree with you as to the general
impression which the book gives of Hamilton. Only as it shews
advantageously a side of his character which I had no knowledge of, that
of his private affections, the general result rather raised him in my
eyes.80

Veitch (who was using the first and third editions of the Examination,
with page references to the third) attacked Mill for alleging that
Hamilton’s philosophic positions were conditioned by his unreasoned
acceptance of the doctrine of free will, and that he bribed his pupils
to accept metaphysical dogmas “by the promise or threat” that they
afford the only valid support for “foregone” conclusions.81 These
remarks Mill ignored, as he also passed by Veitch’s admission that Mill
was in the main right in suggesting that Hamilton lacked (in Veitch’s
phrasing) “the historical imagination as exercised in philosophy,”
though Mill notices Veitch’s claim that Mill was completely wrong in
imputing to Hamilton a weakness in perceiving (Mill’s words) “the mutual
relations of philosophical doctrines.”82 This latter question is gone
into more thoroughly by Veitch in his appended Note C, where he examines
and attempts to refute Mill’s expositions of Hamilton on Hume, Leibniz,
and Aristotle (to only part of the last of which did Mill respond, in
the changes alluded to above).83 The “vinegar” of Veitch’s attack is
most evident in his Note A, concerning Hamilton on Cousin’s view of the
Infinite and Absolute, where, in language stronger than Mill’s about
Hamilton, Veitch refers to Mill’s “gross, even ludicrous,
misrepresentation of Hamilton’s doctrines,” and says, in a classical
example of the rhetorical device of occupatio, that there is no need for
further rebuttal than that found in Mansel’s “admirably clear, acute,
and powerful exposure of Mr Mill’s misconceptions” in his Philosophy of
the Conditioned.84 Given Veitch’s special acquaintance with Hamilton’s
Lectures (he was one of Hamilton’s students),85 it is interesting to
find him assailing Mill for treating them as of equal value with
Hamilton’s “deliberate writing”;86 it is even more interesting to find
Veitch nonetheless using the Edition: current; Page: [xciii] Lectures in
an attempt to refute Mill on a substantive issue,87 and then showing no
hesitation in bestowing fulsome praise on them in other contexts, and
going so far as to devote his Note B to citing the high opinions of the
Lectures expressed in the United States.88

The emotional disadvantages of engaging in this kind of controversy are
illustrated by the rather unusual reaction of Patrick Proctor Alexander
to Mill’s ignoring his riposte to Mill’s response to his attack.
Alexander, in what Mill accurately characterized as a “rollicking style”
(460n), assaulted the Examination in Mill and Carlyle. An examination of
Mr. John Stuart Mill’s doctrine of causation in relation to moral
freedom. With an occasional discourse on Sauerteig, by Smelfungus
(Edinburgh: Nimmo, 1866)—the title itself giving clear enough indication
that Alexander inclined to the Carlylian side of the conjunction. In the
third edition Mill responded at some length (see the citations in the
Bibliographic Index), but not very much to the satisfaction of
Alexander, who replied with Moral Causation; or, Notes on Mr. Mill’s
notes to the chapter on “freedom” in the third edition of his
“Examination of Sir W. Hamilton’s Philosophy” (Edinburgh: Nimmo, 1868),
the rollicking introduction to which reveals (7) that others had called
his style “disgustingly flippant.” “The success of this work,” Alexander
later commented, “was, sooth to say, not much; I am not aware that any
one ever bought or read it; and the notices of it in the press were few,
slight, and for the most part, I rather think, contemptuous.” He had,
however, sent a copy to Mill, and anticipated a reply in Mill’s fourth
edition—but no such reply was there! Alexander therefore prepared a
second edition of his Moral Causation (“revised and extended”), which he
planned to issue so that Mill could reply in a fifth edition. But again
frustrated, in this case by Mill’s death, Alexander issued his second
edition (Edinburgh and London: Blackwood, 1875), in the Preface to which
(as Edition: current; Page: [xciv] well as the remark about the success
of the first edition quoted above) he includes a complaint against
Mill’s having said in his fourth edition that only Mansel and McCosh had
published rejoinders to the replies in the third.89 In this context it
should be noted that Mill objects (cvii) to McCosh’s assumption that
criticisms unrefuted are triumphant; he calls attention to the fact that
the subject of the work is the philosophy of Hamilton, not McCosh contra
Mill.90

Since anyone who has attempted to follow the intricacies of these
controversies with sympathy and understanding may well have felt a
heaviness of spirit, I may be forgiven the mention of one other
curiosity. The perceptiveness of the rather taciturn John Grote (younger
brother of George) might well lead one to anticipate valuable comments
on the Examination in his Exploratio Philosophica.91 But all one finds
is the following example of scholarly eccentricity, which does not
permit of condensation:

Since the following pages have been in course of printing, I have become
aware of a book which Mr Mill is publishing, or has published, on the
subject of his philosophical differences with Sir William Hamilton. I
speak in this doubtful manner only because I have purposely avoided
learning further. Perhaps this will be understood. To have waited, and
referred to what Mr Mill may thus say, would have involved a wider
controversy. If criticism of Mr Mill had been in any degree my main
purpose, I should have been bound to do this: but, as I have said, I
have only used Mr Mill’s published views (and so for the other books I
have noticed) to compare my own with: I have said as little as may be of
approving and disapproving, and spoken only of agreement and
disagreement: let us suppose Mr Mill, as he has written hitherto, to be
A, a character in rather a lengthened philosophical discussion, and if
the actual Mr Mill has changed his views, or, which is exceedingly
likely, I have misunderstood him, then let it not be supposed that it is
Mr Mill that I am discussing with at all. For myself, I am curious to
see, when these pages are published, what Mr Mill may have said on any
subject of which I may have spoken, and I think that such involuntary
controversy may possibly not be the worst form of it. And after all,
since what I have said about Mr Mill and Sir William Hamilton in
conjunction is not much, it is possible that what Mr Mill says of the
philosophy of the latter may not refer to it, and may concern some other
subject, as, for instance, the Philosophy of the Unconditioned.

(“Introduction,” xxx.)

Effects of the revisions. The fourth edition—or, more truthfully, the
third, where most of the changes appeared—of the Examination is, in tone
Edition: current; Page: [xcv] as well as length, a markedly different
work from the first edition, even though virtually nothing was removed.
It is, I believe, both unnecessary and unwise to comment extensively on
the different ways in which the two versions affect a reader, but a few
comments may assist an understanding of the controversial circumstances.
Alan Ryan comments in his Introduction on the two kinds of material in
the Examination: on the one hand, and most extensively, an exposition
and criticism of Hamilton’s (and to a lesser extent, Mansel’s) views; on
the other, an exposition and defence of Mill’s (usually) countering
views. While the two cannot be exactly isolated, for Mill almost
necessarily interweaves his views with his criticism of Hamilton,
Chapters xi, xii, and xiii are devoted to Mill’s account of his own
psychological theory, which is compared not in these chapters, but in
the surrounding ones, to the views of Hamilton and his school. Also
Chapter xxvi, on the Freedom of the Will, contains a good deal of
exposition and defence of Mill’s view. One may consider as well the
chapters where Mansel receives most attention, especially vii, “The
Philosophy of the Conditioned, as Applied by Mr. Mansel to the Limits of
Religious Thought,” and xiv, which deals with Mansel’s as well as
Hamilton’s treatment of Associationism, as being specially related to
Mill’s views.92

So, in the crudest terms, of the twenty-eight chapters (which vary
widely in length), six may be considered as most relevant to a
consideration of Mill’s direct presentation of his ideas, and all but
one of these appear in the first half (measured in chapters) of the
work. In fact, measured in pages, in the first two editions these
fourteen chapters occupy 270 of the total 560 pages, or 46 per cent. In
the third edition these fourteen chapters come to 326 of 633 pages, or
51.5 per cent, and in the fourth to 340 of 650, or 52.3 per cent, not in
themselves very startling increases, except that they account for 70
additional pages, leaving only 20 for the chapters of the latter half.
When one looks at the five chapters in the first half specially relevant
to Mill’s views, the point is more clearly made: 42 of the 70 pages
added to the first fourteen chapters (33 pages in 1867, 9 in 1872)
appear there.93 (And of the 20 added in the latter half, 11 appear in
Chapter xxvi.) Furthermore, two other chapters in the first half,
devoted in the first edition to critical examinations of Hamilton’s
views on the relativity of human knowledge (Chapter iii) and the
Philosophy of the Conditioned (Chapter vi), were greatly expanded for
the third edition, and further enlarged for the fourth, to accommodate
some of Mill’s strongest statements of his views countering Edition:
current; Page: [xcvi] those of Hamilton’s defenders. In these two
chapters (both, it will be noted, again in the first half of the work) a
further 26 pages appeared by the fourth edition, and so, adding these to
those already accounted for, 68 pages of the 70 added in the first half
between the first and fourth editions appear in chapters having to do
particularly with Mill’s own views and his arguments against the major
metaphysical positions of Hamilton and the application of those views by
Mansel. (And Chapter xxvi, which is related to these same matters,
accounts for slightly more than half of the additions to the second
half.) One should also recall the point made above, that a majority of
the additions come in footnotes that consist of Mill’s defence or
counter-attack against critics who most frequently are assailing Mill’s
views rather than supporting Hamilton’s.

Without going into even more painful games of numbers, one may, I
believe, accept certain conclusions about the overall rhetorical and
tonal effects of the revisions, and make at least suggestions concerning
what seemed important to Mill about his vocal readers’ reactions. In the
first version, less than half the work was given over to the exposition
of Hamilton’s and Mill’s countering views on metaphysics and psychology;
the larger part dealt mainly with other aspects of Hamilton’s thought
(see Mill’s explanation of the divisions on 301; cf. 109, 417, 430,
470), most particularly with his logical speculations. By and large,
almost no one took up the challenge—the challenge is certainly there,
for the polemic is very strong in the latter half—to defend Hamilton on
logic, or mathematics, or any other special topic, and so the latter
half of the work finally remained (with the exception of Chapter xxvi)
much as it had been in the first edition. (The interesting comments in
the concluding chapter on Hamilton’s personal qualities do little to
affect the tone.) But many a critic seized metaphysical and theological
cudgels to belabour Mill—not even here, in general, to defend the corpus
of Hamilton—and Mill, not without some selection of ground where
response would be, in his view, most telling, took the field of their
choice, that is, the areas covered in the first half of the work. There
is nothing odd in these reactions, of course, but they do suggest that
it was not Sir William Hamilton who attracted the critics’ attention,
but the battle between the two philosophies, and the way it was being
waged by the active combatant, Mill. Surely it may, at the least, be
surmised that here lies the explanation for what has appeared odd to
many, Mill’s choice of Hamilton as a subject for what is, after all, his
third longest work, and one on which he bestowed much labour. He was
looking for a fight, and Hamilton (as he discovered during his careful
study) provided both issue and occasion. Organizing the work as he
did—and exception can be taken to the details of his dispositio94—he
called attention to what he considered most important, Edition: current;
Page: [xcvii] and (perhaps) most provoking. The event proved him right,
for not only did the argument centre on the issues between intuitionism
and empiricism, but it was a clamorous one, more immediately intense
than that aroused by any of his other works. The Examination, whatever
the modern view, passed its own test.


IV.: THE PRESENT TEXT

as throughout the Collected Works, the copy-text is that of the final
edition in Mill’s lifetime, in this case, the fourth, 1872. It has been
collated with the three previous editions, and the few manuscript
fragments reproduced in Appendix A. Substantive textual changes among
the editions are recorded, substantive here meaning all changes except
spelling, initial capitalization, word division, punctuation,
demonstrable typographical errors, alterations in the form and style of
references, and such printing-house concerns as type size.

Our goals are (a) an accurate text as little interrupted by editorial
apparatus as is consistent with (b) the immediate reconstruction of
earlier versions without separate instructions for each variant, and (c)
the minimum number of levels of type on the page. This minimum number is
three: the text of the fourth edition; in slightly smaller type, Mill’s
own footnotes and referential footnotes added (in square brackets) by
the editor; and in still smaller type, footnotes giving the variant
readings. In the Edition: current; Page: [xcviii] text itself, the usual
indicators (*, †, etc.) call attention to Mill’s footnotes; editorial
notes of reference are signalled by the same indicators (in separate
sequence) enclosed in square brackets. Small italic superscript letters,
in alphabetical sequence (beginning anew in each chapter) call attention
to variant readings (and, in the seven cases where manuscript fragments
occur, to their existence). These variants are of three kinds: addition
of a word or words, substitution of a word or words, deletion of a word
or words. The illustrative examples below are chosen for their ease of
presentation and reference, not for their significance.

Addition of a word or words: see 83p-p. In the text, the word
“invariably” appears as “pinvariablyp”; the variant note reads
“p-p+67,72”. Here the plus sign indicates that the word was added; the
following numbers indicate the editions in which the added word appears.
The editions are indicated by the last two numbers of their publication
dates, with superscript numerals to distinguish between the first and
second editions, both of which appeared in 1865: that is, 651=first
edition (1865), 652=second edition (1865), 67=third edition (1867), and
72=fourth edition (1872), the copy-text. The only exception is that one
change of “a” to “an” (before “useful” at 471.11) and three changes of
“an” to “a” (before “hyperphysical” at 190.9, and twice before
“hypothetical” at 410.12 and 16) are not recorded. If a variant occurs
within a quotation, and the earlier version (i.e., that in the variant
note) is the reading of the source from which Mill is quoting, the word
“Source” precedes the edition indicators in the variant note (see
382f-f). (If the reading in the text, as opposed to that in the variant
note, is the same as that of the source, no such indication is
necessary.) If the quoted text varies from the source, but does not vary
among editions, there is no variant note (the variant reading is given,
however, in Appendix D, the Bibliographic Appendix: see, e.g., the entry
for 242n.3 under Abbott’s Sight and Touch, 521, where the “then” in
Abbott does not appear in any of Mill’s editions).

Placing the example (83p-p) in context, then, the interpretation is that
in the first and second editions the reading is “as it is interpreted”;
in the third edition (1867) this was altered to “as it is invariably
interpreted”, and the reading of the third edition was retained (as is
clear in the text) in the fourth edition (1872), the copy-text.

When the addition is a long one, the second enclosing superscript may
appear several pages after the first one; to make reference easier, the
superscript notation in the footnote (which appears on the same page as
the first superscript) will give the page number where the variant
concludes (see, e.g., 63g-g65).

Substitution of a word or words: see 63f-f. In the text the words “one
of the chief sources” appears as “fone of the chief sourcesf”; the
variant note reads “f-f651,652 the chief source”. Here the reading
following the edition Edition: current; Page: [xcix] indicators is that
for which “one of the chief sources” was substituted; again putting the
variant in context, the interpretation is that in the first and second
editions (651 and 652) the reading was “and be the chief source of the
reputation”; in the third edition this was altered to “and be one of the
chief sources of the reputation”, and this reading was retained (again
as is clear in the text) in the fourth edition.

Deletion of a word or words: see 75g. In the text, a single superscript
g appears centred between “but” and “could”; the variant note reads
“g651,652 it”. Here the word following the edition indicators was
deleted; again putting the variant in context, the interpretation is
that the reading in the first and second editions was “but it could not
realize”; the word “it” was deleted in the third edition, and the
reading of the third was continued in the fourth edition.

Passages changed more than once. Here two methods are used. In the
cases, rare in the Examination though common in Mill’s other lengthy
works (which went through many editions over an extended period of
time), when a few words were altered and then altered again, the method
followed is that illustrated at 38k-k. Here the text reads “juncaused,
and is therefore most naturally identified with thej”; the variant note
reads “j-j651, 652 a] 67 the”. The interpretation is, that in the first
and second editions the reading, in context, was “In this signification
it is synonymous with a First Cause.” In the third edition the sentence
ending was altered to “with the First Cause”; and in the fourth edition
(as is evident in the text) to “with uncaused, and is therefore most
naturally identified with the First Cause.”

The other method is used for changes within lengthy passages added
subsequent to the first edition. Most of these, in the Examination,
occur within added footnotes (discussed below), but examples in the text
will be found at 26n-n to q-q, where within a long addition (m-m, which
runs from 24 to 32) there are, all within one sentence, later changes
indicated. Passage m-m was added in the third edition, but the wording,
in that sentence, was altered in the fourth edition. For example, in
1867 it began: “Indeed, the very fact that Sir W. Hamilton thinks it
possible for philosophers to discriminate . . .”; in 1872 the wording
became: “Indeed, the discrimination which Sir W. Hamilton thinks it
possible for philosophy to make. . . .” In these cases, within the
superscript letters indicating an added passage, there will be other
superscript sets indicating other changes; the variants are listed
separately, and in the order of their appearance in the text.

Variants in Mill’s footnotes. By far the most common type is the note
added in full (the great majority of them in 1867), as, for example, at
21n, where the first note begins: “[67] This is essentially . . .”; the
editorially inserted “[67]” indicates that the note was added in the
third edition, and Edition: current; Page: [c] was retained (as is
evident) in the fourth. Many of these are simply referential, deriving
from variants in the text proper, but their addition is always
separately signalled in this way.

Changes within notes are treated in the same manner as changes in the
text: see, e.g., 29g-g, where a passage was added in 1872; 29r-r, where
a substitution was made, again in 1872; and 34a, where a clause was
deleted, once more in 1872.

Prefaces. No preface appeared in the first or second edition. That to
the third edition was reprinted (still entitled “Preface to the Third
Edition”) in the fourth, with a substantial addition. Mill not having
indicated that this matter was added in the fourth edition, we have
treated it as a variant in the usual way.

Other textual liberties. The following changes are all silently made in
the text, except as specifically indicated. Textual emendations,
including typographical errors, are listed in Appendix B below, with a
note explaining their choice and treatment.95 (Typographical errors
found only in one or more of the first three editions are not listed.)
Long quotations have been set in smaller type; the quotation marks found
in such quotations at each line in the left margin of the original
editions have been removed. (It may be noted, as will be seen in
Appendix B, that in several instances these quotation marks led to
typographical errors when the text was reset.) Within these quotations,
Mill sometimes used quotation marks and round brackets to signal
interpolations; we have deleted the quotation marks and substituted
square brackets. As mentioned above, the square brackets that Mill
occasionally used to indicate matter added in footnotes have been
replaced by variant indicators. Mill’s placing of footnote indicators
was rather eccentric in this work; we have, wherever it was possible
without causing confusion, moved them to the ends of quoted passages.
Infrequently the result is that two of his notes have been combined.
Also, more infrequently, where Mill gave a single reference for a very
lengthy quotation from which he had omitted a considerable passage, we
have split his one reference into two. Indications of ellipsis in
quotations have been standardized to three dots plus, when required,
terminal punctuation. A few trivial alterations in printing style have
been made, such as the removal of dashes when combined with other
punctuation in introducing quotations and references. The running heads
have been altered to suit this edition. When necessary, Mill’s
references to sources have been amplified and Edition: current; Page:
[ci] corrected (the corrections are listed in Appendix C below), with
all added information being placed in square brackets, as are all
editorial references. These last are also signalled by indicators in
square brackets, as mentioned above.


V.: APPENDICES

Appendix A gives the readings (with explanatory and variant notes) of
the few manuscript fragments that survive.

Appendix B lists the textual emendations with the original readings. The
headnote gives the general justification; individual items there entered
give, when necessary, the special justifications.

Appendix C gives the original and emended readings of Mill’s references
that have been silently corrected in his footnotes.

Appendix D, the Bibliographic Appendix, lists all persons and works
referred to or quoted in the Examination, except mythical persons and
those simply used as place-holders in logical examples. Substantive
variants between Mill’s quotations and his sources are entered, both to
correct misquotations and to provide contexts for partial quotations.
Because this appendix includes all references to persons and books, it
is in effect an index to names and titles, which are therefore omitted
from the Index proper.

The Index has been prepared by Dr. Bruce L. Kinzer.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

for permission to publish manuscript material, we are indebted to the
Columbia University Library, the Houghton Library of Harvard University,
to the Yale University Library, and to the National Provincial Bank
(literary executors and residual legatees of Mary Taylor, Mill’s
step-grand-daughter). Our deep gratitude is once again cheerfully
offered to the staffs of the British Library, the Somerville College
Library, the University of London Library, the University of Reading
Library (and especially its Archivist, Mr. J. A. Edwards), the British
Library of Political and Economic Science, the London Library, the
University of Toronto Library, the library of the Pontifical Institute
of Mediæval Studies, the libraries of Knox, Regis, St. Michael’s,
Trinity, and Wycliffe Colleges, Toronto, and never least, the Victoria
University Library. To the members of the Editorial Committee,
especially Jean Houston and R. F. McRae, to the copy-editor, Rosemary
Shipton, and the editorial, production, and printing Edition: current;
Page: [cii] staff of the University of Toronto Press, my never failing,
though not always expressed, thanks for unstinting co-operation. Among
others to whom credit is due, and no discredit should accrue, are Father
J. L. Dewan, Mr. Charles P. Finlayson of the Edinburgh University
Library, Professor Daniel De Montmollin, Professor Joseph Hamburger,
Professor Hugh R. MacCallum, Professors E. Jane and Michael Millgate,
Professor Emeritus J. R. O’Donnell, the Reverend J. Owens, Mr. H.
Russell of the Belfast Public Libraries, Professor C. A. Silber,
Professor F. E. Sparshott, Professor Jack Stillinger, and Professor J.
R. Vanstone. In a very real sense the editing of the volume is the work
of my colleagues on the Mill project, where good spirits, co-operation,
and industry have made the time seem short and be pleasant: Marion
Filipiuk, Bruce Kinzer, Martin Kreiswirth, Judith LeGoff, and Rea
Wilmshurst. Lady Hamilton, among her other duties, sat up through the
nights till the northern dawn transcribing the lecture notes which Sir
William was writing for the next afternoon; that my wife did not do the
like for me (nor I for her) might suggest a number of conclusions, but I
believe that her generous aid to this volume would not have been
forthcoming had she (or I) done so.

Edition: current; Page: [ciii]


Preface to the Third Edition[*]

in former writings I have perhaps seemed to go in search of objectors,
whom I might have disregarded, but who enabled me to bring out my
opinions into greater clearness and relief. My present condition is far
different; for a host of writers, whose mode of philosophic thought was
either directly or indirectly implicated in the criticisms made by this
volume on Sir W. Hamilton, have taken up arms against it, and fought as
pro aris et focis. Among these are included, not solely friends or
followers of Sir W. Hamilton, who were under some obligation to say
whatever could fairly be said in his defence, but many who stand almost
as widely apart from him as I do, though mostly on the reverse side. To
leave these attacks unanswered, would be to desert the principles which
as a speculative thinker I have maintained all my life, and which the
progress of my thoughts has constantly strengthened. The criticisms
which have come under my notice (omitting the daily and weekly journals)
are the following; there may be others:

Mr. Mansel: The Philosophy of the Conditioned; comprising some remarks
on Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy, and on Mr. J. S. Mill’s
Examination of that Philosophy. (First published in Nos. 1 and 2 of the
Contemporary Review.)[†]

The Battle of the Two Philosophies; by an Inquirer.[‡]

Dr. M‘Cosh: An Examination of Mr. J. S. Mill’s Philosophy, being a
Defence of Fundamental Truth.[§]

Dr. Calderwood: “The Sensational Philosophy—Mr. J. S. Mill and Dr.
M‘Cosh;” in the British and Foreign Evangelical Review for April
1866.[¶]

Edition: current; Page: [civ]
Dr. Henry B. Smith: “Mill v. Hamilton,” in the American Presbyterian and
Theological Review for January 1866.[*]

Mr. H. F. O’Hanlon: A Criticism of John Stuart Mill’s Pure Idealism; and
an Attempt to show that, if logically carried out, it is Pure
Nihilism.[†]

Review of this work in Blackwood’s Magazine for January 1866.[‡]

(The two last mentioned are confined to the doctrine of Permanent
Possibilities of Sensation.)

Mr. J. P. Mahaffy, in the Introduction to his translation of Professor
Kuno Fischer’s account of Kant’s Kritik. (Confined to the doctrine of
Permanent Possibilities, and the subject of Necessary Truths.)[§]

Mr. Patrick Proctor Alexander: “An Examination of Mr. John Stuart Mill’s
Doctrine of Causation in Relation to Moral Freedom;” forming the greater
part of a volume entitled Mill and Carlyle.[¶]

Reviews of this work in the Dublin Review for October 1865 (with the
signature R.E.G.), and in the Edinburgh Review for July 1866.[∥]

And, earlier than all these, the able and interesting volume of my
friend Professor Masson, entitled Recent British Philosophy: a Review,
with Criticisms; including some comments on Mr. Mill’s Answer to Sir
William Hamilton.[**]

All these, in regard to such of the main questions as they severally
discuss, are unqualifiedly hostile: though some of the writers are, in a
personal point of view, most courteous, and even over-complimentary; and
the last eminently friendly as well as flattering.

The following are only partially adverse:

Review of the present work in the North British Review for September
1865, attributed to Professor Fraser, and bearing the strongest internal
marks of that origin.[††] This able thinker, though he considers me to
have often misunderstood Sir W. Hamilton, is, on the substantive
philosophic Edition: current; Page: [cv] doctrines principally
concerned, a most valuable ally; to whom I might almost have left the
defence of our common opinions.

Mr. Herbert Spencer: “Mill v. Hamilton—The Test of Truth;” in the
Fortnightly Review for July 15, 1865.[*]

Review of the present work in the North American Review for July
1866.[†]

The only important criticism, in all essentials favourable, to which I
am able to refer, is that in the Westminster Review for January 1866, by
an illustrious historian and philosopher, who, of all men now living, is
the one by whom I should most wish that any writing of mine, on a
subject in speculative philosophy, should be approved.[‡] There have
also been published since the first edition of the present work, two
remarkable books, which, if they do not give me direct support, effect a
powerful diversion in my favour. One is Mr. Bolton’s Inquisitio
Philosophica; an Examination of the Principles of Kant and Hamilton;[§]
which, along with much other valuable matter, contains a vigorous
assault upon my most conspicuous assailant, Mr. Mansel.[¶] The other is
Mr. Stirling’s Sir William Hamilton, being the Philosophy of Perception;
an Analysis:[∥] an able and most severe criticism on Sir W. Hamilton’s
inconsistencies, and on his general character as a philosopher, taken
from a different point of view from mine, and expressed with far greater
asperity than I should myself think justifiable; legitimated, no doubt,
to the writer’s mind by “a certain vein of disingenuousness”[**] which
he finds in Sir W. Hamilton, but which I have not found, and shall not
believe until I see it proved.

I must have been quite incapable of profiting by criticism, if I had
learnt nothing from assailants so numerous, all of more or less, and
some of very considerable, ability. They have detected not a few
inadvertences of expression, as well as some of thought: and partly by
their help, partly without it, I have discovered others. They have not
shaken any statement or opinion of real moment; but I am sincerely
indebted to them, both for the errors they have corrected, and for
compelling me to strengthen my defences. The point in which it was to be
expected that they would oftenest Edition: current; Page: [cvi] prevail,
was in showing me to have erroneously interpreted Sir W. Hamilton. The
difficulty to any thinker is so great, in these high regions of
speculation, of placing himself completely at the point of view of a
different philosophy, and even of thoroughly understanding its language,
that it would be very presumptuous in me to imagine that I had always
overcome that difficulty; and that too with the warning before me, of
the absolute failure of able and accomplished minds on the other side in
philosophy, to accomplish this in regard to the modes of thinking with
which I am most familiar. I have been surprised, therefore, to find in
how few instances, and those how little important, the defenders of Sir
W. Hamilton have been able to show that I have misunderstood or
incorrectly stated his opinions or arguments. I cannot doubt that more
such mistakes remain to be pointed out: and I regret that the greater
part of the volume has not yet, in its relation to Sir W. Hamilton, had
the benefit of a sufficiently minute scrutiny. Had the unsparing
criticism of Mr. Mansel on the first few chapters been continued to the
remainder, he would doubtless have pointed out real mistakes; he might
perhaps have thrown light on some of the topics from his own thoughts;
and I should at least have had to thank him for additional confidence in
the statements and opinions which had passed unharmed through the ordeal
of his attacks.

Where criticism or reconsideration has convinced me that anything in the
book was erroneous, or that any improvement was required in the mode of
stating and setting forth the truth, I have made the requisite
alterations. When the case seemed to require that I should call the
reader’s attention to the change, I have done so; but I have not made
this an invariable rule. Mere answers to objectors I have generally
relegated to notes. With so many volumes to deal with, I could not take
express notice of every criticism which they contained. When any of my
critics finds that he, or some of his objections, are not individually
referred to, let him be assured that it is from no disrespect, but
either because I consider them to have been answered by the reply made
to some one else, or because their best confutation is to remand the
objector to the work itself, or because the edge of the objection has
been turned by some, perhaps quite unapparent, correction of the text. A
slight modification in a sentence, or even in a phrase, which a person
acquainted with the former editions might read without observing it, and
of which, even if he observed it, he would most likely not perceive the
purpose, has sometimes effaced many pages of hostile criticism.

* * * * *

aOf the assailants to whom I replied, two only have published a
rejoinder; Dean Mansel, in the Contemporary Review for September 1867,
and Dr. Edition: current; Page: [cvii] M‘Cosh, in the British and
Foreign Evangelical Review for April 1868[*] Neither of them appears to
me to have added much of value to what he had previously advanced; and
so far as concerns Dean Mansel, his regretted death has put a final
termination to the controversy between us. I am not, however, thereby
exempted from taking notice, however briefly, of such points in his
rejoinder as appear to require it. Dr. M‘Cosh seems to think it a great
triumph of his assaults upon me, that many of them were not noticed in
my replies to critics. It is a little unreasonable in Dr. M‘Cosh to
suppose that in a work, the subject of which is the philosophy of Sir
William Hamilton, I was bound to fight a pitched battle with Dr. M‘Cosh
on the whole line. His book was an attack directed against the whole of
my philosophical opinions. I answered such parts of it as had reference
to the present work, when they seemed to require an answer, and not to
have received it sufficiently in what I had already written. And I have
done the same, in the present edition, with his rejoinder.

Besides several unpublished criticisms which I owe to the kindness of
correspondents, and which have helped me to correct or otherwise improve
some of the details of the work; two more attacks have been made upon it
subsequently to the third edition. Professor Veitch, in the Appendices
to his interesting Memoir of Sir W. Hamilton, has commented sharply on
what I have said respecting Sir W. Hamilton’s mode of understanding the
Relativity of human knowledge, and respecting his failure to apprehend
correctly the general character of Hume and Leibnitz as philosophers, as
well as some particular passages of Aristotle.[†] On the first subject,
that of Relativity, I find so much difficulty in reducing Professor
Veitch’s statement to distinct propositions, and, so far as I understand
his meaning, it differs so little, and that little not to its advantage,
from what I have already commented on in answering Mr. Mansel, that I do
not think it necessary to burthen this volume with an express reply to
him. With regard to Hume and Leibnitz I am content that they who have a
competent knowledge of those philosophers should form their own opinion.
As regards Sir W. Hamilton’s interpretation of Aristotle, Professor
Veitch has convicted me of a mistake in treating a citation made by his
editors as if it had been made by himself, and of an overstatement of
one of Sir W. Hamilton’s opinions which I only noticed incidentally.[‡]
These errors I have corrected, in their places,[§] and Edition: current;
Page: [cviii] it will be found that they do not affect anything of
importance in the criticism there made upon Sir W. Hamilton.

Professor Veitch* considers it unfair that I should press against Sir W.
Hamilton anything contained in his Lectures,[*] these having been
hastily written under pressure from time, and not being the most matured
expression of some of his opinions. But though thus written, it is
admitted that they continued to be delivered by Sir W. Hamilton as long
as he performed the duties of Professor; which would not have been the
case if he had no longer considered them as a fair representation of his
philosophy. A complete representation I never pretended that they were;
a correct representation I am bound to think them; for it cannot be
believed that he would have gone on delivering to his pupils matter
which he judged to be inconsistent with the subsequent developments of
his philosophy.

The other thinker who has taken the field against my psychological
opinions is Dr. Ward, who, in the Dublin Review for October 1871,[†] has
made an able attack on the views I have expressed in this and other
writings on the subject of what is called Necessary Truth. Some of Dr.
Ward’s observations are more particularly directed against a portion of
my System of Logic,[‡] and the fittest place for their discussion is in
connexion with that treatise. But the greater part of his article
principally regards the chapter of the present work which relates to
Inseparable Association, and a reply to it will be found in a note which
I have added at the end of that chapter.a[§]

Edition: current; Page: [1]


AN EXAMINATION OF SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON’S PHILOSOPHY


CHAPTER I: Introductory Remarks

among the philosophical writers of the present century in these islands,
no one occupies a higher position than Sir William Hamilton. He alone,
of our metaphysicians of this and the preceding generation, has
acquired, merely as such, an European celebrity: while, in our own
country, he has not only had power to produce a revival of interest in a
study which had ceased to be popular, but has made himself, in some
sense, the founder of a school of thought. The school, indeed, is not
essentially new; for its fundamental doctrines are those of the
philosophy which has everywhere been in the ascendant since the setting
in of the reaction against Locke and Hume, which dates from Reid among
ourselves and from Kant for the rest of Europe. But that general scheme
of philosophy is split into many divisions, and the Hamiltonian form of
it is distinguished by as marked peculiarities as belong to any other of
its acknowledged varieties. From the later German and French
developments of the common doctrine, it is separated by differences
great in reality, and still greater in appearance; while it stands
superior to the earlier Scottish and English forms by the whole
difference of level which has been gained to philosophy through the
powerful negative criticism of Kant. It thus unites to the prestige of
independent originality, the recommendation of a general harmony with
the prevailing tone of thought. These advantages, combined with an
intellect highly trained and in many respects highly fitted for the
subject, and a knowledge probably never equalled in extent and accuracy
of whatever had been previously thought and written in his department,
have caused Sir William Hamilton to be justly recognised as, in the
province of abstract speculation, one of the important figures of the
age.

The acknowledged position of Sir W. Hamilton at the head, so far as
regards this country, of the school of philosophy to which he belongs,
has principally determined me to connect with his name and writings the
speculations and criticisms contained in the present work. The
justification of the work itself lies in the importance of the
questions, to the discussion of which it is a contribution. England is
often reproached by Continental thinkers, with indifference to the
higher philosophy. But England did not always deserve this reproach, and
is already showing, by no doubtful Edition: current; Page: [2] symptoms,
that she will not deserve it much longer. Her thinkers are again
beginning to see, what they had only temporarily forgotten, that a true
Psychology is the indispensable scientific basis of Morals, of Politics,
of the science and art of Education; that the difficulties of
Metaphysics lie at the root of all science; that those difficulties can
only be quieted by being resolved, and that until they are resolved,
positively awhenevera possible, but at any rate negatively, we are never
assured that any human knowledge, even physical, stands on solid
foundations.

My subject, therefore, is blessb Sir W. Hamilton, cthanc the questions
which Sir W. Hamilton discussed. It is, however, impossible to write on
those questions in our own country and in our own time, without
incessant reference, express or tacit, to his treatment of them. On all
the subjects on which he touched, he is either one of the most powerful
allies of what I deem a sound philosophy, or (more frequently) by far
its most formidable antagonist; both because he came the latest, and
wrote with a full knowledge of the flaws which had been detected in his
predecessors, and because he was one of the ablest, the most
dfar-sightedd, and the most candid. Whenever any opinion which he
deliberately expressed, is contended against, his form of the opinion,
and his arguments for it, are those which especially require to be faced
and carefully appreciated: and it being thus impossible that any fit
discussion of his topics should not involve an estimate of his
doctrines, it seems worth while that the estimate should be rendered as
complete as practicable, by being extended to all the subjects on which
he has made, or on which he is believed to have made, any important
contribution to thought.

In thus attempting to anticipate, as far as is yet possible, the
judgment of posterity on Sir W. Hamilton’s labours, I sincerely lament
that on the many points on which I am at issue with him, I have the
unfair advantage possessed by one whose opponent is no longer in a
condition to reply. Personally I might have had small cause to
congratulate myself on the reply which I might have received, for though
a strictly honourable, he was a most unsparing controversialist, and
whoever assailed even the most unimportant of his opinions, might look
for hard blows in return. But it would have been worth far more, even to
myself, than any polemical success, to have known with certainty in what
manner he would have met the objections raised in the present volume. I
feel keenly, with Plato, how much more is to be learnt by discussing
with a man, who can question and Edition: current; Page: [3] answer,
than with a book, which cannot.[*] But it was not possible to take a
general review of Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrines while they were only known
to the world in the fragmentary state in which they were published
during his life. His Lectures, the fullest and the only consecutive
exposition e(as far as it goes)e of his philosophy, are a posthumous
publication; while the latest and most matured expression of many of his
opinions, the “Dissertations on Reid,”[†] left off, scarcely half
finished, in the middle of a sentence; and so long as he lived, his
readers were still hoping for the remainder. The Lectures, it is true,
have added less than might have been expected to the knowledge we
already possessed of the author’s doctrines; but it is something to know
that we have now all that is to be had; and though we should have been
glad to have his opinions on more subjects, we could scarcely have known
more thoroughly than we are now at last enabled to do, what his thoughts
were on the points to which he attached the greatest importance, and
which are most identified with his name and fame.

Edition: current; Page: [4]


CHAPTER II: The Relativity of Human Knowledge

the doctrine which is thought to belong in the most especial manner to
Sir W. Hamilton, and which was the ground of his opposition to the
transcendentalism of the later French and German metaphysicians, is that
which he and others have called the Relativity of Human Knowledge. It is
the subject of the most generally known, and most impressive, of all his
writings,[*] the one which first revealed to the English metaphysical
reader that a new power had arisen in philosophy; and, together with its
developments, it composes the “Philosophy of the Conditioned,” which he
opposed to the German and French philosophies of the Absolute, and which
is regarded by most of his admirers as the greatest of his titles to a
permanent place in the history of metaphysical thought.

But the “relativity of human knowledge,” like most other phrases into
which the words relative or relation enter, is vague, and admits of a
great variety of meanings. In one of its senses, it stands for a
proposition respecting the nature and limits of our knowledge, in my
judgment true, fundamental, and full of important consequences in
philosophy. From this amplitude of meaning its significance shades down
through a number of gradations, successively more thin and
unsubstantial, till it fades into a truism leading to no consequences,
and hardly worth enunciating in words. When, therefore, a philosopher
lays great stress upon the relativity of our knowledge, it is necessary
to cross-examine his writings, and compel them to disclose in which of
its many degrees of meaning he understands the phrase.

There is one of its acceptations, which, for the purpose now in view,
may be put aside, though in itself defensible, and though, when thus
employed, it expresses a real and important law of our mental nature.
This is, that we only know anything, by knowing it as distinguished from
something else; that all consciousness is of difference; that two
objects are the smallest number required to constitute consciousness;
that a thing is only seen to be what it is, by contrast with what it is
not. The employment of the proposition, Edition: current; Page: [5] that
all human knowledge is relative, to express this meaning, is sanctioned
by high authorities,* and I have no fault to find with that use of the
phrase. But we are not concerned with it in the present case; for it is
not in this sense, that the expression is ordinarily or intentionally
used by Sir W. Hamilton; though he fully recognises the truth which,
when thus used, it serves to express. In general, when he says that all
our knowledge is relative, the relation he has in view is not between
the thing known and other objects compared with it, but between the
thing known and the mind knowing.

All language recognises a distinction between myself—the Ego—and a
world, either material, or spiritual, or both, external to me, but of
which I can, in some mode and measure, take cognizance. The most
fundamental questions in philosophy are those which seek to determine
what we are able to know of these external objects, and by what evidence
we know it.

In examining the different opinions which are or may be entertained on
this subject, it will simplify the exposition very much, if we at first
limit ourselves to the case of physical, or what are commonly called
material objects. These objects are of course known to us through the
senses. By those channels and no otherwise do we learn whatever we do
learn concerning them. Without the senses we should not know nor suspect
that such things existed. We know no more of what they are, than the
senses tell us, nor does nature afford us any means of knowing more.
Thus much, in the obvious meaning of the terms, is denied by no one,
though there are thinkers who prefer to express the meaning in other
language.

There are, however, conflicting opinions as to what it is that the
senses tell us concerning objects. About one part of the information
they give, there is no dispute. They tell us our sensations. The objects
excite, or awaken in us, certain states of feeling. A part, at least, of
what we know of the objects, is the feelings to which they give rise.
What we term the properties of an object, are the powers it exerts of
producing sensations in our consciousness. Take any familiar object,
such as an orange. It is yellow; that is, it affects us, through our
sense of sight, with a particular sensation of colour. It is soft; in
other words it produces a sensation, through our muscular feelings, of
resistance overcome by a slight effort. It is sweet; for it causes a
peculiar kind of pleasurable sensation through our organ of taste. It is
of a globular figure, somewhat flattened at the ends: we affirm this on
account of sensations that it causes in us, respecting which it is still
in dispute among psychologists whether they originally came to us solely
through touch and the muscles, or also through the organ of sight.
Edition: current; Page: [6] When it is cut open, we discover a certain
arrangement of parts, distinguishable as being, in certain respects,
unlike one another; but of their unlikeness we have no measure or proof
except that they give us different sensations. The rind, the pulp, the
juice, differ from one another in colour, in taste, in smell, in degree
of consistency (that is, of resistance to pressure) all of which are
differences in our feelings. The parts are, moreover, aoutsidea one
another, occupying different portions of space: and even this
distinction, it is maintained (though the doctrine is vehemently
protested against by some) may be resolved into a difference in our
sensations. When thus analysed, it is affirmed that all the attributes
which we ascribe to objects, consist in their having the power of
exciting one or another variety of sensation in our minds; that to us
the properties of an object have this and no other meaning; that an
object is to us nothing else than that which affects our senses in a
certain manner; that we are incapable of attaching to the word object,
any other meaning; that even an imaginary object is but a conception,
such as we are able to form, of something which would affect our senses
in some new way; so that our knowledge of objects, and even our fancies
about objects, consist of nothing but the sensations which they excite,
or which we imagine them exciting, in ourselves.

This is the doctrine of the Relativity of Knowledge to the knowing mind,
in the simplest, purest, and, as I think, the most proper acceptation of
the words. There are, however, two forms of this doctrine, which differ
materially from one another.

According to one of the forms, the sensations which, in common parlance,
we are said to receive from objects, are not only all that we can
possibly know of the objects, but are all that we have any ground for
believing to exist. What we term an object is but a complex conception
made up by the laws of association, out of the ideas of various
sensations which we are accustomed to receive simultaneously. There is
nothing real in the process but these sensations. They do not, indeed,
accompany or succeed one another at random; they are held together by a
law, that is, they occur in fixed groups, and a fixed order of
succession: but we have no evidence of anything which, not being itself
a sensation, is a substratum or hidden cause of sensations. The idea of
such a substratum is a purely mental creation, to which we have no
reason to think that there is any corresponding reality exterior to our
minds. Those who hold this opinion are said to doubt or deny the
existence of matter. They are sometimes called by the name Idealists,
sometimes by that of Sceptics, according to the other opinions which
they hold. They include the followers of Berkeley and those of Hume.
Among recent thinkers, the acute and accomplished Edition: current;
Page: [7] Professor Ferrier, though by a circuitous path, and expressing
himself in a very different phraseology, seems to have arrived at
essentially the same point of view. These philosophers maintain the
Relativity of our knowledge in the most extreme form in which the
doctrine can be understood, since they contend, not merely that all we
can possibly know of anything is the manner in which it affects the
human faculties, but that there is nothing else to be known; that
affections of human or of some other minds are all that we can know to
exist.

This, however, is far from being the shape in which the doctrine of the
Relativity of our knowledge is usually held. To most of those who hold
it, the difference between the Ego and the Non-Ego is not one of
language only, nor a formal distinction between two aspects of the same
reality, but denotes two realities, each bhaving a separate existenceb,
and neither dependent on the other. In the phraseology borrowed from the
Schoolmen by the German Transcendentalists, they regard the Noumenon as
in itself a different thing from the Phænomenon, and equally real; many
of them would say, much more real, being the permanent Reality, of which
the other is but the passing manifestation. They believe that there is a
real universe of “Things in Themselves,” and that whenever there is an
impression on our senses, there is a “Thing in itself,” which is behind
the phænomenon, and is the cause of it. But as to what this Thing is “in
itself,” we, having no corgansc except our senses for communicating with
it, can only know what our senses tell us; and as they tell us nothing
but the impression which the thing makes upon us, we do not know what it
is in itself at all. We suppose (at least these philosophers suppose)
that it must be dsomethingd “in itself,” but all that we know it to be
is merely relative to us, consisting in the power of affecting us in
certain ways, or, as it is technically called, of producing Phænomena.
External things exist, and have an inmost nature, but their inmost
nature is inaccessible to our faculties. We know it not, and can assert
nothing of it with a meaning. Of the ultimate Realities, as such, we
know the existence, and nothing more. But the impressions which these
Realities make on us—the sensations they excite, the similitudes,
groupings, and successions of those sensations, or, to sum up all this
in a common though improper expression, the representations generated in
our minds by the action of the Things themselves—these we may know, and
these are all that we can know respecting them. In some future state of
existence it is conceivable that we may know more, and more may be known
by intelligences superior to us. Yet even this can only be true in the
same sense in which a person with the use of his eyes knows more than is
Edition: current; Page: [8] known to one born blind, or in which we
should know more than we do if we were endowed with two or three
additional senses. We should have more sensations; phænomena would exist
to us of which we have at present no conception; and we emighte know
better than we now do, many of those which are within our present
experience; for fiff the new impressions gwereg linked with the old, as
the old are with one another, by uniformities of succession and
coexistence, we should now have new marks indicating to us known
phænomena in cases in which we should otherwise have been unaware of
them. But all this additional knowledge would be, like that which we now
possess, merely phænomenal. We should not, any more than at present,
know things as they are in themselves, but merely an increased number of
relations between them and us. And in the only meaning which we are able
to attach to the term, all knowledge, by however exalted an
Intelligence, can only be relative to the knowing Mind. If Things have
an inmost nature, apart not only from the impressions which they
produce, but from all those which they are fitted to produce, on any
sentient being, this inmost nature is unknowable, inscrutable, and
inconceivable, not to us merely, but to every other creature. To say
that even the Creator could know it, is to use language which to us has
no meaning, because we have no faculties by which to apprehend that
there is any such thing for him to know.

It is in this form that the doctrine of the Relativity of Knowledge is
held by the greater number of those who profess to hold it, attaching
any definite idea to the term. These again are divided into several
distinct schools of thinkers, by some of whom the doctrine is held with
a modification of considerable importance.

Agreeing in the opinion that what we know of Noumena, or Things in
themselves, is but their bare existence, all our other knowledge of
Things being but a knowledge of something in ourselves which derives its
origin from them; there is a class of thinkers who hold that our mere
sensations, and an outward cause which produces them, do not compose the
whole of this relative knowledge. The Attributes which we ascribe to
outward things, or such at least as are inseparable from them in
thought, contain, it is affirmed, other elements, over and above
sensations plus an unknowable cause. These additional elements are still
only relative, for they are not in the objects themselves, nor have we
evidence of anything in the objects that answers to them. They are added
by the mind itself, and belong, not to the Things, but to our
perceptions and conceptions of them. Such properties as the objects can
be conceived divested of, such as sweetness or Edition: current; Page:
[9] sourness, hardness or softness, hotness or coldness, whiteness,
redness, or blackness—these, it is sometimes admitted, exist in our
sensations only. But the attributes of filling space, and occupying a
portion of time, are not properties of our sensations in their crude
state, neither, again, are they properties of the objects, nor is there
in the objects any prototype of them. They result from the nature and
structure of the Mind itself: which is so constituted that it cannot
take any impressions from objects except in those particular modes. We
see a thing in a place, not because the Noumenon, the Thing in itself,
is in any place, but because it is the law of our perceptive faculty
that we must see as in some place, whatever we see at all. Place is not
a property of the Thing, but a mode in which the mind is compelled to
represent it. Time and Space are only modes of our perceptions, not
modes of existence, and higher Intelligences are possibly not bound by
them. Things, in themselves, are neither in time nor in space, though we
cannot represent them to ourselves except under that twofold condition.
Again, when we predicate of a thing that it is one or many, a whole or a
part of a whole, a Substance possessing Accidents, or an Accident
inhering in a Substance—when we think of it as producing Effects, or as
produced by a Cause, (I omit other attributes not necessary to be here
enumerated,) we are ascribing to it properties which do not exist in the
Thing itself, but with which it is clothed by the laws of our conceptive
faculty—properties not of the Things, but of our mode of conceiving
them. We are compelled by our nature to construe things to ourselves
under these forms, but they are not forms of the Things. The attributes
exist only in relation to us, and as inherent laws of the human
faculties; but differ from Succession and Duration in being laws of our
intellectual, not our sensitive faculty; technically termed Categories
of the Understanding. This is the doctrine of the Relativity of our
knowledge as held by Kant, who has been followed in it by many
subsequent thinkers, German, English, and French.

By the side of this there is another philosophy, older in date, which,
though temporarily eclipsed and often contemptuously treated by it, is,
according to present appearances, likely to survive it. Taking the same
view with Kant of the unknowableness of Things in themselves, and also
agreeing with him that we mentally invest the objects of our perceptions
with attributes which do not all point, like whiteness and sweetness, to
specific sensations, but are in some cases constructed by the mind’s own
laws; this philosophy, however, does not think it necessary to ascribe
to the mind certain innate forms, in which the objects are (as it were)
moulded into these appearances, but holds that Place, Extension,
Substance, Cause, and the rest, are conceptions put together out of
ideas of sensation by the known laws of association. This, the doctrine
of Hartley, of James Mill, of Professor Bain, and other eminent
thinkers, and which is compatible with Edition: current; Page: [10]
either the acceptance or the rejection of the Berkeleian theory, is the
extreme form of one mode of the doctrine of Relativity, as Kant’s is of
another. Both schemes accept the doctrine in its widest sense—the entire
inaccessibility to our faculties of any other knowledge of Things than
that of the impressions which they produce in our mental consciousness.

Between these there are many intermediate systems, according as
different thinkers have assigned more or less to the original furniture
of the mind on the one hand, or to the associations generated by
experience on the other. Brown, for example, regards our notion of Space
or Extension as a product of association, while many of our intellectual
ideas are regarded by him as ultimate and undecomposable facts. But he
accepts, in its full extent, the doctrine of the Relativity of our
knowledge, being of opinion that though we are assured of the objective
existence of a world external to the mind, our knowledge of that world
is absolutely limited to the modes in which we are affected by it. The
same doctrine is very impressively taught by one of the acutest
metaphysicians of recent times, Mr. Herbert Spencer, who, in his First
Principles, insists with equal force upon the certainty of the existence
of Things in Themselves, and upon their absolute and eternal relegation
to the region of the Unknowable.* This is also, apparently, the doctrine
of Auguste Comte: though while maintaining with great emphasis the
unknowableness of Noumena by our faculties, his aversion to metaphysics
prevented him from giving any definite opinion as to their real
existence, which, however, his language always by implication
assumes.[*]

It is obvious that what has been said respecting the unknowableness of
Things “in themselves,” forms no obstacle to our ascribing attributes or
properties to them, provided these are always conceived as relative to
us. If a thing produces effects of which our sight, hearing, or touch
can take cognizance, it follows, and indeed is but the same statement in
other words, that the thing has power to produce those effects. These
various powers are its properties, and of such, an indefinite multitude
is open to our knowledge. But this knowledge is merely phænomenal. The
object is known to us only in one special relation, namely, as that
which produces, or is capable of producing, certain impressions on our
senses; and all that we really know is these impressions. This negative
meaning is all that should be understood by the assertion, that we
cannot know the Thing in itself; that we cannot know its inmost nature
or essence. The inmost nature or essence of a Thing is apt to be
regarded as something unknown, which, if we knew it, would Edition:
current; Page: [11] explain and account for all the phænomena which the
thing exhibits to us. But this unknown something is a supposition
without evidence. We have no ground for supposing that there is anything
which if known to us would afford to our intellect this satisfaction;
would sum up, as it were, the knowable attributes of the object in a
single sentence. Moreover, if there were such a central property, it
would not answer to the idea of an “inmost nature;” for if knowable by
any intelligence, it must, like other properties, be relative to the
intelligence which knows it, that is, it must hsolelyh consist in
iproducing in that intelligence some specifically definite state of
consciousnessi; for this is the only idea we have of knowing; the only
sense in which the verb “to know” means anything.

It would, no doubt, be absurd to assume that our words exhaust the
possibilities of Being. There may be innumerable modes of it which are
inaccessible to our faculties, and which consequently we are unable to
name. But we ought not to speak of these modes of Being by any of the
names we possess. These are all inapplicable, because they all stand for
known modes of Being. We might invent new names for jsuchj unknown
modes; but the new names would have no more meaning than the x, y, z, of
Algebra. The only name we can give them which really expresses an
attribute, is the word Unknowable.

The doctrine of the Relativity of our knowledge, in the sense which has
now been explained, is one of great weight and significance, which
impresses a character on the whole mode of philosophical thinking of
whoever receives it, and is the key-stone of one of the only two
possible systems of Metaphysics and Psychology. But the doctrine is
capable of being, and is, understood in at least two other senses. In
one of them, instead of a definite and important tenet, it means
something quite insignificant, which no one ever did or could call in
question. Suppose a philosopher to maintain that certain properties of
objects are in the Thing, and not in our senses; in the thing itself,
not as whiteness may be said to be in the thing (namely, that there is
in the thing a power whereby it produces in us the sensation of white),
but in quite another manner; and are known to us not indirectly, as the
inferred causes of our sensations, but by direct perception of them in
the outward object. Suppose the same philosopher nevertheless to affirm
strenuously that all our knowledge is merely phænomenal, and relative to
ourselves; that we do not and cannot know anything of outward objects,
except relatively to our own faculties. I think our first feeling
respecting a thinker who professed both these doctrines, would be to
wonder what he could possibly mean by the latter of them. It would seem
Edition: current; Page: [12] that he must mean one of two trivialities;
either that we can only know what we have the power of knowing, or else
that all our knowledge is relative to us inasmuch as it is we that know
it.

There is another mode of understanding the doctrine of Relativity,
intermediate between these insignificant truisms and the substantial
doctrine previously expounded. The position taken may be, that
perception of Things as they are in themselves is not entirely denied to
us, but is so mixed and kconfoundedk with impressions derived from their
action on us, as to give a relative character to the whole aggregate.
Our absolute knowledge may be vitiated and disguised by the presence of
a relative element. Our faculty (it may be said) of perceiving things as
they are in themselves, though real, has its own laws, its own
conditions, and necessary mode of operation: our cognitions consequently
depend, not solely on the nature of the things to be known, but also on
that of the knowing faculty, as our sight depends not solely upon the
object seen, but upon that together with the structure of the eye. If
the eye were not achromatic, we should see all visible objects with
colours derived from the organ, as well as with those truly emanating
from the object. Supposing, therefore, that Things in themselves are the
natural and proper object of our knowing faculty, and that this faculty
carries to the mind a report of what is in the Thing itself, apart from
its effects on us, there would still be a portion of uncertainty in
these reports, inasmuch as we could not be sure that the eye of our mind
is achromatic, and that the message it brings from the Noumenon does not
arrive tinged and falsified, in an unknown degree, through an influence
arising from the necessary conditions of the mind’s action. We may, in
short, be looking at Things in themselves, but through imperfect
glasses: what we see may be the very Thing, but the colours and forms
which the glass conveys to us may be partly an optical illusion. This is
a possible opinion: and one who, holding this opinion, should speak of
the Relativity of our knowledge, would not use the term wholly without
meaning. But he could not, consistently, assert that all our knowledge
is relative; since his opinion would be that we have a capacity of
Absolute knowledge, but that we are liable to mistake relative knowledge
for it.

In which, if in any, of these various meanings, was the doctrine of
Relativity held by Sir W. Hamilton? To this question, a more puzzling
one than might have been expected, we shall endeavour in the succeeding
chapter to find an answer.

Edition: current; Page: [13]


CHAPTER III: The Doctrine of the Relativity of Human Knowledge, as Held by Sir William Hamilton

it is hardly possible to affirm more strongly or more explicitly than
Sir W. Hamilton has done, that Things in themselves are to us altogether
unknowable, and that all we can know of anything is its relation to us,
composed of, and limited to, the Phænomena which it exhibits to our
organs. Let me cite a passage from one of the Appendices to the
Discussions.

Our whole knowledge of mind and of matter is relative,
conditioned—relatively conditioned. Of things absolutely or in
themselves, be they external, be they internal, we know nothing, or know
them only as incognisable; and become aware of their incomprehensible
existence, only as this is indirectly and accidentally revealed to us,
through certain qualities related to our faculties of knowledge, and
which qualities, again, we cannot think as unconditioned, irrelative,
existent in and of themselves. All that we know is therefore
phænomenal,—phænomenal of the unknown. . . . Nor is this denied; for it
has been commonly confessed, that, as substances, we know not what is
Matter, and are ignorant of what is Mind.*

This passage might be matched by many others, equally emphatic, and in
appearance equally decisive; several of which I shall have occasion to
quote. Yet in the sense which the author’s phrases seem to convey—in the
only aimportanta meaning capable of being attached to them—the doctrine
they assert was certainly not held by Sir W. Hamilton. He by no means
admits that we know nothing of objects except their existence, and the
impressions produced by them upon the human mind. He affirms this in
regard to what have been called by metaphysicians the Secondary
Qualities of Matter, but denies it of the Primary.

On this point his declarations are very explicit. One of the most
elaborate of his “Dissertations on Reid” is devoted to expounding the
distinction. The “Dissertation” begins thus:

The developed doctrine of Real Presentationism, the basis of Natural
Realism [the doctrine of the author himself] asserts the consciousness
or immediate perception Edition: current; Page: [14] of certain
essential attributes of Matter objectively existing; while it admits
that other properties of body are unknown in themselves, and only
inferred as causes to account for certain subjective affections of which
we are cognizant in ourselves. This discrimination, which to other
systems is contingent, superficial, extraneous, but to Natural Realism
necessary, radical, intrinsic, coincides with what since the time of
Locke has been generally known as the distinction of the Qualities of
Matter or Body, using these terms as convertible, into Primary and
Secondary.*

Further on, he states, in additional development of so-called Natural
Realism,

that we have not merely a notion, a conception, an imagination, a
subjective representation—of Extension, for example—called up or
suggested in some incomprehensible manner to the mind, on occasion of an
extended object being presented to the sense; but that in the perception
of such an object we really have, as by nature we believe we have, an
immediate knowledge of that external object as extended.†

If we are not percipient of any extended reality, we are not percipient
of body as existing; for body exists, and can only be known immediately
and in itself, as extended. The material world, on this supposition,
sinks into something unknown and problematical; and its existence, if
not denied, can, at least, be only precariously affirmed, as the occult
cause, or incomprehensible occasion, of certain subjective affections we
experience in the form either of a sensation of the secondary quality or
of a perception of the primary.‡

Not only, in Sir W. Hamilton’s opinion, do we know, by direct
consciousness or perception, certain properties of Things as they exist
in the Things themselves, but we may also know those properties as in
the Things, by demonstration à priori. “The notion of body being given,
every primary quality is to be evolved out of that notion, as
necessarily involved in it, independently altogether of any experience
of sense.”§ “The Primary Qualities may be deduced à priori, the bare
notion of matter being given; they being, in fact, only evolutions of
the conditions which that notion necessarily implies.”¶ He goes so far
as to say, that our belief of the Primary Qualities is, not merely
necessary as involved in a fact of which we have a direct perception,
but necessary in itself, by our mental constitution. He speaks of “that
absolute or insuperable resistance which we are compelled, independently
of experience, to think that every part of matter would oppose to any
attempt to deprive it of its space, by compressing it into an
inextended.”∥

The following is still more specific. “The Primary” Qualities “are
apprehended as they are in bodies; the Secondary, as they are in us: the
Edition: current; Page: [15] Secundo-primary” (a third class created by
himself, comprising the mechanical as distinguished from the geometrical
properties of Body)

as they are in bodies and as they are in us. . . . We know the Primary
qualities immediately as objects of perception; the Secundo-primary both
immediately as objects of perception and mediately as causes of
sensation; the Secondary only mediately as causes of sensation. In other
words: The Primary are known immediately in themselves; the
Secundo-primary, both immediately in themselves and mediately in their
effects on us; the Secondary, only mediately in their effects on us. . .
. We are conscious, as objects, in the Primary Qualities, of the modes
of a not-self; in the Secondary, of the modes of self; in the
Secundo-primary, of the modes of self and of a not-self at once.*

There is nothing wonderful in Sir W. Hamilton’s entertaining these
opinions; they are held by perhaps a majority of metaphysicians. But it
is surprising that, entertaining them, he should have believed himself,
and been believed by others, to maintain the Relativity of all our
knowledge. What he deems to be relative, in any sense of the term that
is not insignificant, is only our knowledge of the Secondary Qualities
of objects. Extension and the other Primary Qualities he positively
asserts that we have an immediate intuition of, “as they are in
bodies”—“as modes of a not-self;” in express contradistinction to being
known merely as causes of certain impressions on our senses or on our
minds. As there cannot have been, in his own thoughts, a flat
contradiction between what he would have admitted to be the two cardinal
doctrines of his philosophy, the only question that can arise is, which
of the two is to be taken in a non-natural sense. Is it the doctrine
that we know certain properties as they are in the Things? Were we to
judge from a foot-note to the same Dissertation, we might suppose so. He
there observes—“In saying that a thing is known in itself, I do not mean
that this object is known in its absolute existence, that is, out of
relation to us. This is impossible: for our knowledge is only of the
relative. To know a thing in itself or immediately, is an expression I
use merely in contrast to the knowledge of a thing in a representation,
or mediately:”† in other words, he merely means that we perceive objects
directly, and not through the species sensibiles of Lucretius,[*] the
Ideas of bLockeb, or the Mental Modifications of Brown.[†] Let us
suppose this Edition: current; Page: [16] granted, and that the
knowledge we have of objects is gained by direct perception. Still, the
question has to be answered whether the knowledge so acquired is of the
objects as they are in themselves, or only as they are relatively to us.
Now what, according to Sir W. Hamilton, is this knowledge? Is it a
knowledge of the Thing, merely in its effects on us, or is it a
knowledge of somewhat in the Thing, ulterior to any effect on us? He
asserts in the plainest terms that it is the latter. Then it is not a
knowledge wholly relative to us. If what we perceive in the Thing is
something of which we are only aware as existing, and as causing
impressions on us, our knowledge of the Thing is only relative. But if
what we perceive and cognise is not merely a cause of our subjective
impressions, but a Thing possessing, in its own nature and essence, a
long list of properties, Extension, Impenetrability, Number, Magnitude,
Figure, Mobility, Position, all perceived as “essential attributes” of
the Thing as “objectively existing”—all as “Modes of a Not-Self” and by
no means as an occult cause or causes of any Modes of Self—(and that
such is the case Sir W. Hamilton asserts in every form of language,
leaving no stone unturned to make us apprehend the breadth of the
distinction) then I am willing to believe that in affirming this
knowledge to be entirely relative to Self, such a thinker as Sir W.
Hamilton had a meaning, but I have no small difficulty in discovering
what it is.

The place where we should expect to find this difficulty cleared up, is
the formal exposition of the Relativity of Human Knowledge, in the first
volume of the Lectures. He declares his intention of

now stating and explaining the great axiom that all human knowledge,
consequently that all human philosophy, is only of the relative or
phænomenal. In this proposition, the term relative is opposed to the
term absolute; and therefore, in saying that we know only the relative,
I virtually assert that we know nothing absolute,—nothing existing
absolutely, that is, in and for itself, and without relation to us and
our faculties. I shall illustrate this by its application. Our knowledge
is either of matter or of mind. Now, what is matter? What do we know of
matter? Matter, or body, is to us the name either of something known, or
of something unknown. In so far as matter is a name for something known,
it means that which appears to us under the forms of extension,
solidity, divisibility, figure, motion, roughness, smoothness, colour,
heat, cold, &c.; in short, it is a common name for a certain series, or
aggregate, or complement, of appearances or phænomena manifested in
coexistence.

But as these phænomena appear only in conjunction, we are compelled by
the constitution of our nature to think them conjoined in and by
something; and as they are phænomena, we cannot think them the phænomena
of nothing, but must regard them as the properties or qualities of
something that is extended, solid, figured, &c. But this something,
absolutely and in itself, i.e. considered apart from its phænomena—is to
us as zero. It is only in its qualities, only in its effects, in its
relative or phænomenal existence, that it is cognizable or conceivable;
and it is only by a law of thought which compels us to think something
absolute and unknown, as Edition: current; Page: [17] the basis or
condition of the relative and known, that this something obtains a kind
of incomprehensible reality to us. Now, that which manifests its
qualities—in other words, that in which the appearing causes inhere,
that to which they belong,—is called their subject, or substance, or
substratum. To this subject of the phænomena of extension, solidity,
&c., the term matter or material substance is commonly given; and
therefore, as contradistinguished from these qualities, it is the name
of something unknown and inconceivable.

The same is true in regard to the term mind. In so far as mind is the
common name for the states of knowing, willing, feeling, desiring, &c.,
of which I am conscious, it is only the name for a certain series of
connected phænomena or qualities, and, consequently, expresses only what
is known. But in so far as it denotes that subject or substance in which
the phænomena of knowing, willing, &c., inhere—something behind or under
these phænomena,—it expresses what, in itself or in its absolute
existence, is unknown.

Thus, mind and matter, as known or knowable, are only two different
series of phænomena or qualities; mind and matter, as unknown and
unknowable, are the two substances, in which these two different series
of phænomena or qualities are supposed to inhere. cThe existence of an
unknown substance is only an inferencec we are compelled to make from
the existence of known phænomena; and the distinction of two substances
is only inferred from the seeming incompatibility of the two series of
phænomena to coinhere in one.

Our whole knowledge of mind and matter is thus, as we have said, only
relative; of existence, absolutely and in itself, we know nothing: and
we may say of man what Virgil said of Æneas, contemplating in the
prophetic sculpture of his shield the future glories of Rome—

“Rerumque ignarus, imagine gaudet.”*

Here is an exposition of the nature and limits of our knowledge, which
would have satisfied Hartley, Brown, and even Comte. It cannot be more
explicitly laid down, that Matter, as known to us, is but the
incomprehensible and incognisable basis or substratum of a bundle of
sensible qualities, appearances, phænomena; that we know it “only in its
effects;” that its very existence is “only an inference we are compelled
to make” from those sensible appearancesd. On the subject of Mind,
again, could it have been more explicitly affirmed, that all we know of
Mind is its successive states “of knowing, willing, feeling, desiring,
&c.,” and that Mind, considered as “something behind or under these
phænomena,” is to us unknowable?

Subsequently he says, that not only all the knowledge we have of
anything, but all which we could have if we were a thousandfold better
endowed than we are, would still be only knowledge of the mode in which
the thing would affect us. Had we as many senses (the illustration is
his Edition: current; Page: [18] own) as the inhabitants of Sirius, in
the Micromegas of Voltaire;[*] were there, as there may well be, a
thousand modes of real existence as definitely distinguished from one
another as are those which manifest themselves to our present senses,
and “had we, for each of these thousand modes, a separate organ
competent to make it known to us,—still would our whole knowledge be, as
it is at present, only of the relative. Of existence, absolutely and in
itself, we should then be as ignorant as we are now. We should still
apprehend existence only in certain special modes—only in certain
relations to our faculties of knowledge.”*

Nothing can be truer or more clearly stated than all this: but the
clearer it is, the more irreconcileable does it appear with our author’s
doctrine of the direct cognoscibility of the Primary Qualities. If it be
true that Extension, Figure, and the other qualities enumerated, are
known “immediately in themselves,” and not, like Secondary qualities,
“in their effects on us;” if the former are “apprehended as they are in
bodies,” and not, like the Secondary, “as they are in us;” if it is
these last exclusively that are “unknown in themselves, and only
inferred as causes to account for certain subjective affections in
ourselves:” while, of the former, we are immediately conscious as
“attributes of matter objectively existing;” and if it is not to be
endured that matter should “sink into something unknown and
problematical,” whose existence “can be only precariously affirmed as
the occult cause or incomprehensible occasion of certain subjective
affections we experience in the form either of a sensation of the
secondary quality or of a perception of the primary” (being precisely
what Sir W. Hamilton, in the preceding quotations, appeared to say that
it is); if these things be so, our faculties, as far as the Primary
Qualities are concerned, do cognise and know Matter as it is in itself,
and not merely as an unknowable and incomprehensible substratum; they do
cognise and know it as it exists absolutely, and not merely in relation
to us; it is known to us directly, and not as a mere “inference” from
Phænomena.

Will it be said that the attributes of extension, figure, number,
magnitude, and the rest, though known as in the Things themselves, are
yet known only relatively to us, because it is by our faculties that we
know them, and because appropriate faculties are the necessary condition
of knowledge? If so, the “great axiom” of Relativity is reduced to this,
that we can know Things as they are in themselves, but can know no more
of them than our faculties are competent to inform us of. If such be the
meaning of Relativity, our author might well maintain that it is a truth
“harmoniously reechoed by every philosopher of every school;” nor need
he have added Edition: current; Page: [19] “with the exception of a few
late Absolute theorizers in Germany;”* for certainly neither Schelling
nor Hegel claims for us any other knowledge than such as our faculties
are, in their opinion, competent to give.

Is it possible, that by knowledge of qualities “as they are in Bodies,”
no more was meant than knowing that the Body must have qualities whereby
it produces the affection of which we are conscious in ourselves? But
this is the very knowledge which our author predicates of Secondary
Qualities, as contradistinguished from the Primary. Secondary he frankly
acknowledges to be occult qualities: we really, in his opinion, have no
knowledge, and no conception, what that is in an object, by virtue of
which it has its specific smell or taste. But Primary qualities,
according to him, we know all about: there is nothing occult or
mysterious to us in these; we perceive and conceive them as they are in
themselves, and as they are in the body they belong to. They are
manifested to us, not, like the Secondary qualities, only in their
effects, in the sensations they excite in us, but in their own nature
and essence.

Perhaps it may be surmised, that in calling knowledge of this sort by
the epithet Relative, Sir W. Hamilton meant that though we know those
qualities as they are in themselves, we only discover them through their
relation to certain effects in us; that in order that there may be
Perception there must also be Sensation; and we thus know the Primary
Qualities, in their effects on us and also in themselves. But neither
will this explanation serve. This theory of Primary Qualities does not
clash with the Secondary, but it runs against the Secundo-primary. It is
this third class, which, as he told us, are known “both immediately in
themselves and mediately in their effects on us.” The Primary are only
known “immediately in themselves.” He has thus with his own hands
deliberately extruded from our knowledge of the Primary qualities the
element of relativity to us:—except, to be sure, in the acceptation in
which knowing is itself a relation, inasmuch as it implies a knower;
whereby instead of the doctrine that Things in themselves are not
possible objects of knowledge, we obtain the “great axiom” that they
cannot be known unless there is somebody to know them.e

Edition: current; Page: [20]
Can any light be derived from the statement that we do not know any
qualities of things except those which are in connexion with our
faculties, or, as our author expresses it (surely by a very strained use
of language), which are “analogous to our faculties?”* If, by “our
faculties,” is to be understood our knowing faculty, this proposition is
but the trivial one already noticed, that we can know only what we can
know. And this is what the author actually seems to mean; for in a
sentence immediately following, he paraphrases the expression “analogous
to our faculties,” by the phrase that we must “possess faculties
accommodated to their apprehension.”† To be able to see, we must have a
faculty accommodated to seeing. Is this what we are intended to
understand by the “great axiom?”f But if “our faculties” does not here
mean our knowing faculty, it must mean our sensitive faculties; and the
statement is, that, to be known by us, a quality must be “analogous”
(meaning, I suppose, related) to our senses. But what is meant by being
related to our senses? That it must be fitted to give us sensations. We
thus return as before to an identical proposition.

gThere is still another possible supposition; that, in calling our
knowledge relative in contradistinction to absolute, Sir W. Hamilton was
not thinking of our knowledge of qualities, but of substances—of Matter
and Mind; and meant that qualities might be cognised absolutely, or as
they are in themselves, but that, since substances are only known
through their qualities, the knowledge of substances is not knowledge of
them as they are in themselves, but is merely relative. According to
this interpretation, the relativity which Sir W. Hamilton ascribes to
our knowledge of substances is relativity not to us, but to their
attributes: we “become aware of their incomprehensible existence only as
this is revealed to us through certain qualities.” And when he adds,
“which qualities, again, we cannot think as unconditioned, irrelative,
existent in and of themselves,”[*] thus predicating relativity of
attributes also (considered as known or conceived by us), he means
relativity to a substance. We can only know a substance through its
qualities, but also, we can only know qualities as inhering in a
substance. Substance and attribute are correlative, and can only be
thought together: the knowledge of each, therefore, is relative to the
other; but need not be, Edition: current; Page: [21] and indeed is not,
relative to us. For we know attributes as they are in themselves, and
our knowledge of them is only relative inasmuch as attributes have only
a relative existence. It is relative knowledge in a sense not
contradictory to absolute. It is an absolute knowledge, though of things
which only exist in a necessary relation to another thing called a
substance.*

I am not disposed to deny that this interpretation of Sir W. Hamilton’s
doctrine is, to a certain point, correct. He did draw a distinction
between our manner of knowing attributes and our manner of knowing
substances; and did regard certain attributes (the primary qualities) as
objects of direct and immediate knowledge; which, in his opinion,
substances are not, but are merely assumed or inferred from phænomena,
by a law of our nature which compels us to think phænomena as attributes
of something beyond themselves. I do not doubt that when he said that
our knowledge of attributes is relative, the necessity of thinking every
attribute as an attribute of a substance was present to his mind, and
formed a part of his meaning. hThere is, however, abundant evidence that
the relativity which Sir W. Hamilton ascribed to our knowledge of
attributes was not merely relativity to their substances, but also
relativity to us. He affirms of attributes as positively as of
substances, that all our knowledge of them is relative to us. The
passages already quoted apply as much to attributes as to substances.
“In saying that we know only the relative, I virtually assert that we
know nothing absolute—nothing existing absolutely, that is, in and for
itself, and without relation to us and our faculties.”† “In saying that
a thing is known in itself, I do not mean that this object is known in
its absolute existence, that is, out of relation to us. This is
impossible, for our knowledge is only of the relative.”‡ In the
following passages he is speaking solely of attributes. “By the
expression what they are in themselves, in reference to the primary
qualities, and of relative notion in reference to the secondary, Reid
cannot mean that the former are known to us absolutely and in
themselves, that is, out of relation to our cognitive faculties; for he
elsewhere admits that all our knowledge is relative.”§ “We can know, we
can conceive, only what is relative. Our knowledge of qualities or
phænomena is necessarily relative; for these exist only as they exist in
Edition: current; Page: [22] relation to our faculties.”* The
distinction, therefore, which Sir W. Hamilton recognises between our
knowledge of substances and that of attributes, though authentically a
part of his philosophy, is quite irrelevant here.h He affirms without
reservation, that certain attributes (extension, figure, &c.) are known
to us as they really exist out of ourselves; and also that all our
knowledge of them is relative to us. And these two assertions are only
reconcileable, if relativity to us is understood in the altogether
trivial sense, that we know them only so far as our faculties permit.†g

The conclusion I cannot help drawing from this collation of passages is,
that Sir W. Hamilton either never held, or when he wrote the
“Dissertations” had ceased to hold i(for his theory respecting knowledge
of the Primary Qualities does not occur in the Lectures)i the doctrine
for which he has been so often praised and nearly as often attacked—the
Relativity of Human Knowledge. He certainly did sincerely believe that
he held it. But he repudiated it in every sense which makes it other
than a barren truism. In the only meaning in which he really maintained
it, there is nothing to maintain. It is an identical proposition, and
nothing more.

And to this, or something next to this, hej reduces it in kthe first
portion ofk the summary with which he concludes its exposition. “From
what has been said,” he observes, “you will be able, I hope, to
understand what is meant by the proposition, that all our knowledge is
only relative. It is relative, 1st. Because existence is not cognisable
absolutely in itself, but only in special modes; 2nd. Because these
modes can be known only if they stand in a certain relation to our
faculties.” Whoever can find anything more in these two statements, than
that we do not know all about a Thing, but only as much about it as we
are capable of knowing, is more ingenious or more fortunate than myself.

He adds, however, to these reasons why our knowledge is only relative, a
third reason. “3rd. Because the modes, thus relative to our faculties,
are assented to, and known by, the mind only under modifications
determined by those faculties themselves.”‡ Of this addition to the
theory we took Edition: current; Page: [23] notice near the conclusion
of the preceding chapter.[*] It shall have the advantage of a fuller
explanation in Sir W. Hamilton’s words.

In the perception of an external object, the mind does not know it in
immediate relation to itself, but mediately, in relation to the material
organs of sense. If, therefore, we were to throw these organs out of
consideration, and did not take into account what they contribute to,
and how they modify, our knowledge of that object, it is evident that
our conclusion in regard to the nature of external perception would be
erroneous. Again, an object of perception may not even stand in
immediate relation to the organ of sense, but may make its impression on
that organ through an intervening medium. Now, if this medium be thrown
out of account, and if it be not considered that the real external
object is the sum of all that externally contributes to affect the
sense, we shall, in like manner, run into error. For example, I see a
book—I see that book through an external medium (what that medium is, we
do not now inquire) and I see it through my organ of sight, the eye.
Now, as the full object presented to the mind (observe that I say the
mind) in perception, is an object compounded of the external object
emitting or reflecting light, i.e., modifying the external medium—of
this external medium—and of the living organ of sense, in their mutual
relation, let us suppose, in the example I have taken, that the full or
adequate object perceived is equal to twelve, and that this amount is
made up of three several parts; of four, contributed by the book,—of
four, contributed by all that intervenes between the book and the
organ,—and of four, contributed by the living organ itself. I use this
illustration to show that the phænomenon of the external object is not
presented immediately to the mind, but is known by it only as modified
through certain intermediate agencies; and to show, that sense itself
may be a source of error, if we do not analyze and distinguish what
elements, in an act of perception, belong to the outward reality, what
to the outward medium, and what to the action of sense itself. But this
source of error is not limited to our perceptions; and we are liable to
be deceived, not merely by not distinguishing in an act of knowledge
what is contributed by sense, but by not distinguishing what is
contributed by the mind itself. This is the most difficult and important
function of philosophy; and the greater number of its higher problems
arise in the attempt to determine the shares to which the knowing
subject, and the object known, may pretend in the total act of
cognition. For according as we attribute a larger or a smaller
proportion to each, we either run into the extremes of Idealism and
Materialism, or maintain an equilibrium between the two.*

The proposition, that our cognitions of objects are only in part
dependent on the objects themselves, and in part on elements superadded
by our organs or by our minds, is not identical, nor primâ facie absurd.
It cannot, however, warrant the assertion that all our knowledge, but
only that the part so added, is relative. If our author had gone as far
as Kant, and had said that all lthe primary qualities which we think we
perceive in bodies, arel put in by the mind itself, he would have really
held, in one of its forms, the doctrine of the Relativity of our
knowledge. But what he does say, far from Edition: current; Page: [24]
implying that the whole of our knowledge is relative, distinctly imports
that all of it which is real and authentic is the reverse. If any part
of what we fancy that we perceive in the objects themselves, originates
in the perceiving organs or in the cognising mind, thus much is purely
relative; but since, by supposition, it does not all so originate, the
part that does not, is as much absolute as if it were not liable to be
mixed up with these delusive subjective impressions. The admixture of
the relative element not only does not take away the absolute character
of the remainder, but does not even (if our author is right) prevent us
from recognising it. The confusion, according to him, is not
inextricable. It is for us to “analyze and distinguish what elements” in
an “act of knowledge” are contributed by the object, and what by our
organs, or by the mind. We may neglect to do this, and as far as the
mind’s share is concerned, can only do it by the help of philosophy; but
it is a task to which in his opinion philosophy is equal. By thus
stripping off such of the elements in our apparent cognitions of Things
as are but cognitions of something in us, and consequently relative, we
may succeed in uncovering the pure nucleus, the direct intuitions of
Things in themselves; as we correct the observed positions of the
heavenly bodies by allowing for the error due to the refracting
influence of the atmospheric medium, an influence which does not alter
the facts, but only our perception of them.

mThis last doctrine, however,—that the mind’s own constitution
contributes along with the outward object, to make up what is called our
knowledge of the object,—is what Mr. Mansel maintains Sir W. Hamilton to
have meant by the assertion that our whole knowledge of the object is
relative. And this is the foundation of all that Mr. Mansel presents as
a refutation of the present chapter.

If it be true (to use Mr. Mansel’s words) that, in the constitution of
our knowledge, the mind “reacts on the objects affecting it, so as to
produce a result different from that which would be produced, were it
merely a passive recipient,”* this modifying action of the mind must
consist, as is affirmed by Kant and by all others who profess the
doctrine, in making us ascribe to the object, and apprehend as in the
object, properties which are not really in the object, but are merely
lent to it by the constitution of our mental nature. Now, if the
attributes which we perceive, or think we perceive, in objects, are
partly given by the mind, but not wholly, being also partly given by the
nature of the object itself (which is admitted to be Sir W. Hamilton’s
opinion); this joint agency of the object and of the mind’s own laws in
generating what we call our knowledge of the object, may be conceived in
two ways.

Edition: current; Page: [25]
First: The two factors may be jointly operative in every part of the
effect. Every attribute with which we perceive the thing as invested,
may be a joint product of the thing itself and of the modifying action
of the mind. If this be the case, we do not really know any property as
it is in the object: we have no reason to think that the object as we
apprehend it, and as we figure to ourselves that we perceive and know
it, agrees in any respect with the object that exists without us; but
only that it depends upon that outward object, as one of its joint
causes. Such was the opinion of Kant; and whoever is of this opinion,
holds, in one of its forms, as I have expressly admitted, the genuine
doctrine of the Relativity of our knowledge. For all must agree with Mr.
Mansel when he says, that an object of thought, into which the mind puts
a positive element of its own, thereby making it different from what it
otherwise would be, is that which it is, only relatively to the mind.
This seems to be Mr. Mansel’s own mode of representing to himself the
combined action of the mind and the object in perception. For he
compares it to the action of an acid and an alkali in forming a neutral
salt;* and to a chemical fusion together of two elements, in
contradistinction to a mere mechanical juxtaposition.† If we had never
seen, and could not get at, the acid or the alkali except as united in
the salt, Mr. Mansel could not think that our knowledge of the salt gave
us any knowledge of the acid or the alkali themselves.

But, secondly: There is another mode in which the co-operation of the
object and the mind’s own properties in producing our cognition of the
object, may be conceived as taking place. Instead of their being joint
agents in producing our cognitions of all the attributes with which we
mentally clothe the object, some of the attributes as cognised by us may
come from the object only, and some from the mind only, or from both.
Now it is not open to a holder of this second opinion, as it is to one
of the first, to affirm that all the attributes are only known
relatively to us. Such of them, indeed, as are made to be that which
they are by what the mind puts into them, are, on this theory, only
known relatively to the mind: they have even no existence except
relatively to the mind. But those into which no positive element is
introduced by the mind’s laws (I say no positive element, because a mere
negative limitation by the mind’s capacities is nothing to the purpose),
these, as their cognition contains nothing but what is presented in the
external object, must be held to be known not relatively, but
absolutely. The doubt how much of what we apprehend in them is due to
our own constitution, and how much to the external world, has no place
here: they are, by supposition, wholly perceptions of something in the
external world.

Edition: current; Page: [26]
Now, this second view of the joint action of the mind and the outward
thing, as the two factors in our cognition of the thing, is Sir W.
Hamilton’s. The passages in which he characterizes our knowledge of the
Primary Qualities place this beyond question. He affirms clearly and
consistently that extension, figure, and the other Primary Qualities are
known by us “as they are in bodies,” and not “as they are in us;” that
they are known as “essential attributes of matter objectively existing;”
as “modes of a notself,” not even combined, as in the Secundo-primary,
with any “modes of self;”[*] so that no element originating in our
subjective constitution interferes with the purity of the apperception.
In this respect the physical phenomena which Mr. Mansel calls in as
illustrations afford no parallel. No one would say that the acid in a
neutral salt is perceived and known by us in the salt as what it is as
an acid. Indeed, the ndiscrimination whichn Sir W. Hamilton thinks it
possible for philosophy to omake,o between that in our knowledge which
the object contributes and that which the mind contributes, palmost
requires as its condition that some attributes should bep wholly
contributed by the one and some by the other: for if every attribute was
the joint product of both, qit is difficult to see what means the case
could affordq of making the discrimination, any more than of
discriminating between the acid and the alkali in Mr. Mansel’s salt. The
question, how much of the salt is due to the acid and how much to the
alkali, is not merely unresolvable, but intrinsically absurd.*

Edition: current; Page: [27]
Mr. Mansel’s mode of reconciling Sir W. Hamilton’s emphatic declaration,
that we know the Primary Qualities as they are in objects, with his
assertion of the entire incognoscibility of Things in themselves, is by
saying that “objects” are not identical with “things in themselves.”*
“Objective existence,” he says,

does not mean existence per se; and a phenomenon does not mean a mere
mode of mind. Objective existence is existence as an object, in
perception, and therefore in relation; and a phenomenon may be material,
as well as mental. The thing per se may be only the unknown cause of
what we directly know; but what we directly know is something more than
our own sensations. In other words, the phenomenal effect is material as
well as the cause, and is, indeed, that from which our primary
conceptions of matter are derived.†

Now, this is a possible opinion; it was really the opinion of Kant. That
philosopher did recognise a direct object of our perceptions, different
from the thing itself, and intermediate between it and the perceiving
mind. And it was open to Kant to do so; because he held what Sir W.
Hamilton calls a representative theory of perception. He maintained that
the object of our perception, and of our knowledge, is a representation
in our own minds. In his philosophy, both object and subject are
accommodated within the mind itself—the object within the subject. The
mind has no perception of the external thing, nor comes into any contact
with it in the act of perception.‡ Was this Sir W. Hamilton’s opinion?
On the contrary, if there be a doctrine of his philosophy which he has
laboured at beyond any other, against, as he Edition: current; Page:
[28] affirms, nearly all philosophers, it is, that the thing we perceive
is the real thing which exists outside us, and that the perceiving mind
is in direct contact with it, without any intermediate link whatever. We
never hear from Sir W. Hamilton of three elements in our cognition of
the outward world, but of two only, the mind, and the real object; which
he sometimes calls the external object, sometimes Body, sometimes
Matter, sometimes a Non-ego. Yet, according to Mr. Mansel, he must have
believed that this object, which he so strenuously contended to be the
very thing itself, is not the very thing in itself, but that behind it
there is another Thing in itself, the unknown cause of it. I can
discover no trace in Sir W. Hamilton’s writings of any such entity. The
outward things which he believed to exist, he believed that we perceive
and know: not, indeed, “absolutely or in themselves,” because only in
such of their attributes as we have senses to reveal to us; but yet as
they really are. He did not believe in, or recognise, a Thing per se,
itself unknowable, but engendering another material object called a
phænomenon, which is knowable. The only distinction he recognised
between a phænomenon and a Thing per se, was that between attributes and
a substance. But he believed the primary attributes to be known by us as
they exist in the substance, and not in some intermediate object.*

Edition: current; Page: [29]
The mark by which Mr. Mansel distinguishes between the object and the
Thing in itself, is that the object is in space and time, but the Thing
out of space and time; space and time having merely a subjective
existence, in us, not in external nature. This is Kantism, but it is not
Hamiltonism. I do not believe that the expression “out of space and
time” is to be found once in all Sir W. Hamilton’s writings. It belongs
to the Kantian, not to the Hamiltonian philosophy. Sir W. Hamilton does
indeed hold with Kant, and on Edition: current; Page: [30] Kant’s
shewing, that space and time are à priori forms of the mind, but he
believes that they are also external realities, known empirically.* And
it is worth notice, that he grounds the outward reality of Space, not on
his favourite evidence, that of our Natural Beliefs, but on the specific
reason, that (Extension being only another name for Space), if Space was
not an outward thing cognizable à posteriori, we could not, as he
affirms that we do, cognize Extension as an external reality. He must
therefore have thought, not that Space is a mere form in which our
perceptions of objects are clothed by the laws of our perceiving
faculty, but that we perceive real things in real space.†

Mr. Mansel is not the only one of my critics who has interpreted Sir W.
Hamilton’s doctrine of our direct knowledge of outward objects, as if
those outward objects were a tertium quid, between the mind and the real
outward, or if the expression may be permitted, the outer outward
object. For, irreconcilable as this supposition is with the evidence of
his writings, it is the only one which can be thought of to give a
substantial meaning to his doctrine of Relativity, consistent with the
external reality of the Primary Qualities. Professor Masson consequently
had already taken refuge in the same interpretation as Mr. Mansel; but
propounded it in the modest form of Edition: current; Page: [31] an
hypothesis, not a dogmatical assertion. The North American Reviewer in
like manner says:

An existence non-ego may be immediately cognizable consistently with the
doctrine of the relativity of knowledge, provided this non-ego be
phenomenal, that is, necessarily dependent on some other incognizable
existence among the real causes of things. . . . If the meaning of the
word phenomenon which we have attributed to Hamilton be a valid one, his
philosophy escapes from this criticism by affirming that the primary
qualities of matter, that is, the having extension, figure, &c., though
not cognized as the effects of matter on us, are yet modes of existence
implying an unknown substance, and are hence phenomenal in Hamilton’s
meaning of the word.*

This explanation might pass, if Sir W. Hamilton’s assertion of the
relativity of our knowledge to our mind were all contained in the word
phænomenal, and could be explained away by supposing that word to mean
relativity not to us, but to an unknown cause. But I need not requote
his declaration that our knowledge of Qualities is all relative to us,
nor his assertion that nevertheless certain qualities are in the object,
and are perceived and known in the object, and that the object perceived
and known is no other than the real Thing itself. Nowhere in his works
do I find any recognition of another real Thing, which is not the Thing
perceived by us through its attributes. He does not tell us of a Body
perceived, and an unperceived Substance in the background: the Body is
the Substance. He does indeed say that the Substance is only an
inference from the Attributes; but he also says that certain attributes
are perceived as in the real external Thing; and he never drops the
smallest hint of any real external thing in which the attributes can be,
except the Substance itself, which he expressly defines as “that which
manifests its qualities,” that in which the “phænomena or qualities are
supposed to inhere.”[*]

Professor Fraser, in the (in many respects) profound Essay of which he
has done this work the honour of making it the occasion, vindicates at
once the consistency of Sir W. Hamilton, and the substantial
significance of his doctrine of Relativity, by ascribing to him, in
opposition to his incessant declarations, Mr. Fraser’s own far clearer
views of the subject. Mr. Fraser, like myself, believes the Primary
Qualities to have no more existence out of our own or other minds, than
the Secondary Qualities have, or than our pains and pleasures have; and
he asks, “Where does he” (Sir W. Hamilton) “say that we have an absolute
knowledge of the primary qualities of matter, in any other sense than
that in which he says that we have a like knowledge of a feeling of pain
or pleasure in our minds while it is being felt, or of an act Edition:
current; Page: [32] of consciousness while it is being acted?”* To this
“where,” I answer, in every place where he says that we know the Primary
Qualities not as they are in us, but as they are in the Body. That is
asserting an absolute knowledge of them, as distinguished from
relativity to us: and he would not have made a similar assertion of our
pains and pleasures, or of our acts of internal consciousness. Again,
asks Mr. Fraser, “How does the assertion that we are percipient
directly, and not through a medium, of phenomena of solidity and
extension, contradict the principle that all our knowledge is relative,
when the assertion that we are percipient, directly and not through a
medium, of the phenomena of sensation or emotion or intelligence does
not?”† Because the phænomena of sensation or emotion or intelligence are
admitted to be perceived or felt as facts that have no reality out of
us, and the facts being only relative to us, the knowledge of the facts
partakes of the same relativity: but the phænomena of solidity and
extension are alleged by Sir W. Hamilton to be perceived as facts whose
reality is out of our minds, and in the material object: which is indeed
knowing them relatively to the outward object, but is the diametrical
opposite of knowing them relatively to us.‡m

Edition: current; Page: [33]
It has vnowv been shown, by accumulated proof, that Sir W. Hamilton did
not hold any opinion in virtue of which it could rationally be asserted
that all human knowledge is relative; but did hold, as one of the main
elements of his philosophical creed, the opposite doctrine, of the
cognoscibility of external Things, in certain of their aspects, as they
are in themselves, absolutely.

But if this be true, what becomes of his dispute with Cousin, and with
Cousin’s German predecessors and teachers? That celebrated controversy
surely meant something. Where there was so much smoke there must have
been some fire. Some difference of opinion must really have existed
between Sir W. Hamilton and his antagonists.

Assuredly there was a difference, and one of great importance from the
point of view of either disputant; not unimportant in the view of those
who dissent from them both. In the succeeding chapter I shall endeavour
to point out what the difference was.

Edition: current; Page: [34]


CHAPTER IV: In What Respect Sir William Hamilton Really Differs from the Philosophers of the Absolute

the question really at issue in Sir W. Hamilton’s celebrated and
striking review of Cousin’s philosophy,[*] is this: Have we, or have we
not, an immediate intuition of God. The name of God is veiled under two
extremely abstract phrases, “The Infinite” and “The Absolute,” perhaps
from a reverential feeling: such, at least, is the reason given by Sir
W. Hamilton’s disciple, Mr. Mansel,* for preferring the more vague
expressions. But it is one of the most unquestionable of all logical
maxims, that the meaning of the abstract must be sought for in the
concrete, and not conversely; and we shall see, both in the case of Sir
W. Hamilton and of Mr. Mansel, that the process cannot be reversed with
impunity.†

Edition: current; Page: [35]
I proceed to state, chiefly in the words of Sir W. Hamilton, the
opinions of the two parties to the controversy. Both undertake to decide
what are the facts which (in their own phraseology) are given in
Consciousness; or, as others say, of which we have intuitive knowledge.
According to Cousin, there are, in every act of consciousness, three
elements; three things of which we are intuitively aware. There is a
finite element; an element of plurality, compounded of a Self or Ego,
and something different from Self, or Non-ego. There is also an infinite
element; a consciousness of something infinite. “At the same instant
when we are conscious of these [finite] existences, plural, relative,
and contingent, we are conscious likewise of a Edition: current; Page:
[36] superior unity in which they are contained, and by which they are
explained; a unity absolute as they are conditioned, substantive as they
are phænomenal, and an infinite cause as they are finite causes. This
unity is God.”* The first two elements being the Finite and God, the
third element is the relation between the Finite and God, which is that
of cause and effect. These three things are immediately given in every
act of consciousness, and are, therefore, apprehended as real existences
by direct intuition.

Of these alleged elements of Consciousness, Sir W. Hamilton only admits
the first; the Finite element, compounded of Self and a Not-self,
“limiting and conditioning one another.”[*] He denies that God is given
in immediate consciousness—is apprehended by direct intuition. It is in
no such way as this that God, according to him, is known to us: and as
an Infinite and Absolute Being he is not, and cannot be, known to us at
all; for we have no faculties capable of apprehending the Infinite or
the Absolute. The second of M. Cousin’s elements being thus excluded,
the third (the Relation between the first and second) falls with it; and
Consciousness remains limited to the finite element, compounded of an
Ego and a Non-ego.

In this contest it is almost superfluous for me to say, that I am
entirely with Sir W. Hamilton. The doctrine, that we have an immediate
or intuitive knowledge of God, I consider to be bad metaphysics,
involving a false conception of the nature and limits of the human
faculties, and grounded on a superficial and erroneous psychology.
Whatever relates to God I holdc to be matter of inference; I would add,
of inference à posteriori. And in so far as Sir W. Hamilton has
contributed, which he has done very materially, towards discrediting the
opposite doctrine, he has rendered, in my estimation, a dvaluabled
service to philosophy. But though I assent to his conclusion, his
arguments seem to me very far from inexpugnable: a sufficient answer, I
conceive, might without difficulty be given to emoste of them, though I
do not say that it was always competent to M. Cousin to give it. And the
arguments, in the present case, are of as much importance as the
conclusion: not only because they are quite as essential a part of Sir
W. Hamilton’s philosophy, but because they afford the premises from
which some of his followers, if not himself, have drawn inferences which
I venture to think extremely mischievous. While, therefore, I sincerely
applaud the scope and purpose of this celebrated piece of philosophical
criticism, I think it important to sift with some minuteness the
reasonings it employs, and the general mode of thought which it
exemplifies.

Edition: current; Page: [37]
The question is, as already remarked, whether we have a direct intuition
of “the Infinite” and “the Absolute:” M. Cousin maintaining that we
have—Sir W. Hamilton that we have not; that the Infinite and the
Absolute are inconceivable to us, and, by consequence, unknowable.

It is proper to explain to any reader not familiar with these
controversies, the meaning of the terms. Infinite requires no
explanation. It is universally understood to signify that, to the
magnitude of which there is no limit. If we speak of infinite duration,
or infinite space, we are supposed to mean duration which never ceases,
and extension which nowhere comes to an end. Absolute is much more
obscure, being a word of several meanings; but, in the sense in which it
stands related to Infinite, it means (conformably to its etymology) that
which is finished or completed. There are some things of which the
utmost ideal amount is a limited quantity, though a quantity never
actually reached. In this sense, the relation between the Absolute and
the Infinite is (as Bentham would have said) a tolerably close one,
namely a relation of contrariety. For example, to assert an absolute
minimum of matter, is to deny its infinite divisibility. Again, we may
speak of absolutely, but not of infinitely, pure water. The purity of
water is not a fact of which, whatever degree we suppose attained, there
remains a greater beyond. It has an absolute limit: it is capable of
being finished or complete, in thought, if not in reality. The
extraneous substances existing in any vessel of water cannot be of more
than finite amount, and if we suppose them all withdrawn, the purity of
the water cannot, even in idea, admit of further increase.

fThe idea of Absolute, in this sense of the term, being thus contrasted
with that of Infinite, they cannot, both of them, be truly predicated of
God; or, if truly, not in respect of the same attributes. But the word
Absolute, without losing the signification of perfect or complete, may
drop that of limited. It may continue to mean the whole of that to which
it is applied; but without requiring that this whole should be finite.
Granted (for instance) a being of infinite power, that Being’s
knowledge, if supposed perfect, must be infinite; and may therefore, in
an admissible sense of the term, be said to Edition: current; Page: [38]
be both absolute and infinite.* In this acceptation there is no
inconsistency or incongruity in predicating both these words of God.

The word Absolute, however, has other meanings, which have nothing to do
with perfection or completenessf, though often mixed and confounded with
hith; the more readily as they are all ihabitually predicated of the
Deityi. By Absolute is often meant the opposite of Relative; and this is
rather many meanings than one; for Relative also is a term used very
indefinitely, and wherever it is employed, the word Absolute always
accompanies it as its negative. In another of its senses, Absolute means
that which is independent of anything else: which exists, and is what it
is, by its own nature, and not because of any other thing. In this
jfourth sense as in the thirdj, Absolute stands for the negation of a
relation; not now of Relation in general, but of the specific relation
expressed by the term Effect. In this signification it is synonymous
with kuncaused, and is therefore most naturally identified with thek
First Cause. The meaning of a First Edition: current; Page: [39] Cause
is, that all other things exist, and are what they are, by reason of it
and of its properties, but that it is not itself made to exist, nor to
be what it is, by anything else. It does not depend, for its existence
or attributes, on other things: there is nothing upon the existence of
which its own is conditional: it exists absolutely.l

mIn which of these meanings is the term used in the polemic with M.
Cousin? M. Cousin makes no distinction at all between the Infinite and
the Absolute. Sir W. Hamilton distinguishes them as two species of a
higher genus, the Unconditioned; andm defines the Infinite as “the
unconditionally unlimited,” the Absolute as “the unconditionally
limited.”* Here is a new word introduced, the word “unconditionally;” of
which we look in vain for any direct explanation, nbut which needs it as
much as either of the words which it is employed to explain. In the
Essay itself, this is the only attempt made to define the Absolute: but
in the reprint Sir W. Hamilton appends the following note:

“The term Absolute is of a twofold (if not threefold) ambiguity,
corresponding to the double (or treble) signification of the word in
Latin.” The third application he, with reason, dismisses, as here
irrelevant. The other two are as follows:

“1. Absolutum means what is freed or loosed: in which sense the Absolute
will be what is aloof from relation, comparison, limitation, condition,
dependence, &c., and thus is tantamount to τὸ ὰπόλυτον of the lower
Edition: current; Page: [40] Greeks.[*] In this meaning the Absolute is
not opposed to the Infinite.” This is an amplification of my third
meaning.

“2. Absolutum means finished, perfected, completed; in which sense the
Absolute will be what is out of relation, &c. as finished, perfect,
complete, total, and thus corresponds to τὸ ὅλον and τὸ τέλειον of
Aristotle.[†] In this acceptation—and it is that in which for myself I
exclusively use it,—the Absolute is diametrically opposed to, is
contradictory of, the Infinite.”* This second meaning of Sir W.
Hamilton, which I, in the first edition, by a blameable inadvertence,
confounded with my own first meaning,† must be reckoned as a fifth,
compounded of the first and third—of the idea of finished or completed,
and the idea of being out of relation. How to make an intelligible
meaning out of the two combined, is the question. One can, with some
difficulty, find a meaning in being “aloof from relation, comparison,
limitation, condition, dependence;” but what is meant by being all this
“as finished, perfect, complete, total?” Does it mean, being both out of
relation and also complete? and must the Absolute in Sir W. Hamilton’s
second sense be also Absolute in his first, and be out of all relation
whatever? or does the particle “as” signify that it is out of relation
only in respect of its completeness, which (I suppose) means that it
does not depend for its completeness on anything but itself? Mr.
Mansel’s comment, which otherwise does not help us much, decides for the
latter. “Out of relation as completed” means (he says)‡ “self-existent
in its completeness, and not implying the existence of anything else.”§
Without further attempt to clear Edition: current; Page: [41] up the
obscurity, let it suffice that Sir W. Hamilton’s Absolute, though not
synonymous with a “finished, perfected, completed,” but limited, whole,
includes that idea, and is therefore incompatible with Infinite.*n

Having premised these verbal explanations, I proceed to state, as far as
possible in Sir W. Hamilton’s own words, the heads of his argumentation
to prove that the oAbsolute and Infinite areo unknowable. His first
summary statement of the doctrine is as follows:

The unconditionally unlimited, or the Infinite, the unconditionally
limited, or the Absolute, cannot positively be construed to the mind:
they can be conceived only by a thinking away from, or abstraction of,
those very conditions under which thought itself is realized;
consequently, the notion of the Unconditioned is only negative; negative
of the conceivable itself. For example: On the one hand, we can
positively conceive neither an absolute whole, that is, a whole so great
that we cannot also conceive it as a relative part of a still greater
whole; nor an absolute part, that is, a part so small that we cannot
also conceive it as a relative whole divisible into smaller parts. On
the other hand, we cannot positively represent, or realize, or construe
to the mind (as here Understanding and Imagination coincide) an infinite
whole, for this could only be done by the infinite synthesis in thought
of finite wholes, which would itself require an infinite time for its
accomplishment; nor, for the same reason, can we follow out in thought
an infinite divisibility of parts. The result is the same, whether we
apply the process to limitation in space, in time, or in degree. The
unconditional negation, and the unconditional affirmation of limitation;
in other words, the Infinite and the Absolute properly so called, are
thus equally inconceivable to us.†

This argument, that the Infinite and the Absolute are unknowable by us
because the only conceptions we are able to form of them are negative,
is stated still more emphatically a few pages later.

Kant has clearly shown, that the Idea of the Unconditioned can have no
objective reality,—that it conveys no knowledge,—and that it involves
the most insoluble contradictions. But he ought to have shown that the
Unconditioned had no objective application, because it had, in fact, no
subjective affirmation; that it afforded no real knowledge, because it
contained nothing even conceivable; and that it is self-contradictory,
because it is not a notion, either simple or positive, but only a
fasciculus of negations—negations of the Conditioned in its opposite
extremes, and bound together merely by the aid of language, and their
common character of incomprehensibility.‡

Edition: current; Page: [42]
Let us note, then, as the first and most fundamental of Sir W.
Hamilton’s arguments, that our ideas of the Infinite and the Absolute
are ppurely negative, and the Unconditioned which combines the two, “ap
fasciculus of negations.” I reserve consideration of the validity of
this and every other part of the argumentation, until we have the whole
before us. He proceeds:

As the conditionally limited (which we may briefly call the Conditioned)
is thus the only possible object of knowledge and of positive
thought,—thought qnecessarilyq supposes condition. To think is to
condition; and conditional limitation is the fundamental law of the
possibility of thought. For, as the greyhound cannot outstrip his
shadow, nor (by a more appropriate simile) the eagle outsoar the
atmosphere in which he floats, and by which alone he is supported; so
the mind cannot transcend that sphere of limitation, within and through
which exclusively the possibility of thought is realized. Thought is
only of the conditioned; because, as we have said, to think is simply to
condition. The Absolute is conceived merely by a negation of
conceivability; and all that we know, is known as—

“Won from the cold and formless Infinite.”[*]

How, indeed, it could ever be doubted that thought is only of the
conditioned, may well be deemed a matter of the profoundest admiration.
Thought cannot transcend consciousness; consciousness is only possible
under the antithesis of a subject and object of thought known only in
correlation, and mutually limiting each other; while, independently of
this, all that we know either of subject or object, either of mind or
matter, is only a knowledge in each of the particular, of the plural, of
the different, of the modified, of the phænomenal. We admit that the
consequence of this doctrine is—that philosophy, if viewed as more than
a science of the conditioned, is impossible. Departing from the
particular, we admit that we can never, in our highest generalizations,
rise above the Finite; that our knowledge, whether of mind or matter,
can be nothing more than a knowledge of the relative manifestations of
an existence which in itself it is our highest wisdom to recognise as
beyond the reach of philosophy. This is what, in the language of St.
Austin, Cognoscendo ignoratur, et ignoratione cognoscitur.*

The dictum that “to think is to condition” r(the meaning of which will
be examined hereafter)r may be noted as our author’s second argument.
And here ends the positive part of his argumentation. There remains his
refutation of opponents. After an examination of Schelling’s opinion,
into which I need not follow him, he grapples with M. Cousin, against
whom he undertakes to show, that “his argument to prove the correality
of his three Ideas proves directly the reverse;” “that the conditions
under which alone he allows intelligence to be possible, necessarily
exclude the possibility of a knowledge, not to say a conception, of the
Absolute;” and “that the Absolute, Edition: current; Page: [43] as
defined by him, is only a relative and a conditioned.”* Of this argument
in three parts, if we pass over (or, as our author would say, discount)
as much as is only ad hominem, what is of general application is as
follows:

sFirst:s M. Cousin and our author are agreed that there can be no
knowledge except “where there exists a plurality of terms;”[*] there are
at least a perceived and a perceiver, a knower and a known. But this
necessity of “difference and plurality” as a condition of knowledge, is
inconsistent with the meaning of the Absolute, which

as absolutely universal, is absolutely one. Absolute unity is
convertible with the absolute negation of plurality and difference. . .
. The condition of the Absolute as existing, and under which it must be
known, and the condition of intelligence, as capable of knowing, are
incompatible. For, if we suppose the Absolute cognisable: it must be
identified either—1°, with the subject knowing: or, 2°, with the object
known: or, 3°, with the indifference of both. The first hypothesis, and
the second, are contradictory of the Absolute. For in these the Absolute
is supposed to be known, either as contradistinguished from the knowing
subject, or as contradistinguished from the object known: in other
words, the Absolute is asserted to be known as absolute unity, i.e., as
the negation of all plurality, while the very act by which it is known,
affirms plurality as the condition of its own possibility. The third
hypothesis, on the other hand, is contradictory of the plurality of
intelligence; for if the subject and the object of consciousness be
known as one, a plurality of terms is not the necessary condition of
intelligence. The alternative is therefore necessary: either the
Absolute cannot be known or conceived at all; or our author is wrong in
subjecting thought to the conditions of plurality and difference.†

tSecondly:t In order to make the Absolute knowable by us, M. Cousin,
says the author, is obliged to present it in the light of an absolute
cause: now causation is a relation; therefore M. Cousin’s Absolute is
but a relative. Moreover, “what exists merely as a cause, exists merely
for the sake of something else—is not final in itself, but simply a mean
towards an end. . . . Abstractly considered, the effect is therefore
superior to the cause.” Hence an absolute cause “is dependent on the
effect for its perfection;” and, indeed,

even for its reality. For to what extent a thing exists necessarily as a
cause, to that extent it is not all-sufficient to itself; since to that
extent it is dependent on the effect, as on the condition through which
it realizes its existence; and what exists absolutely Edition: current;
Page: [44] as a cause, exists therefore in absolute dependence on the
effect for the reality of its existence. An absolute cause, in truth,
only exists in its effects: it never is, it always becomes: for it is an
existence in potentia, and not an existence in actu, except through and
by its effects. The Absolute is thus, at best, something merely
inchoative and imperfect.*

Let me ask, en passant, vwhy M. Cousin is under an obligation to thinkv
that if the Absolute, or, to speak plainly, if God, is only known to us
in the character of a cause, he must therefore “exist merely as a
cause,” and be merely “a mean towards an end?” It is surely possible to
maintain that the Deity is known to us only as he who feeds the ravens,
without supposing that the Divine Intelligence exists solely in order
that the ravens may be fed.†

In reviewing the series of arguments adduced by Sir W. Hamilton for the
incognoscibility and inconceivability of the Absolute, the first remark
that Edition: current; Page: [45] occurs is, that most of them lose
their application by simply substituting for the metaphysical
abstraction “The Absolute,” the more intelligible concrete expression
“Something Absolute.” If the first phrase has any meaning, it must be
capable of being expressed in terms of the other. When we are told of an
“Absolute” in the abstract, or of an Absolute Being, even though called
God, we are entitled, and if we would know what we are talking about,
are bound to ask, absolute in what? Do you mean, for example, absolute
in goodness, or absolute in knowledge? or do you, perchance, mean
absolute in ignorance, or absolute in wickedness? for any Edition:
current; Page: [46] one of these is as much an Absolute as any other.
And when you talk of something in the abstract which is called the
Absolute, does it means one, or more than one, of these? or does it,
peradventure, mean all of them? When (descending to a less lofty height
of abstraction) we speak of The Horse, we mean to include every object
of which the name horse can be predicated. Or, to take our examples from
the same region of thought to which the controversy belongs—when The
True or The Beautiful are spoken of, the phrase is meant to include all
things whatever that are true, or all things whatever that are
beautiful.* If this rule is good for other abstractions, it is good for
the Absolute. The word is devoid of meaning unless in reference to
predicates of some sort. What is absolute must be absolutely something;
absolutely this or absolutely that. The Absolute, then, ought to be a
genus comprehending whatever is absolutely anything—whatever possesses
any predicate in finished completeness. If we are told therefore that
there is some one Being who is, or which is, The Absolute—not something
absolute, but the Absolute itself,—the proposition can be understood in
no other sense than that the supposed Being possesses in absolute
completeness all predicates; is absolutely good, and absolutely bad;
absolutely wise, and absolutely stupid; and so forth.† The conception of
such a being, I will not say of such a God, is worse than a “fasciculus
of negations;” it is a fasciculus of contradictions: and our author
might have spared himself the Edition: current; Page: [47] trouble of
proving a thing to be unknowable, which cannot be spoken of but in words
implying the impossibility of its existence. To insist on such a truism
is not superfluous, for there have been philosophers who saw that this
must be the meaning of “The Absolute,” and yet accepted it as a reality.
“What kind of an Absolute Being is that,” asked Hegel, “which does not
contain in itself all that is actual, even evil included?”* Undoubtedly:
and it is therefore necessary to admit, either that there is no Absolute
Being, or that the law, that contradictory propositions cannot both be
true, does not apply to the Absolute. Hegel chose the latter side of the
alternative; and by this, among other things, has fairly earned the
honour which will probably be awarded to him by posterity, of having
logically extinguished transcendental metaphysics by a series of
reductiones ad absurdissimum.

What I have said of the Absolute is true, mutatis mutandis, of the
Infinite. This also is a phrase of no meaning, except in reference to
some particular predicate; it must mean the infinite in something—as in
size, in duration, or in power. These are intelligible conceptions. But
an abstract Infinite, a Being not merely infinite in one or in several
attributes, but which is “The Infinite” itself, must be not only
infinite in greatness, but also in littleness; its duration is not only
infinitely long, but infinitely short; it is not only infinitely awful,
but infinitely contemptible; it is the same mass of contradictions as
its companion the Absolute. There is no need to prove that neither of
them is knowable, since, if the universal law of Belief is of objective
validity, neither of them exists.

It is these unmeaning abstractions, however, these muddles of
self-contradiction, which alone our author has proved, against Cousin
and others, to be unknowable. He has shown, without difficulty, that we
cannot know The Infinite or The Absolute. He has not shown that we
cannot know a concrete reality as infinite or as absolute. Applied to
this latter thesis, his reasoning breaks down.

We have seen his principal argument, the one on which he substantially
relies. It is, that the Infinite and the Absolute are unknowable because
inconceivable, and inconceivable because the only notions we can have of
them are purely negative. If he is right in his antecedent, the
consequent Edition: current; Page: [48] follows. A conception made up of
negations is a conception of Nothing. It is not a conception at all.

But is a conception, by the fact of its being a conception of something
infinite, reduced to a negation? This is quite true of the senseless
abstraction “The Infinite.” That indeed is purely negative, being formed
by excluding from the concrete conceptions classed under it, all their
positive elements. But in place of “the Infinite,” put the idea of
Something infinite, and the argument collapses at once. “Something
infinite” is a conception which, like most of our complex ideas,
contains a negative element, but which contains positive elements also.
Infinite space, for instance: is there nothing positive in that? The
negative part of this conception is the absence of bounds. The positive
are, the idea of space, and of space greater than any finite space. So
of infinite duration: so far as it signifies “without end” it is only
known or conceived negatively; but in so far as it means time, and time
longer than any given time, the conception is positive. The existence of
a negative element in a conception does not make the conception itself
negative, and a non-entity. It would surprise most people to be told
that “the life eternal” is a purely negative conception; that
immortality is inconceivable. Those who hope for it for themselves have
a very positive conception of what they hope for. True, we cannot have
an adequate conception of space or duration as infinite; but between a
conception which though inadequate is real, and correct as far as it
goes, and the impossibility of any conception, there is a wide
difference. Sir W. Hamilton does not admit this difference. He thinks
the distinction without meaning. “To say that the infinite can be
thought, but only inadequately thought, is a contradiction in adjecto;
it is the same as saying that the infinite can be known, but only known
as finite.”* I answer, that to know it as greater than anything finite
is not to know it as finite. The conception of Infinite as that which is
greater than any given quantity, is a conception we all possess,
sufficient for all human purposes, and as genuine and good a positive
conception as one need wish to have. It is not adequate; our conception
of a reality never is. But it is positive; and the assertion that there
is nothing positive in the idea of infinity can only be maintained by
leaving out and ignoring, as Sir W. Hamilton invariably does, the very
element which constitutes the idea. Considering how many recondite laws
of physical nature, afterwards verified by experience, have been arrived
at by trains of mathematical reasoning grounded on what, if Sir W.
Hamilton’s doctrine be correct, is a non-existent conception, one would
be obliged to suppose that conjuring is a highly successful mode of the
investigation of nature. If, indeed, we trifle by setting up an
imaginary Infinite which is infinite in Edition: current; Page: [49]
nothing in particular, our notion of it is truly nothing, and a
“fasciculus of negations.” But this is a good example of the bewildering
effect of putting nonsensical abstractions in the place of concrete
realities. Would Sir W. Hamilton have said that the idea of God is but a
xnegation, or a fasciculus of negations?x As having nothing greater than
himself, he is indeed conceived negatively. But as himself greater than
all other real or imaginable existences, the conception of him is
positive.

Put Absolute instead of Infinite, and we come to the same result. “The
Absolute,” as already shown, is a heap of contradictions, but “absolute”
in reference to any given attribute, signifies the possession of that
attribute in finished perfection and completeness. A Being absolute in
knowledge, for example, is one who knows, in the literal meaning of the
term, everything. Who will pretend that this conception is negative, or
unmeaning to us? We cannot, indeed, form an adequate conception of a
being as knowing everything, since to do this we must have a conception,
or mental representation, of all that he knows. But neither have we an
adequate conception of any person’s finite knowledge. I have no adequate
conception of a shoemaker’s knowledge, since I do not know how to make
shoes: but my conception of a shoemaker and of his knowledge is a real
conception; it is not a fasciculus of negations. If I talk of an
Absolute Being (in the sense in which we are now employing the term) I
use words without meaning; but if I talk of a Being who is absolute in
wisdom and goodness, that is, who knows everything, and at all times
intends what is best for every sentient creature, I understand perfectly
what I mean: and however much the fact may transcend my conception, the
shortcoming can only consist in my being ignorant of the details of
which the reality is composed: as I have a positive, and may have a
correct conception of the empire of China, though I know not the aspect
of any of the places, nor the physiognomy of any of the human beings,
comprehended therein.

It appears, then, that the leading argument of Sir W. Hamilton to prove
the inconceivability and consequent unknowability of the Unconditioned,
namely, that our conception of it is merely negative, holds good only of
an abstract Unconditioned which cannot possibly exist, and not of a
concrete Being, supposed infinite and absolute in certain definite
attributes.* Let us now see if there be any greater value in his other
arguments.

Edition: current; Page: [50]
The first of them is,z that all knowledge is of things plural and
different; that a thing is only known to us by being known as different
from something else; from ourselves as knowing it, and also from other
known things which Edition: current; Page: [51] are not it. Here we have
at length something which the mind can rest on as a fundamental truth.
It is one of the profound psychological observations which the world
owes to Hobbes;[*] it is fully recognised both by M. Cousin and by Sir
W. Hamilton; and it has, more recently, been admirably illustrated and
applied by Mr. Bain and by Mr. Herbert Spencer. That to know a thing is
to distinguish it from other things, is, as I formerly remarked, one of
the truths which the very ambiguous expression “the relativity of human
knowledge” has been employed to denotea. With this doctrine I have no
quarrel. But Sir W. Hamilton proceeds to argue that the Absolute, being
“absolutely One,” cannot be known under the conditions of plurality and
difference, and as these are the acknowledged conditions of all our
knowledge, cannot, therefore, be known at all. There is here, as it
seems to me, a strange confusion of ideas. Sir W. Hamilton seems to mean
that, being absolutely One, it cannot be known as plural. But the
proposition that plurality is a condition of knowledge, does not mean
that the thing known must be known as itself plural. It means, that a
thing is only known, by being known as distinguished from something
else. The plurality required is not within the thing itself, but is made
up between itself and other things. Again, even if we concede that a
thing cannot be known at all unless known as plural, does it follow that
it cannot be known as plural because it is also One? bAre the One and
the Many, then,b incompatible things, instead of different aspects of
the same thing? Sir W. Hamilton surely does not mean by Absolute Unity,
an indivisible Unit; the minimum, instead of the maximum of Being. He
must mean, as M. Cousin certainly means, an absolute Whole; the Whole
which comprehends all things. If this be so, does not this Whole not
only admit of, but necessitate, the supposition of parts? Is not an
Unity which comprehends everything, ex vi termini known as a plurality,
and the most plural of all pluralities, plural in an unsurpassable
degree? If there is any meaning in the words, must not Absolute Unity be
Absolute cTotality, which is the highest degree of Pluralityc? There is
no escape from the alternative: dthe Absoluted either means a single
atom or monad, or it means Plurality in the extreme degree.

Though it is hardly needful, we will try this argument by the test we
Edition: current; Page: [52] applied to a previous one; by substituting
the concrete, God, for the abstract Absolute. Would Sir W. Hamilton have
said that God is not cognizable under the condition of Plurality—is not
known as distinguished from ourselves, and from the objects in nature?
Call any positive Thing by a name which expresses only its negative
predicates, and you may easily prove it under that name to be
incognizable and a non-entity. Give it back its full name (if Mr.
Mansel’s reverential feelings will permit), its positive attributes
reappear, and you find, to your surprise, that what is a reality can be
known as one.*

The next argument is chiefly directed against the doctrine of M. Cousin,
that we know the Absolute as Absolute Cause.[*] This doctrine, says Sir
W. Hamilton, destroys itself. The idea of a Cause is irreconcilable with
the Absolute, for a Cause is relative, and implies an Effect: this
Absolute, therefore, is not an Absolute at all. efThis would be
unanswerable, if by the Edition: current; Page: [53] Absolute we were
obliged to understand something which is not only “out of” all relation,
but incapable of ever passing into relation. But is this what any one
can possibly mean by the Absolute, who identifies it with the Creator?
Granting that the Absolute implies an existence in itself, standing in
no relation to anything: the only Absolute with which we are concerned,
or in which anybody believes, must not only be capable of entering into
relation with things, but must be capable of entering into any relation
whatever, except that of dependence, with anything. May it not be known
in some, at least, of those relations, and particularly in the relation
of a Cause? And if it is a “finished, perfected, completed”[*] Cause,
i.e. the most a cause that it is possible to be—the cause of everything
except itself—then, if known as such, it is known as an Absolute Cause.e
Has Sir W. Hamilton shown that an Absolute Cause, thus understood, is
inconceivable, or unknowable? No: all he shows is, that, though gcapable
of being known, itgf is known relatively to something else, namely, to
its effects; and that such knowledge of God is not of God in himself,
but of God in relation to his works. The truth is, M. Cousin’s doctrine
is too legitimate a product of the metaphysics common to them both, to
be capable of being refuted by Sir W. Hamilton. For this knowledge of
God in and by his effects, according to M. Cousin, is knowing him as he
is in himself: because the creative power whereby he causes, is in
himself, is inseparable from him, and belongs to his essence.[†] And as
far as I can see, the principles common to the two philosophers are as
good a warrant to M. Cousin for saying this, as to Sir W. Hamilton for
maintaining that extension and figure are h“essential attributes”h of
matter, and perceived as such by intuition.

I have now examined, with one exception, every argument (which is not
merely ad hominem) advanced by Sir W. Hamilton to prove against M.
Cousin the unknowableness of the Unconditioned. The argument which I
have reserved, is the emphatic and oracular one, that the Unconditioned
must be unthinkable, because “to think is to condition.”[‡] I have kept
this Edition: current; Page: [54] for the last, because it will occupy
us the longest time: for we must begin by finding the meaning of the
proposition; which cannot be done very briefly, so little help is
afforded us by the author.

According to the best notion I can form of the meaning of “condition,”
either as a term of philosophy or of common life, it means that on which
something else is contingent, or (more definitely) which being given,
something else exists, or takes place. I promise to do something on
condition that you do something else: that is, if you do this, I will do
that; if not, I will do as I please. A Conditional Proposition, in
logic, is an assertion in this form: “If so and so, then so and so.” The
conditions of a phænomenon are the various antecedent circumstances
which, when they exist simultaneously, are followed by its occurrence.
As all these antecedent circumstances must coexist, each of them in
relation to the others is a conditio sine quâ non; i.e. without it the
phænomenon will not follow from the remaining conditions, though it
perhaps may from some set of conditions totally different.

If this be the meaning of Condition, the Unconditioned should mean, that
which does not depend for its existence or its qualities on any
antecedent; in other words, it should be synonymous with iUncausedi.
This, however, cannot be the meaning intended by Sir W. Hamilton: for,
in a passage already quoted from his argument against Cousin, he speaks
of the effect as a condition of its cause. The condition, therefore, as
he understands it, needs not be an antecedent, and may be a subsequent
fact to that which it conditions.

He appears, indeed, in his writings generally, to reckon as a condition
of a thing, anything necessarily implied by it: and uses the word
Conditioned almost interchangeably with Relative. For relatives are
always in pairs: a term of relation implies the existence of two things,
the one which it is affirmed of, and another: parent implies child,
greater implies less, like implies another like, and vice versâ.
Relation is an abstract name for all concrete facts which concern more
than one object. Wherever, therefore, a relation is affirmed, or
anything is spoken of under a relative name, the existence of the
correlative may be called a condition of the relation, as well as of the
truth of the assertion. When, accordingly, Sir W. Hamilton calls an
effect a condition of its cause, he speaks intelligibly, and the
received use of the term affords him a certain amount of justification
for thus speaking.

But, if the Conditioned means the Relative, the Unconditioned must mean
its opposite; and in this acceptation, the Unconditioned would mean all
Noumena; Things in themselves, considered without reference to the
effects they produce in us, which are called their phænomenal agencies
or Edition: current; Page: [55] properties. Sir W. Hamilton does, very
frequently, seem to use the term in this sense. In denying all knowledge
of the Unconditioned, he often seems to be denying any other than
phænomenal knowledge of Matter or of Mind. Not only, however, he does
not consistently adhere to this meaning, but it directly conflicts with
the only approach he ever makes to a definition or an explanation of the
term. We have seen him declaring that the Unconditioned is the genus of
which the Infinite and the Absolute are the two species. But Things in
themselves are not all of them infinite and absolute. Matter and Mind,
as such, are neither the one nor the other. It is evident that Sir W.
Hamilton had never decided what extent he intended giving to the term
Unconditioned. Sometimes he gives it one degree of amplitude, sometimes
another. Between the meanings in which he uses it there is undoubtedly a
link of connexion; but this only makes the matter still worse than if
there were none. The phrase has that most dangerous kind of ambiguity,
in which the meanings, though essentially different, are so nearly
allied that the thinker unconsciously interchanges them one with
another.*

jThe probability is that when our author asserts that “to think is to
Edition: current; Page: [56] condition,” he uses the word Condition in
neither of these senses, but in a third meaning, equally familiar to
him, and recurring constantly in such phrases as “the conditions of our
thinking faculty,” “conditions of thought,” and the like. He means by
Conditions something similar to Kant’s Forms of Sense and Categories of
Understanding; a meaning more correctly expressed by another of his
phrases, “Necessary Laws of Thought.” He is applying to the mind the
scholastic maxim, “Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis.”
He means that our perceptive and conceptive faculties have their own
laws, which not only determine what we are capable of perceiving and
conceiving, but put into our perceptions and conceptions elements not
derived from the thing perceived or conceived, but from the mind itself:
That, therefore, we cannot at once infer that whatever we find in our
perception or conception of an object, has necessarily a prototype in
the object itself: and that we must, in each instance, determine this
question by philosophic investigation. According to this doctrine, which
no fault can be found with our author for maintaining, though often for
not carrying it far enough—the “conditions of thought” would mean the
attributes with which, it is supposed, the mind cannot help investing
every object of thought—the elements which, derived from its own
structure, cannot but enter into every conception it is able to form;
even if there should be nothing corresponding in the object which is the
prototype of the conception: though our author, in most cases, (therein
differing from Kant) believes that there is this correspondence.

We have here an intelligible meaning for the doctrine that to think is
to conditionk; and as Mr. Mansel, in his reply, guarantees this as the
true meaning of Sir W. Hamilton,[*] I will accept it as being so. If,
then (which I do not here discuss), the philosophical doctrine be true,
which was held partially by Sir W. Hamilton, and in a more
thorough-going manner by Kant, viz. that, in the act of thought, the
mind, by an à priori necessity, invests the object of thought with
attributes which are not in itself, but are created by the mind’s own
laws; and if we consent to call these necessities Edition: current;
Page: [57] of thought the conditions of thought; then evidently to think
is to condition, and to think the Unconditioned would be to think the
unthinkable. But the Unconditioned, in this application of the term, is
not identical with the Infinite plus the Absolute. The Infinite and the
Absolute are not necessarily, in this sense, unconditioned. The words
infinite and absolute, as I have already said, have no meaning save as
expressing some concrete reality or supposed reality, possessing
infinitely or absolutely attributes of some sort, which attributes, as
finite and limited, we are able to think. In thinking these attributes,
we are not able to divest ourselves of our mental conditions, but we can
think the attributes as surpassing the conditions. “To condition,” and
“to think under conditions,” are ambiguous phrases. An Infinite Being
may be thought, and is thought, with reference to the conditions, but
not as limited by them. The most familiar examples of the alleged
necessary conditions of thought, are Time and Space: we cannot, it is
affirmed, think anything, except in time and space. Now, an Infinite
Being is not thought as in time and space, if this means as occupying a
portion of time or a portion of space. But (substituting for Time the
word Duration, to get rid of the theological antithesis of Time and
Eternity) we do actually conceive God in reference to Duration and
Extension, namely, as occupying lthe whole of both; and these being
conceived as infinite, to conceive a Being as occupying the whole of
them is to conceive that Being as infinite. If thinking God as eternal
and omnipresent is thinking him in Space and Time, we do think God in
Space and Time: if thinking him as eternal and omnipresent is not
thinking him in Space and Time, we are capable of thinking something out
of Space and Time. Mr. Mansel may make his choice between the two
opinions. I have already shown that the ideas of infinite space and time
are real and positive conceptions:[*] that of a Being who is in all
Space and in all Time is no less so. To think anything, must of course
be to condition it by attributes which are themselves thinkable; but not
necessarily to condition it by a limited quantum of those attributes: on
the contrary, we may think it under a degree of them greater than all
limited degrees, and this is to think it as infinite.*kl

Edition: current; Page: [58]
If we now ask ourselves, as the result of this long discussion, what Sir
W. Hamilton can be considered as having accomplished in this celebrated
Essay, our answer must be: That he has established, more thoroughly
perhaps than he intended, the futility of all speculation respecting
those meaningless abstractions “The Infinite” and “The Absolute,”
notions contradictory in themselves, and to which no corresponding
realities do or can exist.*m Respecting the unknowableness, not of “the
Infinite,” or “the Absolute,” but of concrete persons or things
possessing infinitely or absolutely certain specific attributes, I
cannot think that our author has proved anything; nor do I think it
possible to prove them any otherwise unknowable, than that they can only
be known in their relations to us, and not as Noumena, or Things in
themselves. This, however, is true of the finite as well as of the
infinite, of the imperfect as well as of the completed or Edition:
current; Page: [59] absolute. Our author has merely proved the
uncognoscibility of a being which is nothing but infinite, or nothing
but absolute: and since nobody supposes that there is such a being, but
only beings which are something positive carried to the infinite, or to
the absolute, to have established this point cannot be regarded as any
great achievement. He has not even refuted M. Cousin; whose doctrine of
an intuitive cognition of the Deity,[*] like every other doctrine
relating to intuition, can only be disproved by showing it to be a
mistaken interpretation of facts; which, again, as we shall see
hereafter, can only be done by pointing out in what other way the
seeming perceptions may have originated, which are erroneously supposed
to be intuitive.

Edition: current; Page: [60]


CHAPTER V: What is Rejected as Knowledge by Sir William Hamilton, Brought Back Under the Name of Belief

we have found Sir W. Hamilton maintaining with great earnestness, and
taking as the basis of his philosophy, an opinion respecting the
limitation of human knowledge, which, if he did not mean so much by it
as the language in which he often clothed it seemed to imply, meant at
least this, that the Absolute, the Infinite, the Unconditioned, are
necessarily unknowable by us. I have discussed this opinion as a serious
philosophical dogma, expressing a definite view of the relation between
the universe and human apprehension, and fitted to guide us in
distinguishing the questions which it is of any avail to ask, from those
which are altogether closed to our investigations.

But had the doctrine, in the mind of Sir W. Hamilton, meant ten times
more than it did—had he upheld the relativity of human knowledge in the
fullest, instead of the scantiest meaning of which the words are
susceptible—the question would still have been reduced to naught, or to
a mere verbal controversy, by his admission of a second akinda of
intellectual conviction called Belief; which is anterior to knowledge,
is the foundation of it, and is not subject to its limitations; and
through the medium of which we may have, and are justified in having, a
full assurance of all the things which he has pronounced unknowable to
us; and this not exclusively by revelation, that is, on the supposed
testimony of a Being whom we have ground for trusting as veracious, but
by our natural faculties.

From some philosophers, this distinction would have the appearance of a
mere fetch—one of those transparent evasions which have sometimes been
resorted to by the assailants of received opinions, that they might have
an opportunity of ruining the rational foundations of a doctrine without
exposing themselves to odium by its direct denial: as the writers
against Christianity in the eighteenth century, after declaring some
doctrine to be contradictory to reason, and exhibiting it in the
absurdest possible light, were Edition: current; Page: [61] wont to add
that this was not of the smallest consequence, religion being an affair
of faith, not of reason. But Sir W. Hamilton evidently meant what he
says; he was expressing a serious conviction, and one of the tenets of
his philosophy: he really recognised bunder the name ofb Belief a
substantive source, I was going to say, of knowledge; I may at all
events say of trustworthy evidence. This appears in the following
passages:

The sphere of our belief is much more extensive than the sphere of our
knowledge, and therefore, when I deny that the Infinite can by us be
known, I am far from denying that by us it is, must, and ought to be,
believed. This I have indeed anxiously evinced, both by reasoning and
authority.*

St. Austin accurately says, “We know, what rests upon reason; but
believe, what rests upon authority.” But reason itself must rest at last
upon authority; for the original data of reason do not rest on reason,
but are necessarily accepted by reason on the authority of what is
beyond itself. These data are, therefore, in rigid propriety, Beliefs or
Trusts. Thus it is that in the last resort we must perforce
philosophically admit, that belief is the primary condition of reason,
and not reason the ultimate ground of belief. We are compelled to
surrender the proud Intellige ut credas of Abelard, to content ourselves
with the humble Crede ut intelligas of Anselm.†

And in another part of the same Dissertation, (he is arguing that we do
not believe, but know, the external world)—

If asked, indeed, how we know that we know it? how we know that what we
apprehend in sensible perception is, as consciousness assures us, an
object, external, extended, and numerically different from the conscious
subject? how we know that this object is not a mere mode of mind,
illusively presented to us as a mere mode of matter; then indeed we must
reply that we do not in propriety know that what we are compelled to
perceive as not-self is not a perception of self, and that we can only
on reflection believe such to be the case, in reliance on the original
necessity of so believing, imposed on us by our nature.‡

It thus appears that, in Sir W. Hamilton’s opinion, Belief is a
cconviction of higher authorityc than Knowledge; Belief is ultimate,
knowledge only derivative; Knowledge itself finally rests on Belief;
natural beliefs are the Edition: current; Page: [62] sole warrant for
all our knowledge. Knowledge, therefore, is an inferior ground of
assurance to natural Belief; and as we have beliefs which tell us that
we know, and without which we could not be assured of the truth of our
knowledge, so we have, and are warranted in having, beliefs beyond our
knowledge; beliefs respecting the Unconditioned—respecting that which is
in itself unknowable.

I am not now considering what it is that, in our author’s opinion, we
are bound to believe concerning the unknowable. What here concerns us
is, the nullity to which this doctrine reduces the position to which our
author seemed to cling so firmly—viz., that our knowledge is relative to
ourselves, and that we can have no knowledge of the infinite and
absolute. In telling us that it is impossible to the human faculties to
know anything about Things in themselves, we naturally suppose he
intends to warn us off the ground—to bid us understand that this subject
of enquiry is closed to us, and exhort us to turn our attention
elsewhere. It appears that nothing of the kind was intended: we are to
understand, on the contrary, that we may have the best grounded and most
complete assurance of the things which were declared unknowable—an
assurance not only equal or greater in degree, but the same in nature,
as we have for the truth of our knowledge: and that the matter dind
dispute was only whether this assurance or conviction shall be called
knowledge, or by another name. If this be all, I must say I think it not
of the smallest consequence. If no more than this be intended by the
“great axiom”[*] and the elaborate argument against Cousin, a great deal
of trouble has been taken to very little purpose; and the subject would
have been better left where Reid left it, who did not trouble himself
with nice distinctions between belief and knowledge, but was content to
consider us as knowing that which, by the constitution of our nature, we
are forced, with entire conviction, to believe. According to Sir W.
Hamilton, we believe premises, but know the conclusions from them. The
ultimate facts of consciousness are “given less in the form of
cognitions than of beliefs:” “Consciousness in its last analysis, in
other words our primary experience, is a faith.”* But if we know the
theorems of Euclid, and do not know the definitions and axioms on which
they rest, the word knowledge, thus singularly applied, must be taken in
a merely technical sense. eTo say that we believe the premises, but know
the conclusion, would be understood by every one as meaning that we had
other independent evidence of the conclusion. If we only know it through
the premises, the same name ought Edition: current; Page: [63] in reason
to be given to our assurance of both.*e In common language, when Belief
and Knowledge are distinguished, Knowledge is understood to mean
complete conviction, Belief a conviction somewhat short of complete; or
else we are said to believe when the evidence is probable (as that of
testimony), but to know, when it is intuitive, or demonstrative from
intuitive premises: we believe, for example, that there is a Continent
of America, but know that we are alive, that two and two make four, and
that the sum of any two sides of a triangle is greater than the third
side. This is a distinction of practical value: but in Sir W. Hamilton’s
use of the term, it is the intuitive convictions that are the Beliefs,
and those which are dependent and contingent upon them, compose our
knowledge. Whether a particular portion of our convictions, which are
not more certain, but if anything less certain, than the remainder, and
according to our author rest on the same ultimate basis, shall in
opposition to the common usage of mankind, receive exclusively the
appellation of knowledge, is at the most a question of terminology, and
can only be made to appear philosophically important by confounding
difference of name with difference of fact. That anything capable of
being said on such a subject should pass for a fundamental principle of
philosophy, and be fone of the chief sourcesf of the reputation of a
metaphysical system, is but an example how the mere forms of logic and
metaphysics can blind mankind to the total absence of their substance.

gIt must not be supposed, from anything which has been here said, that I
wish to abolish the distinction between Knowledge and Belief (meaning
True Belief) or maintain that it is necessarily a distinction without a
difference. Those terms are employed to denote more than one real
difference, and neither of them can conveniently be dispensed with in
philosophy.† What concerns us in the present chapter is not the
rationale of the distinction between knowledge and belief, but whether
that distinction Edition: current; Page: [64] is relevant to the
question between Sir W. Hamilton and M. Cousin about the Infinite and
the Absolute; and whether Sir W. Hamilton is warranted in giving back
under the name of Belief, the assurance or conviction respecting these
objects which he refuses under the name of knowledge. My position is,
that the Infinite and Absolute which Sir W. Hamilton has been proving to
be unknowable, being made up of contradictions, are as incapable of
being believed as of being known; that the only attitude in reference to
them, of any intellect which apprehends the meaning of language, is that
of disbelief. On the other hand, there are Infinites and Absolutes
which, not being self-contradictory, admit of being believed, namely,
concrete realities supposed to be infinite or absolute in respect of
certain attributes: but Sir W. Hamilton, as I maintain, has done nothing
towards proving that Edition: current; Page: [65] such concrete
realities cannot be known, in the way in which we know other things,
namely, in their relations to us. When, therefore, he affirms that
though the Infinite cannot by us be known, “by us it is, must, and ought
to be believed,”[*] I answer, that the Infinite which, as he has so
laboriously proved, cannot be known, neither is, must, nor ought to be
believed; not because it cannot be known, but because there exists no
such thing for us to know; unless, with Hegel, we hold that the Absolute
is not subject to the Law of Contradiction, but is at once a real
existence and the synthesis of contradictories. And, on the other hand,
the Infinite and Absolute which are really capable of being believed,
are also, for anything Sir W. Hamilton has shown to the contrary,
capable of being, in certain of their aspects, known.g

Edition: current; Page: [66]


CHAPTER VI: The Philosophy of the Conditioned

the “philosophy of the conditioned,” in its wider sense, includes all
the doctrines that we have been discussing. In its narrower, it
consists, I think, mainly of a single proposition, which Sir W. Hamilton
often reiterates, and insists upon as a fundamental law of human
intellect. Though suggested by Kant’s Antinomies of Speculative Reason,
in the form which it bears in Sir W. Hamilton’s writings it belongs, I
believe, originally to himself. No doctrine which he has anywhere laid
down is more characteristic of his mode of thought, and none is more
strongly associated with his fame.

For the better understanding of this theory, it is necessary to premise
some explanations respecting another doctrine, which is also his, but
not peculiar to him. He protests, frequently and with emphasis, against
the notion that whatever is inconceivable must be false. “There is no
ground,” he says, “for inferring a certain fact to be impossible, merely
from our inability to conceive its possibility.”* I regard this opinion
as perfectly just. It is one of the psychological truths, highly
important, and by no means generally recognised, which frequently meet
us in his writings, and which give them, in my eyes, most of their
philosophical value. I am obliged to add, that though he often furnishes
a powerful statement and vindication of such truths, he seldom or never
consistently adheres to them. Too often what he has affirmed in generals
is taken back in details, and arguments of his own are found to rest on
philosophical commonplaces which he has himself repudiated and refuted.
I am afraid that the present is one of these cases, and that Sir W.
Hamilton will sometimes be found contending that a thing cannot possibly
be true because we cannot conceive it: but at all events he disclaims
any such inference, and broadly lays down, that things not only may be,
but are, of which it is impossible for us to conceive even the
possibility.

Before showing how this proposition is developed into the “Philosophy of
the Conditioned,” let us make the ground safe before us, by bestowing a
Edition: current; Page: [67] brief consideration upon the proposition
itself, its meaning, and the foundations on which it rests.

We cannot conclude anything to be impossible, because its possibility is
inconceivable to us; for two reasons. First; what seems to us
inconceivable, and, so far as we are personally concerned, may really be
so, usually owes its inconceivability only to a strong association.
When, in a prolonged experience, we have often had a particular
sensation or mental impression, and never without a certain other
sensation or impression immediately accompanying it, there grows up so
firm an adhesion between our ideas of the two, that we are unable to
think of the former without thinking the latter in close combination
with it. And unless other parts of our experience afford us some analogy
to aid in disentangling the two ideas, our incapacity of imagining the
one fact without the other grows, or is prone to grow, into a belief
that the one cannot exist without the other. This is the law of
Inseparable Association, an element of our nature of which few have
realized to themselves the full power. It was for the first time largely
applied to the explanation of the more complicated mental phænomena by
Mr. James Mill;[*] and is, in an especial manner, the key to the
phænomenon of inconceivability. As that phænomenon only exists because
our powers of conception are determined by our limited experience,
Inconceivables are incessantly becoming Conceivables as our experience
becomes enlarged. There is no need to go farther for an example than the
case of Antipodes. This physical fact was, to the early speculators,
inconceivable: not, of course, the fact of persons in that position;
this the mind could easily represent to itself; but the possibility
that, being in that position, and not being nailed on, nor having any
glutinous substance attached to their feet, they could help falling off.
Here was an inseparable, though, as it proved to be, not an indissoluble
association, which while it continued made a real fact what is called
inconceivable; and because inconceivable, it was unhesitatingly believed
to be impossible. Inconceivabilities of similar character have, at many
periods, obstructed the reception of new scientific truths: the
Newtonian system had to contend against several of them; and we are not
warranted in assigning a different origin and character to those which
still subsist, because the experience that would be capable of removing
them has not occurred. If anything which is now inconceivable by us were
shown to us as a fact, we should soon find ourselves able to conceive
it. We should even be in danger of going over to the opposite error, and
believing that the negation of it is inconceivable. There are many cases
in the history Edition: current; Page: [68] of science (I have dilated
on some of them in another work)[*] where something which had once been
inconceivable, and which people had with great difficulty learnt to
conceive, becoming itself fixed in the bonds of an inseparable
association, scientific men came to think that it alone was conceivable,
and that the conflicting hypothesis which all mankind had believed, and
which a vast majority were probably believing still, was inconceivable.
In Dr. Whewell’s writings on the Inductive Sciences, this transition of
thought is not only exemplified but defended.[†] Inconceivability is
thus a purely subjective thing, arising from the mental antecedents of
the individual mind, or from those of the human mind generally at a
particular period, and cannot give us any insight into the possibilities
of Nature.

But, secondly, aeven assuminga that inconceivability is not solely the
consequence of limited experience, but that some incapacities of
conceiving are inherent in the mind, and inseparable from it; this would
not entitle us to infer, that what we are thus incapable of conceiving
cannot exist. Such an inference would only be warrantable, if we could
know à priori that we must have been created capable of conceiving
whatever is capable of existing: that the universe of thought and that
of reality, the Microcosm and the Macrocosm (as they once were called)
must have been framed in complete correspondence with one another. That
this is really the case has been laid down expressly in some systems of
philosophy, by implication in more, and is the foundation (among others)
of the systems of Schelling and Hegel: but an assumption more destitute
of evidence could scarcely be made, nor can one easily imagine any
evidence that could prove it, unless it were revealed from above.

What is inconceivable, then, cannot therefore be inferred to be false.
But let us vary the terms of the proposition, and express it thus: what
is inconceivable, is not therefore incredible. We have now a statement,
which may mean either exactly the same as the other, or more. It may
mean only that our inability to conceive a thing, does not entitle us to
deny its possibility, nor its existence. Or it may mean that a thing’s
being inconceivable to us is no reason against our believing, and
legitimately believing, that it actually is. This is a very different
proposition from the preceding. Sir W. Edition: current; Page: [69]
Hamilton, as we have said, goes this length. It is now necessary to
enter more minutely than at first seemed needful, into the meaning of
“inconceivable;” which, like almost all the metaphysical terms we are
forced to make use of, is weighed down with ambiguities.

Reid pointed out and discriminated two meanings of the verb “to
conceive,”* giving rise to two different meanings of inconceivable. But
Sir W. Hamilton uses “to conceive” in three meanings, and has
accordingly three meanings for Inconceivable; though he does not give
the smallest hint to his readers, nor seems ever to suspect, that the
three are not one and the same.

The first meaning of Inconceivable is, that of which the mind cannot
form to itself any representation; either (as in the case of Noumena)
because no attributes are given, out of which a representation could be
framed, or because the attributes given are incompatible with one
another—are such as the mind cannot put together in a single image. Of
this last case numerous instances present themselves to the most cursory
glance. The fundamental one is that of a simple contradiction. We cannot
represent anything to ourselves as at once being something, and not
being it; as at once having, and not having, a given attribute. The
following are other examples. We cannot represent to ourselves time or
space as having an end. We cannot represent to ourselves two and two as
making five; nor two straight lines as Edition: current; Page: [70]
enclosing a space. We cannot represent to ourselves a round square;
bnorb a body all black, and at the same time all white.

These things are literally inconceivable to us, our minds and our
experience being what they are. Whether they would be inconceivable if
our minds were the same but our experience different, is open to
discussion. A distinction may be made, which, I think, will be found
pertinent to the question. That the same thing should at once be and not
be—that identically the same statement should be both true and false—is
not only inconceivable to us, but we cannot cimaginec that it could be
made conceivable. We cannot attach sufficient meaning to the
proposition, to be able to represent to ourselves the supposition of a
different experience on this matter. We cannot therefore even entertain
the question, whether the incompatibility is in the original structure
of our minds, or is only put there by our experience. The case is
otherwise in all the other examples of inconceivability. Our incapacity
of conceiving the same thing as A and not A, may be primordial; but our
inability to conceive A without B, is because A, by experience or
teaching, has become inseparably associated with B: and our inability to
conceive A with C, is, because, by experience or teaching, A has become
inseparably associated with some mental representation which includes
the negation of C. Thus all inconceivabilities may be reduced to
inseparable association, combined with the original inconceivability of
a direct contradiction. All the cases which I have cited as instances of
inconceivability, and which are the strongest I could have chosen, may
be resolved in this manner. We cannot conceive a round square, not
merely because no such object has ever presented itself in our
experience, for that would not be enough. Neither, for anything we know,
are the two ideas in themselves incompatible. To conceive a round
square, or to conceive a body all black and yet all white, would only be
to conceive two different sensations as produced in us simultaneously by
the same object; a conception familiar to our experience; and we should
probably be as well able to conceive a round square as a hard square, or
a heavy square, if it were not that, in our uniform experience, at the
instant when a thing begins to be round it ceases to be square, so that
the beginning of the one impression is inseparably associated with the
departure or cessation of the other.* Thus our inability to form a
conception always arises from our being compelled Edition: current;
Page: [71] to form another contradictory to it. We cannot conceive time
or space as having an end, because the idea of any portion whatever of
time or space is inseparably associated with the idea of a time or space
beyond it. We cannot conceive two and two as five, because an
inseparable association compels us to conceive it as four; and it cannot
be conceived as both, because four and five, like round and square, are
so related in our experience, that each is associated with the
cessation, or removal, of the other. We cannot conceive two straight
lines as enclosing a space, because enclosing a space means approaching
and meeting a second time; and the mental image of two straight lines
which have once met is inseparably associated with the representation of
them as diverging. Thus it is not wholly without ground that the notion
of a round square, and the assertion that two and two make five, or that
two straight lines can enclose a space, are said, in common and even in
scientific parlance, to involve a contradiction. The statement is not
logically correct, for contradiction is only between a positive
representation and its negative. But the impossibility of uniting
contradictory conceptions in the same representation, is the real ground
of the inconceivability in these cases. And we should probably have no
difficulty in putting together the two ideas supposed to be
incompatible, if our experience had not first inseparably associated one
of them with the contradictory of the other.*

Edition: current; Page: [72]
Thus far, of the first kind of Inconceivability; the first and most
proper meaning in which the word is used. But there is another meaning,
in which things are often said to be inconceivable which the mind is
under no Edition: current; Page: [73] incapacity of representing to
itself in an image. It is often said, that we are unable to conceive as
possible that which, in itself, we are perfectly well able to conceive:
we are able, it is admitted, to conceive it as an imaginary Edition:
current; Page: [74] object, but unable to conceive it realized. This
extends the term inconceivable to every combination of facts which to
the mind simply contemplating it, appears incredible.* It was in this
sense that Antipodes were inconceivable. They could be figured in
imagination; they could even be painted, or Edition: current; Page: [75]
modelled in clay. The mind could put the parts of the conception
together, butg could not realize the combination as one which could
exist in nature. The cause of the inability was the powerful tendency,
generated by experience, to expect falling off, when a body, not of
adhesive quality, was in contact only with the under side of another
body. The association was not so powerful as to disable the mind from
conceiving the body as holding on; doubtless because other facts of our
experience afforded models on which such a conception could be framed.
But though not disabled from conceiving the combination, the mind was
disabled from believing it. The difference between belief and
conception, and between the conditions of belief and those of simple
conception, are psychological questions into which I do not enter. It is
sufficient that inability to believe can coexist with ability to
conceive, and that a mental association between two facts which is not
intense enough to make their separation unimaginable, may yet create,
and, if there are no counter associations, always does create, more or
less of difficulty in believing that the two can exist apart: a
difficulty often amounting to a local or temporary impossibility.

This is the second meaning of Inconceivability; which by Reid is
carefully distinguished from the first,[*] but his editor Sir W.
Hamilton employs the word in both senses indiscriminately.* How he came
to miss the distinction is tolerably obvious to any one who is familiar
with his writings, and especially with his theory of Judgment; but needs
not be pointed out here. It is more remarkable that he gives itoi the
term a third sense, Edition: current; Page: [76] answering to a third
signification of the verb “to conceive.” To conceive any thing, has with
him not only its two ordinary meanings—to represent the thing as an
image, and to be able to realize it as possible—but an additional one,
which he denotes by various phrases. One of his common expressions for
it is, “to construe to the mind in thought.” This, he often says, can
only be done “through a higher notion.” “We think, we conceive, we
comprehend a thing only as we think it as within or under something
else.”* So that a fact, or a supposition, is conceivable or
comprehensible by us (conceive and comprehend being with him in this
case synonymous) only by being reduced to some more general fact, as a
particular case under it. Again, “to conceive the possibility” of a
thing, is defined “conceiving it as the consequent of a certain
reason.”† The inconceivable, in this third sense, is simply the
inexplicable. Accordingly all first truths are, according to Sir W.
Hamilton, inconceivable. “The primary data of consciousness, as
themselves the conditions under which all else is comprehended, are
necessarily themselves incomprehensible . . . that is . . . we are
unable to conceive through a higher notion how that is possible, which
the deliverance avouches actually to be.”‡ And we shall find him arguing
things to be inconceivable, merely on the ground that we have no higher
notion under which to class them. This use of the word inconceivable,
being a complete perversion of it from its established meanings, I
decline to recognise. If all the general truths which we are most
certain of are to be called inconceivable, the word no longer serves any
purpose. Inconceivable is not to be confounded with unprovable, or
unanalysable. A truth which is not inconceivable in either of the
received meanings of the term—a truth which is completely apprehended,
and without difficulty believed, I cannot consent to call inconceivable
merely because we cannot account for it, or deduce it from a higher
truth.§

Edition: current; Page: [77]
These being Sir W. Hamilton’s three kinds of inconceivability; is the
inconceivability of a proposition in any of these senses, consistent
with believing it to be true? The third kind lis avowedly compatible not
only with belief, but with our strongest and most natural beliefsl. An
inconceivable Edition: current; Page: [78] of the second kind can not
only be believed, but believed with full understanding. In this case we
are perfectly able to represent to ourselves mentally what is said to be
inconceivable; only, from an association in our mind, it does not look
credible: but, this association being the result of experience or of
teaching, contrary experience or teaching is able to dissolve it; and
even before this has been done—while the thing still feels incredible,
the intellect may, on sufficient evidence, accept it as true. An
inconceivable of the first kind, inconceivable in the proper sense of
the term—that which the mind is actually unable to put together in a
representation—may nevertheless be believed, if we attach any meaning to
it, but cannot be said to be believed with understanding. We cannot
believe it on direct evidence, i.e. through its being presented in our
experience, for if it were so presented it would immediately cease to be
inconceivable. We may believe it because its falsity would be
inconsistent with something which we otherwise know to be true. Or we
may believe it because it is affirmed by some one wiser than ourselves,
who, we suppose, may have had the experience which has not reached us,
and to whom it may thus have become conceivable. But the belief is
without understanding, for we form no mental picture of what we believe.
We do not so much believe the fact, as believe that we should believe it
if we could have the needful presentation in our experience; and that
some other being has, or may have, had that presentation. Our inability
to conceive it, is no argument whatever for its being false, and no
hindrance to our believing it, to the above-mentioned extent.

But though facts, which we cannot join together in an image, may be
united in the universe, and though we may have sufficient ground for
believing that they are so united in point of fact, it is impossible to
believe a proposition which conveys to us no meaning at all. If any one
says to me, Humpty Dumpty is an Abracadabra, I neither knowing what is
meant by an Abracadabra, nor what is meant by Humpty Dumpty, I may, if I
have confidence in my informant, believe that he means something, and
that the something which he means is probably true: but I do not believe
the very thing which he means, since I am entirely ignorant what it is.
Propositions of this kind, the unmeaningness of which lies in the
subject or predicate, are not those generally described as
inconceivable. The unmeaning propositions spoken of under that name, are
usually those which involve contradictions. That the same thing is and
is not—that it did and did not rain at the same time and place, that a
man is both alive and not alive, are forms of words which carry no
signification to my mind. As Sir W. Hamilton truly says,* one half of
the statement simply sublates or takes away the meaning which the other
half has laid down. The unmeaningness here resides in the Edition:
current; Page: [79] copula. The word is has no meaning, except as
exclusive of is not. The case is more hopeless than that of Humpty
Dumpty, for no explanation by the speaker of what the words mean can
make the assertion intelligible. Whatever may be meant by a man, and
whatever may be meant by alive, the statement that a man can be alive
and not alive is equally without meaning to me. I cannot make out
anything which the speaker intends me to believe. The sentence affirms
nothing of which my mind can take hold. Sir W. Hamilton, indeed,
maintains the contrary. He says, “When we conceive the proposition that
A is not A, we clearly comprehend the separate meaning on the terms A
and not A, and also the import of the assertion of their identity.”* We
comprehend the separate meaning of the terms, but as to the meaning of
the assertion, I think we only comprehend what the same form of words
would mean in another case. The very import of the form of words is
inconsistent with its meaning anything when applied to terms of this
particular kind. Let any one who doubts this, attempt to define what is
meant by applying a predicate to a subject, when the predicate and the
subject are the negation of one another. To make sense of the assertion,
some new meaning must be attached to is or is not, and if this be done
the proposition is no longer the one presented for our assent. Here,
therefore, is one kind of inconceivable proposition which nothing
whatever can make credible to us. Not being able to attach any meaning
to the proposition, we are equally incompetent to assert that it is, or
that it is not, possible in itself. But we have not the power of
believing it; and there the matter must rest.

We are now prepared to enter on the peculiar doctrine of Sir W.
Hamilton, called the Philosophy of the Conditioned. Not content with
maintaining that things which from the natural and fundamental laws of
the human mind are for ever inconceivable to us, may, for aught we know,
be true, he goes farther, and says, we know that many such things are
true. “Things there are which may, nay must, be true, of which the
understanding is wholly unable to construe to itself the possibility.”†
Of what nature these things are, is declared in many parts of his
writings, in the form of a general law. It is thus stated in the review
of Cousin:

The Conditioned is the mean between the two extremes—two
unconditionates, exclusive of each other, neither of which can be
conceived as possible, but of which, on the principles of contradiction
and excluded middle, one must be admitted as necessary. . . . The mind
is not represented as conceiving two propositions subversive of each
other as equally possible; but only, as unable to understand as
possible, either of the extremes; one of which, however, on the ground
of their mutual repugnance, it is compelled to recognise as true.‡

In the “Dissertations on Reid” he enunciates, in still more general
terms, Edition: current; Page: [80] as “the Law of the Conditioned: That
all positive thought lies between two extremes, neither of which we can
conceive as possible, and yet as mutual contradictories, the one or the
other we must recognise as necessary.” And it is (he says) “from this
impotence of intellect” that “we are unable to think aught as absolute.
Even absolute relativity is unthinkable.”*

The doctrine is more fully expanded in the Lectures on Logic, from which
I shall quote at greater length.

All that we can positively think . . . lies between two opposite poles
of thought, which, as exclusive of each other, cannot, on the principles
of Identity and Contradiction, both be true, but of which, on the
principle of Excluded Middle, one or the other must. Let us take, for
example, any of the general objects of our knowledge. Let us take body,
or rather, since body as extended is included under extension, let us
take extension itself, or space. Now extension alone will exhibit to us
two pairs of contradictory inconceivables,† that is, in all, four
incomprehensibles, but of which, though all are equally unthinkable . .
. we are compelled, by the law of Excluded Middle, to admit some two as
true and necessary.

Extension may be viewed either as a whole or as a part; and in each
aspect it affords us two incogitable contradictions. 1st. Taking it as a
whole: space, it is evident, must either be limited, that is, have an
end, and circumference; or unlimited, that is, have no end, no
circumference. These are contradictory suppositions; both, therefore,
cannot, but one must, be true. Now let us try positively to comprehend,
positively to conceive,‡ the possibility of either of these two mutually
exclusive alternatives. Can we represent, or realize in thought,
extension as absolutely limited? in other words, can we mentally hedge
round the whole of space, conceive§ it absolutely bounded, that is, so
that beyond its boundary there is no outlying, no surrounding space?
This is impossible. Whatever compass of space we may enclose by any
limitation of thought, we shall find that we have no difficulty in
transcending these limits. Nay, we shall find that we cannot but
transcend them; for we are unable to think any extent of space except as
within a still ulterior space, of which, let us think till the powers of
thinking fail, we can never reach the circumference. It is thus
impossible for us to think space as a totality, that is, as absolutely
bounded, but all-containing. We may, therefore, lay down this first
extreme as inconceivable.¶ We cannot think space as limited.

Let us now consider its contradictory: can we comprehend the possibility
of infinite or unlimited space? To suppose this is a direct
contradiction in terms; it is to comprehend the incomprehensible. We
think, we conceive,∥ we comprehend a thing, only as we think it as
within or under something else; but to do this of the infinite is to
think the infinite as finite, which is contradictory and absurd.

Edition: current; Page: [81]
Now here it may be asked, how have we then the word infinite? How have
we the notion which this word expresses? The answer to this question is
contained in the distinction of positive and negative thought. We have a
positive concept of a thing when we think it by the qualities of which
it is the complement. But as the attribution of qualities is an
affirmation, as affirmation and negation are relatives, and as relatives
are known only in and through each other, we cannot, therefore, have a
consciousness of the affirmation of any quality, without having at the
same time the correlative consciousness of its negation. Now, the one
consciousness is a positive, the other consciousness is a negative
notion. But, in point of fact, a negative notion is only the negation of
a notion; we think only by the attribution of certain qualities, and the
negation of these qualities and of this attribution is simply, in so
far, a denial of our thinking at all. As affirmation always suggests
negation, every positive notion must likewise suggest a negative notion:
and as language is the reflex of thought, the positive and negative
notions are expressed by positive and negative names. Thus it is with
the infinite. The finite is the only object of real or positive thought;
it is that alone which we think by the attribution of determinate
characters; the infinite, on the contrary, is conceived only by the
thinking away of every character by which the finite was conceived: in
other words, we conceive it only as inconceivable.* . . .

It is manifest that we can no more realize the thought or conception of
infinite, unbounded, or unlimited space, than we can realize the
conception of a finite or absolutely bounded space.† But these two
inconceivables are reciprocal contradictories: we are unable to
comprehend‡ the possibility of either, while, however, on the principle
of Excluded Middle, one or other must be admitted. . . .

It is needless to show that the same result is given by the experiment
made on extension considered as a part, as divisible. Here if we attempt
to divide extension in thought, we shall neither, on the one hand,
succeed in conceiving the possibility§ of an absolute minimum of space,
that is, a minimum ex hypothesi extended, but which cannot be conceived
as divisible into parts,¶ nor, on the other, of carrying on this
division to infinity. But as these are contradictory opposites,∥

one or the other of them must be true.

In other passages our author applies the same order of considerations to
Time, saying that we can neither conceive an absolute commencement, nor
an infinite regress; an absolute termination, nor a duration infinitely
prolonged; though either the one or the other must be true. And again,
of the Will: we cannot, he says, conceive the Will to be Free, because
this would be to conceive an event uncaused, or, in other words, an
absolute commencement: neither can we conceive the Will not to be Free,
because this would be supposing an infinite regress from effect to
cause. The will, however, must be either free or not free; and in this
case, he thinks we have Edition: current; Page: [82] independent grounds
for deciding one way, namely, that it is free, because if it were not,
we could not be accountable for our actions, which our consciousness
assures us that we are.[*]

This, then, is the Philosophy of the Conditioned: into the value of
which it now remains to enquire.

In the case of each of the Antinomies which the author presents, he
undertakes to establish two things: that neither of the rival hypotheses
can be conceived by us as possible, and that we are nevertheless certain
that one or the other of them is true.o

To begin with his first position, that we can neither conceive an end to
space, nor space without end.

That we are unable to conceive an end to space I fully acknowledge. To
account for this there needs no inherent incapacity. We are disabled
from forming this conception, by known psychological laws. We have never
perceived any object, or any portion of space, which had not other space
beyond it. And we have been perceiving objects and portions of space
from the moment of birth. How then could the idea of an object, or of a
portion of space, escape becoming inseparably associated with the idea
of additional space beyond? Every instant of our lives helps to rivet
this association, and we never have had a single experience tending to
disjoin it. The association, under the present constitution of our
existence, is indissoluble. But we have no ground for believing that it
is so from the original structure of our minds. We can suppose that in
some other state of existence we might be transported to the end of
space, when, being apprised of what had happened by some impression of a
kind utterly unknown to us now, we should at the same instant become
capable of conceiving the fact, and learn that it was true. After some
experience of the new impression, the fact of an end to space would seem
as natural to us as the revelations of sight to a person born blind,
after he has been long enough couched to have become familiar with them.
But as this cannot happen in our present state of existence, the
experience which would render the association dissoluble is never
obtained; and an end to space remains inconceivable.

One half, then, of our author’s first proposition, must be conceded. But
the other half? Is it true that we are incapable of conceiving infinite
space? I have already shown strong reasons for dissenting from this
assertion: and those which our author, in this and other places, assigns
in its support, seem to me quite untenable.

He says, “we think, we conceive, we comprehend, a thing, only as we
think it as within or under something else. But to do this of the
infinite is to Edition: current; Page: [83] think the infinite as
finite, which is contradictory and absurd.” When we come to Sir W.
Hamilton’s account of the Laws of Thought, we shall have some remarks to
make on the phrase “to think one thing within or under another;” a
favourite expression with the Transcendental school, one of whose
characteristicsp is, that they are always using the prepositions in a
metaphorical sense. But granting that to think a thing is to think it
under something else, we must understand this statement as it is
qinvariablyq interpreted by those who employ it. According to them, we
think a thing when we make any affirmation respecting it, and we think
it under the notion which we affirm of it. Whenever we judge, we think
the subject under the predicate. Consequently when we say “God is good,”
we think God under the notion “good.” Is this, in our author’s opinion,
to think the infinite as finite, and hence “contradictory and absurd?”

If this doctrine hold, it follows that we cannot predicate anything of a
subject which we regard as being in any of its attributes, infinite. We
are unable, without falling into a contradiction, to assert anything not
only of God, but of Time, and of Space. Considered as a reductio ad
absurdum, this is sufficient. But we may go deeper into the matter, and
deny the statement that to think anything “under” the notion expressed
by a general term is to think it as finite. None of our general
predicates are, in the proper sense of the term, finite; they are all,
at least potentially, infinite. “Good” is not a name for the things or
persons possessing that attribute which exist now, or at any other given
moment, and which are only a finite aggregate. It is a name for all
those which ever did, or ever will, or even in hypothesis or fiction
can, possess the attribute. This is not a limited number. It is the very
nature and constituent character of a general notion that its extension
(as Sir W. Hamilton would say) is rwithout limitr.

But he might perhaps say, that though its extension, consisting of the
possible individuals included in it, smays be infinite, its
comprehension, the set of attributes contained in it (or as I prefer to
say, connoted by its name) is a limited quantity. Undoubtedly it is. But
see what follows. If, because the comprehension of a general notion is
finite, anything infinite cannot without contradiction be thought under
it, the consequence is, that a being possessing in an infinite degree a
given attribute, cannot be thought under that very attribute. Infinite
goodness cannot be thought as goodness, because that would be to think
it as finite. Surely there must be some great confusion of ideas in the
premises, when this comes out as the conclusion.

Our author goes on to repeat the argument used in his reply to Cousin,
Edition: current; Page: [84] that Infinite Space is inconceivable,
because all the conception we are able to form of it is negative, and a
negative conception is the same as no conception. “The infinite is
conceived only by the thinking away of every character by which the
finite was conceived.” To this assertion I oppose my former reply.
Instead of thinking away every character of the finite, we think away
only the idea of an end, or a boundary. Sir W. Hamilton’s proposition is
true of “The Infinite,” the meaningless abstraction; but it is not true
of Infinite Space. In trying to form a conception of that, we do not
think away its positive characters. We leave to it the character of
Space; all that belongs to it as space; its three dimensions, with all
their geometrical properties. We leave to it also a character which
belongs to it as Infinite, that of being greater than any tfinitet
space. If an object which has these well-marked positive attributes is
unthinkable, because it has a negative attribute as well, the number of
thinkable objects must be remarkably small. Nearly all our positive
conceptions which are at all complex, include negative attributes. I do
not mean merely the negatives which are implied in affirmatives, as in
saying that snow is white we imply that it is not black; but independent
negative attributes superadded to these, and which are so real that they
are often the essential characters, or differentiæ, of classes. Our
conception of dumb, is of something which cannot speak; of the brutes,
as of creatures which have not reason; of the mineral kingdom, as the
part of Nature which has not organization and life; of immortal, as that
which never dies. Are all these examples of the Inconceivable? So false
is it that to think a thing under a negation is to think it as
unthinkable.

In other passages, Sir W. Hamilton argues that we cannot conceive
infinite space, because we should require infinite time to do it in. It
would of course require infinite time to carry our thoughts in
succession over every part of infinite space. But on how many of our
finite conceptions do we think it necessary to perform such an
operation? Let us try the doctrine upon a complex whole, short of
infinite; such as the number 695, 788. Sir W. Hamilton would not, I
suppose, have maintained that this number is inconceivable. How long did
he think it would take to go over every separate unit of this whole, so
as to obtain a perfect knowledge of that exact sum, as different from
all other sums, either greater or less? Would he have said that we could
have no conception of the sum until this process had been gone through?
We could not, indeed, have an adequate conception. Accordingly we never
have an adequate conception of any real thing. But we have a real
conception of an object if we conceive it by any of its attributes that
are sufficient to distinguish it from all other things. We have a
conception of any large number, when we have conceived it by some one of
its modes of composition, such as that indicated by the position of its
digits. We seldom Edition: current; Page: [85] get nearer than this to
an adequate conception of any large number. But for all intellectual
purposes, this limited conception is sufficient: for it not only enables
us to avoid confounding the number, in our calculations, with any other
numerical whole—even with those so nearly equal to it that no difference
between them would be perceptible by sight or touch, unless the units
were drawn up in a manner expressly adapted for displaying it—but we can
also, by means of this attribute of the number, ascertain and add to our
conception as many more of its properties as we please. If, then, we can
obtain a real conception of a finite whole without going through all its
component parts, why deny us a real conception of an infinite whole
because to go through them all is impossible? Not to mention that even
in the case of the finite number, though the units composing it are
limited, yet, Number being infinite, the possible modes of deriving any
given number from other numbers are numerically infinite; and as all
these are necessary parts of an adequate conception of any number, to
render our conception even of this finite whole perfectly adequate would
also require an infinite time.*

But though our conception of infinite space can never be adequate, since
we can never exhaust its parts, the conception, as far as it goes, is a
real conception. Wex realize in imagination the various attributes
composing it. We realize it as space. We realize it as greater than any
given space. We even realize it as endless, in an intelligible manner,
that is, we clearly represent to ourselves that however much of space
has been already explored, and however much more of it we may imagine
ourselves to traverse, we are no nearer to the end of it than we were at
firsty; sincey, however often we repeat the process of imagining
distance extending in any direction from us, that process is always
susceptible of being carried further. This conception is both real and
perfectly definite. zA merely negative notion may correspond to any
number of the most heterogeneous positive things, but this notion
corresponds to one thing only.z We possess Edition: current; Page: [86]
it as completely as we possess any of our clearest conceptions, and can
avail ourselves of it as well for ulterior mental operations. As regards
the Extent of Space, therefore, Sir W. Hamilton ahas nota made out his
point: one of the two contradictory hypotheses is not inconceivable.

The same thing may be said, equally decidedly, respecting the
Divisibility of Space. According to our author, a minimum of
divisibility, and a divisibility without limit, are both inconceivable.
I venture to think, on the contrary, that both are conceivable.
Divisibility, of course, does not here mean physical separability of
parts, but their mere existence; and the question is, can we conceive a
portion of extension so small as not to be composed of parts, and can
we, on the other hand, conceive parts consisting of smaller parts, and
these of still smaller, without end? As to the latter, smallness without
limit is as positive a conception as greatness without limit. We have
the idea of a portion of space, and to this we add that of being smaller
than any given portion. The other side of the alternative is still more
evidently conceivable. It is not denied that there is a portion of
extension which to the naked eye appears an indivisible point; it has
been called by philosophers the minimum visibile. This minimum we can
indefinitely magnify by means of optical instruments, making visible the
still smaller parts which compose it. In each successive experiment
there is still a minimum visibile, anything less than which, cannot be
discerned with that instrument, but can with one of a higher power.
Suppose, now, that as we increase the magnifying bpowersb of our
instruments, and before we have reached the limit of possible increase,
we arrive at a stage at which that which seemed the smallest visible
space under a given microscope, does not appear larger under one which,
by its mechanical construction, is adapted to magnify more—but still
remains apparently indivisible. I say, that if this happened, we should
believe in a minimum of extension; cand as we should be unable to
conceive, that is, to represent to ourselves in an image, anything
smaller, any further divisibility would be as inconceivable to us as it
would be unbelievablec.

There would be no difficulty in applying a similar line of argument to
the case of Time, or to any other of the Antinomies, (there is a long
list of them,* to some of which I shall have to return for another
purpose,) but it would needlessly encumber our pages. In no one case
mentioned by Sir W. Hamilton do I believe that he could substantiate his
assertion, that “the Conditioned,” by which he means every object of
human knowledge, lies Edition: current; Page: [87] between two
“inconditionate” hypotheses, both of them inconceivable. Let me add,
that even granting the inconceivability of the two opposite hypotheses,
I cannot see that any distinct meaning is conveyed by the statement that
the Conditioned is “the mean” between them, or that “all positive
thought,” “all that we can positively think,” “lies between” these two
“extremes,” these “two opposite poles of thought.” The extremes are,
Space in the aggregate considered as having a limit, Space in the
aggregate considered as having no limit. Neither of these, says Sir W.
Hamilton, can we think. But what we can positively think (according to
him) is not Space in the aggregate at all; it is some limited Space, and
this we think as square, as circular, as triangular, or as elliptical.
Are triangular and elliptical a mean between infinite and finite? They
are, by the very meaning of the words, modes of the finite. So that it
would be more like the truth to say that we think the pretended mean
under one of the extremes; and if infinite and finite are “two opposite
poles of thought,” then in this polar opposition, unlike voltaic
polarity, all the matter is accumulated at one pole. But this
counter-statement would be no more tenable than Sir W. Hamilton’s; for
in reality, the thought which he affirms to be a medium between two
extreme statements, has no correlation with those statements at all. It
does not relate to the same object. The two counter-hypotheses are
suppositions respecting Space at large, Space as a collective whole. The
“conditioned” thinking, said to be the mean between them, relates to
parts of Space, and classes of such parts: circles and triangles, or
planetary and stellar distances. The alternative of opposite
inconceivabilities never presents itself in regard to them; they are all
finite, and are conceived and known as such. What the notion of extremes
and a mean can signify, when applied to propositions in which different
predicates are affirmed of different subjects, passes my comprehension:
but it served to give greater apparent profundity to the “Fundamental
Doctrine,” in the eyes not of disciples (for Sir W. Hamilton was wholly
incapable of quackery) but of the teacher himself.

dIf these arguments are valid, the “Law of the Conditioned” rests on no
rational foundation. The proposition that the Conditioned lies between
two hypotheses concerning the Unconditioned, neither of which hypotheses
Edition: current; Page: [88] we can conceive as possible,d must be
placed in that numerous class of metaphysical doctrines, which have a
magnificent sound, but are empty of the smallest substance.*

Edition: current; Page: [89]


CHAPTER VII: The Philosophy of the Conditioned, as Applied by Mr. Mansel to the Limits of Religious Thought

mr. mansel may be affirmed, by a fair application of the term, to be, in
metaphysics, a pupil of Sir W. Hamilton. I do not mean that he agrees
with him in all his opinions; for he avowedly dissents from the peculiar
Hamiltonian theory of Cause: still less that he has learnt nothing from
any other teacher, or from his own independent speculations. On the
contrary, he has shown considerable power of original thought, both of a
good and of what seems to me anot a gooda quality. But he is the
admiring editor of Sir W. Hamilton’s Lectures; he invariably speaks of
him with a deference which he pays to no other philosopher; he expressly
accepts, in language identical with Sir W. Hamilton’s own, the doctrines
regarded as specially characteristic of the Hamiltonian philosophy, and
may with reason be considered as a representative of the same general
mode of thought. Mr. Mansel has bestowed especial cultivation upon a
province but slightly touched by his master—the application of the
Philosophy of the Conditioned to the theological department of thought;
the deduction of such of its corollaries and consequences as directly
concern religion.

The premises from which Mr. Mansel reasons are those of Sir W. Hamilton.
He maintains the necessary relativity of all our knowledge. He holds
that the Absolute and the Infinite, or, to use a more significant
expression, an Absolute and an Infinite Being, are inconceivable by us;
and that when we strive to conceive what is thus inaccessible to our
faculties, we fall into self-contradiction. That we are, nevertheless,
warranted in believing, and bound to believe, the real existence of an
absolute and infinite being, and that this being is God. God, therefore,
is inconceivable and unknowable by us, and cannot even be thought of
without self-contradiction; that is (for Mr. Mansel is careful thus to
qualify the assertion), thought of as Absolute, and as Infinite. Through
this inherent imposibility Edition: current; Page: [90] of our
conceiving or knowing God’s essential attributes, we are disqualified
from judging what is or is not consistent with them. If, then, a
religion is presented to us, containing any particular doctrine
respecting the Deity, our belief or rejection of the doctrine ought to
depend exclusively upon the evidences which can be produced for the
divine origin of the religion; and no argument grounded on the
incredibility of the doctrine, as involving an intellectual absurdity,
or on its moral badness as unworthy of a good or wise being, ought to
have any weight, since of these things we are incompetent to judge.
This, at least, is the drift of Mr. Mansel’s argument; but I am bound to
admit that he affirms the conclusion with a certain limitation; for he
acknowledges, that the moral character of the doctrines of a religion
ought to count for something among the reasons for accepting or
rejecting, as of divine origin, the religion as a whole. That it ought
also to count for something in the interpretation of the religion when
accepted, he neglects to say; but we must in fairness suppose that he
would admit it. These concessions, however, to the moral feelings of
mankind, are made at the expense of Mr. Mansel’s logic. If his theory is
correct, he has no right to make either of them.

There is nothing new in this line of argument as applied to theology.
That we cannot understand God; that his ways are not our ways; that we
cannot scrutinize or judge his counsels—propositions which, in a
reasonable sense of the terms, could not be denied by any Theist—have
often before been tendered as reasons why we may assert any absurdities
and any moral monstrosities concerning God, and miscall them Goodness
and Wisdom. The novelty is in presenting this conclusion as a corollary
from the most advanced doctrines of modern philosophy—from the true
theory of the powers and limitations of the human mind, on religious and
on all other subjects.

My opinion of this doctrine, in whatever way presented, is, that it is
simply the most morally pernicious doctrine now current; and that the
question it involves is, beyond all others which now engage speculative
minds, the decisive one between moral good and evil for the Christian
world. It is a momentous matter, therefore, to consider whether we are
obliged to adopt it. Without holding Mr. Mansel accountable for the
moral consequences of the doctrine, further than he himself accepts
them, I think it supremely important to examine whether the doctrine
itself is really the verdict of a sound metaphysic; and essential to a
true estimation of Sir W. Hamilton’s philosophy to enquire, whether the
conclusion thus drawn from his principal doctrine, is justly affiliated
on it. I think it will appear that the conclusion not only does not
follow from a true theory of the human faculties, but is not even
correctly drawn from the premises from which Mr. Mansel infers it.

Edition: current; Page: [91]
We must have the premises distinctly before us as conceived by Mr.
Mansel, since we have hitherto seen them only as taught by Sir W.
Hamilton. Clearness and explicitness of statement being in the number of
Mr. Mansel’s merits, it is easier to perceive the flaws in his arguments
than in those of his master, because he often leaves us less in doubt
what he means by his words.

To have “such a knowledge of the Divine Nature” as would enable human
reason to judge of theology, would be, according to Mr. Mansel, “to
conceive the Deity as he is.” This would be to “conceive him as First
Cause, as Absolute, and as Infinite.”* The First Cause Mr. Mansel
defines in the usual manner. About the meaning of Infinite there is no
difficulty. But when we come to the Absolute we are on more slippery
ground. Mr. Mansel, however, tells us his meaning plainly. By the
Absolute, he does not mean what Sir W. Hamilton bprofesses always to
mean by it, something which includes the idea of completed or finished.
He adopts the other meaning, which Sir W. Hamilton mentions, but
disclaims—b the opposite of Relative. “By the Absolute is meant that
which exists in and by itself, having no necessary relation to any other
Being.”[*]

This explanation by Mr. Mansel of Absolute in the sense in which it is
opposed to Relative, is more definite in its terms than that which Sir
W. Hamilton gives when attempting the same thing. For Sir W. Hamilton
recognises (as already remarked) this second meaning of Absolute, and
this is the account he gives of it: “Absolutum means what is freed or
loosed; in which sense the Absolute will be what is aloof from relation,
comparison, limitation, condition, dependence, &c., and thus is
tantamount to τὸ ἀπόλυτον of the lower Greeks.”† May it not be surmised
that the vagueness in which the master here leaves the conception, was
for the purpose of avoiding difficulties upon which the pupil, in his
desire of greater precision, has unwarily run? Mr. Mansel certainly
gains nothing by the more definite character of his language. The
cwords, “having no necessary relation to any other Being,”c admit of two
constructions. The words, in their natural sense, only mean, capable of
existing out of relation to anything else. The Edition: current; Page:
[92] argument requires that they should mean, incapable of existing in
relation with anything else. Mr. Mansel cannot intend the latter. He
cannot mean that the Absolute is incapable of entering into relation
with any other being; for he would not affirm this of God; on the
contrary, he is continually speaking of God’s relations to the world and
to us. Moreover, he accepts, from dDr.d Calderwood, an interpretation
inconsistent with this.* This, however, is the meaning necessary to
support his case. For what is his first argument? That God cannot be
known by us as Cause, as Absolute, and as Infinite, because these
attributes are, to our conception, incompatible with one another. And
why incompatible? Because “a Cause cannot, as such, be absolute; the
Absolute cannot, as such, be a cause. The cause, as such, exists only in
relation to its effect: the cause is a cause of the effect; the effect
is an effect of the cause. On the other hand, the conception of the
Absolute involves a possible existence out of all relation.”† But in
what manner is a possible existence out of all relation, incompatible
with the notion of a cause? Have not causes a possible existence apart
from their effects? Would the sun (for example) not exist if there were
no earth or planets for it to illuminate? Mr. Mansel seems to think that
what is capable of existing out of relation, cannot possibly be
conceived or known in relation. But this is not so. Anything which is
capable of existing in relation, is capable of being conceived or known
in relation. If the Absolute Being cannot be conceived as Cause, it must
be that he cannot exist as Cause; he must be incapable of causing. If he
can be in any relation whatever to any finite thing, he is conceivable
and knowable in that relation, if no otherwise. Freed from this
confusion of ideas, Mr. Mansel’s argument resolves itself into this—The
same Being cannot be thought by us both as Cause and as Absolute,
because a Cause as such is not Absolute, and Absolute as such is not a
Cause; which is exactly as if he had said that Newton cannot be thought
by us both as an Englishman and as a mathematician, because an
Englishman, as such, is not a mathematician, nor a mathematician, as
such, an Englishman.‡

Edition: current; Page: [93]
Again, Mr. Mansel argues, that, “supposing the Absolute to become a
cause,” since ex vi termini it is not necessitated to do so, it must be
a voluntary agent, and therefore conscious; for “volition is only
possible in a conscious being.”* But consciousness, again, is only
conceivable as a relation; and any relation conflicts with the notion of
the Absolute, since relatives are mutually dependent on one another.
Here it comes out distinctly as a premise in the reasoning, that to be
in a relation at all, even if only a relation to itself, the relation of
being “conscious of itself,” is inconsistent with being the Absolute.†

Edition: current; Page: [94]
Mr. Mansel, therefore, must alter his definition of the Absolute if he
would maintain his argument. He must either fall back on the happy
ambiguity of Sir W. Hamilton’s definition, “what is aloof from
relation,” which does not decide whether the meaning is merely that it
can exist out of relation, or that it is incapable of existing in it; or
he must take courage, and affirm that an Absolute Being is incapable of
all relation. But as he will certainly refuse to predicate this of God,
the consequence follows, that God is not an Absolute Being.

The whole of Mr. Mansel’s argument for the inconceivability of the
Infinite and of the Absolute is one long ignoratio elenchi. It has been
pointed out in a former chapter that the words Absolute and Infinite
have no real meaning, unless we understand by them that which is
absolute or infinite in some given attribute; as space is called
infinite, meaning that it is infinite in extension; and as God is termed
infinite in the sense of possessing infinite power, and absolute in the
sense of absolute goodness, or knowledge.[*] It has also been shown that
Sir W. Hamilton’s arguments for the unknowableness of the Unconditioned,
do not prove that we cannot know an object which is absolute or infinite
in some specific attribute, but only that we cannot know an abstraction
called “The Absolute” or “The Infinite,” which is supposed to have all
attributes at once. The same remark is applicable to Mr. Mansel,* with
only this difference, that he, with the laudable ambition I have already
noticed of stating everything explicitly, Edition: current; Page: [95]
draws this important distinction himself, and says, of his own motion,
that the Absolute he means is the abstraction. He says, that the
Absolute gand Infiniteg can be “nothing less than the sum of all
reality,” the complex of all positive predicates, even those which are
exclusive of one another: and expressly identifies it with Hegel’s
Absolute Being, which contains in itself “all that is actual, even evil
included.”* “That which is conceived as absolute and infinite,” says Mr.
Mansel, “must be conceived as containing within itself the sum not only
of all actual, but of all possible modes of being.”† One may well agree
with Mr. Mansel that this farrago of contradictory attributes cannot be
conceived: but what shall we say of his equally positive averment that
it must be believed? If this be what the Absolute is, what does he mean
by saying that we must believe God to be the Absolute?

The remainder of Mr. Mansel’s argumentation is suitable to this
commencement. The Absolute, as conceived, that is, as he defines it,
cannot be “a whole composed of parts,” or “a substance consisting of
attributes,” or

a conscious subject in antithesis to an object. For if there is in the
absolute any principle of unity, distinct from the mere accumulation of
parts or attributes, this principle alone is the true absolute. If, on
the other hand, there is no such principle, then there is no absolute at
all, but only a plurality of relatives. The almost unanimous voice of
philosophy, in pronouncing that the absolute is both one and simple,
must be accepted as the voice of reason also, so far as reason has any
voice in the matter. But this absolute unity, as indifferent and
containing no attributes, Edition: current; Page: [96] can neither be
distinguished from the multiplicity of finite beings by any
characteristic feature, nor be identified with them in their
multiplicity.*

It will be noticed that the Absolute, which was just before defined as
having all attributes, is here declared to have none: but this, Mr.
Mansel would say, is merely one of the contradictions inherent in the
attempt to conceive what is inconceivable.

Thus we are landed in an inextricable dilemma. The Absolute cannot be
conceived as conscious, neither can it be conceived as unconscious: it
cannot be conceived as complex, neither can it be conceived as simple:
it cannot be conceived by difference, neither can it be conceived by the
absence of difference: it cannot be identified with the universe,
neither can it be distinguished from it.[*]

Is this chimerical abstraction the Absolute Being whom anybody need be
concerned about, either as knowable or as unknowable? Is the
inconceivableness of this impossible fiction any argument against the
possibility of conceiving God, who is neither supposed to have no
attributes nor to have all attributes, but to have good attributes? Is
it any hindrance to our being able to conceive a Being absolutely just,
for example, or absolutely wise? Yet it is of this that Mr. Mansel
undertook to prove the impossibility.

Again, of the Infinite: according to Mr. Mansel, being “that than which
a greater is inconceivable,” it “consequently can receive no additional
attribute or mode of existence which it had not from all eternity.” It
must therefore be the same complex of all possible predicates which the
Absolute is, and all of them infinite in degree. It “cannot be regarded
as consisting of a limited number of attributes, each unlimited in its
kind. It cannot be conceived, for example, after the analogy of a line,
infinite in length, but not in breadth; or of a surface, infinite in two
dimensions of space, but bounded in the third; or of an intelligent
being, possessing some one or more modes of consciousness in an infinite
degree, but devoid of others.”† This Infinite, which is infinite in all
attributes, and not solely in those which it would be thought decent to
predicate of God, cannot, as Mr. Mansel very truly says, be conceived.
For

the Infinite, if it is to be conceived at all, must be conceived as
potentially everything and actually nothing; for if there is anything
general which it cannot become, it is thereby limited; and if there is
anything in particular which it actually is, it is thereby excluded from
being any other thing. But again, it must also be conceived as actually
everything and potentially nothing; for an unrealized potentiality is
likewise a limitation. If the infinite can be that which it is not, it
is by that very possibility marked out as incomplete, and capable of a
higher perfection. If it is actually everything, it possesses no
characteristic feature by which it can be distinguished from anything
else, and discerned as an object of consciousness.‡

Edition: current; Page: [97]
Here certainly is an Infinite whose infinity does not seem to be of much
use to it. But can a writer be serious who bids us conjure up a
conception of something which possesses infinitely all conflicting
attributes, and because we cannot do this without contradiction, would
have us believe that there is a contradiction in the idea of infinite
goodness, or infinite wisdom? Instead of “the Infinite,” substitute “an
infinitely good Being,” and Mr. Mansel’s argument reads thus: If there
is anything which an infinitely good Being cannot become—if he cannot
become bad—that is a limitation, and the goodness cannot be infinite. If
there is anything which an infinitely good Being actually is (namely
good), he is excluded from being any other thing, as from being wise or
powerful. I hardly think that Sir W. Hamilton would patronize this
logic, learnt though it be in his school.*

It cannot be necessary to follow up Mr. Mansel’s metaphysical
dissertation any farther. It is all, as I have said, the same ignoratio
elenchi. I have been able to find only one short passage in which he
attempts to show that we are unable to represent in thought a particular
attribute carried to the infinite. For the sake of fairness, I cite it
in a note.† All the argument that I Edition: current; Page: [98] can
discover in it, I conceive that I have already answered, as stated much
better by Sir W. Hamilton.

Mr. Mansel thinks it necessary to declare that the contradictions are
not in “the nature of the Absolute” or Infinite “in itself, but only” in
“our own conception of that nature.”* He did not mean to say that the
Divine Nature is itself contradictory. But he says “We are compelled by
the constitution of our minds, to believe in the existence of an
Absolute and Infinite Being.”† Such being the case, I ask, is the Being,
whom we must believe to be infinite and absolute, infinite and absolute
in the meaning which those terms bear in Mr. Mansel’s hdefinitionh of
them? If not, he is bound to tell us in what other meaning. Believing
God to be infinite and absolute must be believing something, and it must
be possible to say what. If Mr. Mansel means that we must believe the
reality of an Infinite and Absolute Being in some other sense than that
in which he has proved such a Being to be inconceivable, his point is
not made out, since he undertook to prove the inconceivability of the
very Being in whose reality we are required to believe. But the truth is
that the Infinite and Absolute which he says we must believe in, are the
very Infinite and Absolute of his definitions. The Infinite is that
which is opposed to the Finite; the Absolute, that which is opposed to
the Relative. He has therefore either proved nothing, or vastly more
than he intended. For the contradictions which he asserts to be involved
in the notions, do not follow from an imperfect mode of apprehending the
Infinite and Absolute, but lie in the definitions of them; in the
meaning of the iphrasesi themselves. The contradictions are in the very
object which we are called upon to believe. If, therefore, Mr. Mansel
would escape from the conclusion that an Infinite and Absolute Being is
intrinsically impossible, it must be by affirming, with Hegel, that the
law of Contradiction does not apply to the Absolute; that, respecting
the Absolute, contradictory propositions may both be true.‡

Let us now pass from Mr. Mansel’s metaphysical argumentation on an
Edition: current; Page: [99] irrelevant issue, to jaj much more
important subjectk, thatk of his practical conclusion, namely, that we
cannot know the divine attributes in such a manner, as can entitle us to
reject any statement respecting the Deity on the ground of its being
inconsistent with his character. Let us examine whether Edition:
current; Page: [100] this assertion is a legitimate corollary from the
relativity of human knowledge, either as it really is, or as it is
understood to be by Sir W. Hamilton and by Mr. Mansel.

The fundamental property of our knowledge of God, Mr. Mansel says, is
that we do not and cannot know him as he is in himself: certain persons,
therefore, whom he calls Rationalists, he condemns as unphilosophical,
when they reject any statement as inconsistent with the character of
God.[*] This is a valid answer, as far as words go, to some of the later
Transcendentalists—to those who think that we have an intuition of the
Divine Nature; though even as to them it would not be difficult to show
that the answer is but skin-deep. But those “Rationalists” who hold,
with Mr. Mansel himself, the relativity of human knowledge, are not
touched by his reasoning. We cannot know God as he is in himself (they
reply); granted: and what then? Can we know man as he is in himself, or
matter as it is in itself? We do not claim any other knowledge of God
than such as we have of man or of matter. Because I do not know my
fellow-men, nor any of the powers of nature, as they are in themselves,
am I therefore not at liberty to disbelieve anything I hear respecting
them as being inconsistent with their character? I know something of Man
and Nature, not as they are in themselves, but as they are relatively to
us; and it is as relative to us, and not as he is in himself, that I
suppose myself to know anything of God. The attributes which I ascribe
to him, as goodness, knowledge, power, are all relative. They are
attributes (says the rationalist) which my experience enables me to
conceive, and which I consider as proved, not absolutely, by an
intuition of God, but phænomenally, by his action on the creation, as
known through my senses and my rational faculty. These relative
attributes, each of them in an infinite degree, are all I pretend to
predicate of God. When I reject a doctrine as inconsistent with God’s
nature, it is not as being inconsistent with what God is in himself, but
with what he is as manifested to us. If my knowledge of him is only
phænomenal, the assertions which I reject are phænomenal too. If those
assertions are inconsistent with my relative knowledge of him, it is no
answer to say that all my knowledge of him is relative. That is no more
a reason against disbelieving an alleged fact as unworthy of God, than
against disbelieving another alleged fact as unworthy of Turgot, or of
Washington, whom also I do not know as Noumena, but only as Phænomena.

There is but one way for Mr. Mansel out of this difficulty, and he
adopts it. He must maintain, not merely that an Absolute Being is
unknowable in himself, but that the Relative attributes of an Absolute
Being are unknowable likewise. He must say that we do not know what
Wisdom, Justice, Edition: current; Page: [101] Benevolence, Mercy, are,
as they exist in God. Accordingly he does say so. The following are his
direct utterances on the subject: as an implied doctrine, it pervades
his whole argument.

It is a fact which experience forces upon us, and which it is useless,
were it possible, to disguise, that the representation of God after the
model of the highest human morality which we are capable of conceiving,
is not sufficient to account for all the phenomena exhibited by the
course of his natural Providence. The infliction of physical suffering,
the permission of moral evil, the adversity of the good, the prosperity
of the wicked, the crimes of the guilty involving the misery of the
innocent, the tardy appearance and partial distribution of moral and
religious knowledge in the world—these are facts which no doubt are
reconcilable, we know not how, with the Infinite Goodness of God, but
which certainly are not to be explained on the supposition that its sole
and sufficient type is to be found in the finite goodness of man.*

In other words, it is necessary to suppose that the infinite goodness
ascribed to God is not the goodness which we know and love in our
fellow-creatures, distinguished only as infinite in degree, but is
different in kind, and another quality altogether. When we call the one
finite goodness and the other infinite goodness, we do not mean what the
words assert, but something else: we intentionally apply the same name
to things which we regard as different.

Accordingly Mr. Mansel combats, as a heresy of his opponents, the
opinion that infinite goodness differs only in degree from finite
goodness. The notion “that the attributes of God differ from those of
man in degree only, not in kind, and hence that certain mental and moral
qualities of which we are immediately conscious in ourselves, furnish at
the same time a true and adequate image of the infinite perfections of
God,” (the word adequate must have slipped in by inadvertence, since
otherwise it would be an inexcusable misrepresentation) he identifies
with “the vulgar Rationalism which regards the reason of man, in its
ordinary and normal operation, as the supreme criterion of religious
truth.”† And in characterizing the mode of arguing of this vulgar
Rationalism, he declares its principles to be, that “all the excellences
of which we are conscious in the creature, must necessarily exist in the
same manner, though in a higher degree, in the Creator. God is indeed
more wise, more just, more merciful, than man; but for that very reason,
his wisdom and justice and mercy must contain nothing that is
incompatible with the corresponding attributes in their human
character.”‡ It is against this doctrine that Mr. Mansel feels called on
to make an emphatic protest.

Edition: current; Page: [102]
Here, then, I take my stand on the acknowledged principle of logic and
of morality, that when we mean different things we have no right to call
them by the same name, and to apply to them the same predicates, moral
and intellectual. Language has no meaning for the words Just, Merciful,
Benevolent, save that in which we predicate them of our
fellow-creatures; and unless that is what we intend to express by them,
we have no business to employ the words. If in affirming them of God we
do not mean to affirm these very qualities, differing only as greater in
degree, we are neither philosophically nor morally entitled to affirm
them at all. If it be said that the qualities are the same, but that we
cannot conceive them as they are when raised to the infinite, I grant
that we cannot adequately conceive them in one of their elements, their
infinity. But we can conceive them in their other elements, which are
the very same in the infinite as in the finite development. Anything
carried to the infinite must have all the properties of the same thing
as finite, except those which depend upon the finiteness. Among the many
who have said that we cannot conceive infinite space, did any one ever
suppose that it is not space? that it does not possess all the
properties by which space is characterized? Infinite Space cannot be
cubical or spherical, because these are modes of being bounded: but does
any one imagine that in ranging through it we might arrive at some
region which was not extended; of which one part was not outside
another; where, though no Body intervened, motion was impossible; or
where the sum of two sides of a triangle was less than the third side?
The parallel assertion may be made respecting infinite goodness. What
belongs to it leither as Infinite or as Absolutel I do not pretend to
know; but I know that infinite goodness must be goodness, and that what
is not consistent with goodness, is not consistent with infinite
goodness. If in ascribing goodness to God I do not mean what I mean by
goodness; if I do not mean the goodness of which I have some knowledge,
but an incomprehensible attribute of an incomprehensible substance,
which for aught I know may be a totally different quality from that
which I love and venerate—and even must, if Mr. Mansel is to be
believed,[*] be in some important particulars opposed to this—what do I
mean by calling it goodness? and what reason have I for venerating it?
If I know nothing about what the attribute is, I cannot tell that it is
a proper object of veneration. To say that God’s goodness may be
different in kind from man’s goodness, what is it but saying, with a
slight change of phraseology, that God may possibly not be good? To
assert in words what we do not think in meaning, is as suitable a
definition as can be given of a moral falsehood. Besides, suppose that
certain unknown attributes are Edition: current; Page: [103] ascribed to
the Deity in a religion the external evidences of which are so
conclusive to my mind, as effectually to convince me that it comes from
God. Unless I believe God to possess the same moral attributes which I
find, in however inferior a degree, in a good man, what ground of
assurance have I of God’s veracity? All trust in a Revelation
presupposes a conviction that God’s attributes are the same, in all but
degree, with the best human attributes.

If, instead of the “glad tidings” that there exists a Being in whom all
the excellences which the highest human mind can conceive, exist in a
degree inconceivable to us, I am informed that the world is ruled by a
being whose attributes are infinite, but what they are we cannot learn,
not what are the principles of his government, except that “the highest
human morality which we are capable of conceiving”[*] does not sanction
them; convince me of it, and I will bear my fate as I may. But when I am
told that I must believe this, and at the same time call this being by
the names which express and affirm the highest human morality, I say in
plain terms that I will not. Whatever power such a being may have over
me, there is one thing which he shall not do: he shall not compel me to
worship him. I will call no being good, who is not what I mean when I
apply that epithet to my fellow-creatures;* and if such a being can
sentence me to hell for not so calling him, to hell I will go.[†]

Neither is this to set up my own limited intellect as a criterion of
divine or of any other wisdom. If a person is wiser and better than
myself, not in some unknown and unknowable meaning of the terms, but in
their known human acceptation, I am ready to believe that what this
person thinks may be true, and that what he does may be right, when, but
for the opinion I have of him, I should think otherwise. But this is
because I believe that he and I have at bottom the same standard of
truth and rule of right, and that he probably understands better than I
the facts of the particular case. If I thought it not improbable that
his notion of right might be my notion of wrong, I should not defer to
his judgment. In like manner, one who sincerely believes in an
absolutely good ruler of the world, is not warranted in disbelieving any
act ascribed to him, merely because the very small part of its
circumstances which we can possibly know does not sufficiently justify
it. But if what I am told respecting him is of a kind which no facts
that Edition: current; Page: [104] can be supposed added to my knowledge
could make me perceive to be right; if his alleged ways of dealing with
the world are such as no imaginable hypothesis respecting things known
to him and unknown to me, could make consistent with the goodness and
wisdom which I mean when I use the terms, but are in direct
contradiction to their signification; then, if the law of contradiction
is a law of human thought, I cannot both believe these things, and
believe that God is a good and wise being. If I call any being wise or
good, not meaning the only qualities which the words import, I am
speaking insincerely; I am flattering him by epithets which I fancy that
he likes to hear, in the hope of winning him over to my own objects. For
it is worthy of remark that the doubt whether words applied to God have
their human signification, is only felt when the words relate to his
moral attributes; it is never heard of in regard to his power. We are
never told that God’s omnipotence must not be supposed to mean an
infinite degree of the power we know in man and nature, and that perhaps
it does not mean that he is able to kill us, or consign us to eternal
flames. The Divine Power is always interpreted in a completely human
signification, but the Divine Goodness and Justice must be understood to
be such only in an unintelligible sense. Is it unfair to surmise that
this is because those who speak in the name of God, have need of the
human conception of his power, since an idea which can overawe and
enforce obedience must address itself to real feelings; but are content
that his goodness should be conceived only as something inconceivable,
because they are so often required to teach doctrines respecting him
which conflict irreconcilably with all goodness that we can conceive?*

Edition: current; Page: [105]
I am anxious to say once more, that Mr. Mansel’s conclusions do not go
the whole length of his arguments, and that he disavows the doctrine
that God’s justice and goodness are wholly different from what human
beings understand by the terms. He would, and does, admit that the
qualities as conceived by us bear some likeness to the justice and
goodness which Edition: current; Page: [106] belong to God, since man
was made in God’s image. But such a semiconcession, which no Christian
could avoid making, since without it the whole Christian scheme would be
subverted, cannot save him; he is not relieved by it from any
difficulties, while it destroys the whole fabric of his argument. The
Divine goodness, which is said to be a different thing from human
goodness, but of which the human conception of goodness is some
imperfect reflexion or resemblance, does it agree with what men call
Edition: current; Page: [107] goodness in the essence of the quality—in
what constitutes it goodness? If it does, the “Rationalists” are right;
it is not illicit to reason from the one to the other. If not, the
divine attribute, whatever else it may be, is not goodness, and ought
not to be called by the name. Unless there be some human conception
which agrees with it, no human name can properly be applied to it; it is
simply the unknown attribute of a thing unknown; it has no existence in
relation to us, we can affirm nothing of it, and owe it no worship. Such
is the inevitable alternative.*

To conclude: Mr. Mansel has not made out any connexion between his
philosophical premises and his theological conclusion. The relativity of
human knowledge, the uncognoscibility of the Absolute, and the
contradictions Edition: current; Page: [108] which follow the attempt to
conceive a Being with all or without any attributes, are no obstacles to
our having the same kind of knowledge of God which we have of other
things, namely not as they exist absolutely, but relatively. The
proposition, that we cannot conceive the moral attributes of God in such
a manner as to be able to affirm of any doctrine or assertion that it is
inconsistent with them, has no foundation in the laws of the human mind:
while, if admitted, it would not prove that we should ascribe to God
attributes bearing the same name as human qualities, but not to be
understood in the same sense; it would prove that we ought not to
ascribe any moral attributes to God at all, inasmuch as no moral
attributes known or conceivable by us are true of him, and we are
condemned to absolute ignorance of him as a moral being.

Edition: current; Page: [109]


CHAPTER VIII: Of Consciousness, as Understood by Sir William Hamilton

in the discussion of the Relativity of human knowledge and the
Philosophy of the Conditioned, we have brought under consideration those
of Sir W. Hamilton’s metaphysical doctrines which have the greatest
share in giving to his philosophy the colour of individuality which it
possesses, and the most important of those which can be regarded as
belonging specially to himself. On a certain number of minor points, and
on one of primary importance, Causation, we shall again have to examine
opinions of his which are original. But on most of the subjects which
remain to be discussed, at least in the psychological department (as
distinguished from the logical), Sir W. Hamilton is merely an eminent
representative of one of the two great schools of metaphysical thought;
that which derives its popular appellation from Scotland, and of which
the founder and most celebrated champion was a philosopher whom, on the
whole, Sir W. Hamilton seems to prefer to any other, Dr. Reid. For the
future, therefore, we shall be concerned less with Sir W. Hamilton’s
philosophy as such, than with the general mode of thought to which it
belongs. We shall be engaged in criticizing doctrines common to him with
many other thinkers; but in doing so we shall take his writings as
text-books, and deal with the opinions chiefly in the form in which he
presented them. No other course would be so fair to the opinions
themselves: not only because they have not, within the last half
century, had so able a teacher, and never one so well acquainted with
the teachings of others, but also because he had the great advantage of
coming last. All theories, at their commencement, bear the burthen of
mistakes and inadvertences not inherent in the theories themselves, but
either personal to their authors, or arising from the imperfect state of
philosophical thought at the time of their origin. At a later period,
the errors which accidentally adhered to the theory are stript off, the
most obvious objections to it are perceived, and more or less
successfully met, and it is rendered, at least apparently, consistent
with such admitted truths as it at first seemed to contradict. One of
the unfairest, though commonest tricks of controversy, is that of
directing the attack exclusively against the Edition: current; Page:
[110] first crude form of a doctrine.* Whoever should judge Locke’s
philosophy as it is in Locke, Berkeley’s philosophy as it is in
Berkeley, or Reid’s as it is in Reid, would often condemn them on the
ground of incidental misapprehensions, which form no essential part of
their doctrine, and from which its later adherents and expositors are
free. Sir W. Hamilton’s is the latest form of the Reidian theory; and by
no other of its supporters has that theory been so well guarded, or
expressed in such discriminating terms, and with such studious
precision. Though there are a few points on which the earlier
philosopher seems to me nearer the truth, on the whole it is impossible
to pass from Reid to Sir W. Hamilton, or from Sir W. Hamilton back to
Reid, and not be struck with the immense progress which their common
philosophy has made in the interval between them.

All theories of the human mind profess to be interpretations of
Consciousness: the conclusions of all of them are supposed to rest on
that ultimate evidence, either immediately or remotely. What
Consciousness directly reveals, together with what can be legitimately
inferred from its revelations, composes, by universal admission, all
that we know of the mind, or indeed of any other thing. When we know
what any philosopher considers to be revealed in Consciousness, we have
the key to the entire character of his metaphysical system.

There are some peculiarities requiring notice, in Sir W. Hamilton’s mode
of conceiving and defining Consciousness. The words of his definition do
not, of themselves, indicate those peculiarities. Consciousness, he
says, is “the recognition by the mind or ego of its own acts or
affections;” and in this, as he truly observes, “all philosophers are
agreed.”† But all philosophers have not, by any means, meant the same
thing by it. Most of them (including Reid and Stewart) have meant, as
the words naturally mean, Self-consciousness. They have held, that we
can be conscious only of some state of our own mind. The mind’s “own
acts or affections” are in the mind itself, and not external to it:
accordingly we have, in their opinion, the direct evidence of
consciousness, only for the internal world. An external world is but an
inference, which, according to most philosophers, is justified, or even,
by our mental constitution, compelled: according to others, not
justified.

Nothing, however, can be farther from Sir W. Hamilton’s mind than he
declares this opinion to be. Though consciousness, according to him, is
a recognition of the mind’s own acts and affections, we are nevertheless
conscious of things outside the mind. Some of the mind’s acts are
perceptions of outward objects; and we are, of course, conscious of
those acts: Edition: current; Page: [111] now, to be conscious of a
perception, necessarily implies being conscious of the thing perceived.

It is palpably impossible that we can be conscious of an act, without
being conscious of the object to which that act is relative. This,
however, is what Dr. Reid and Mr. Stewart maintain. They maintain that I
can know that I know, without knowing what I know—or that I can know the
knowledge without knowing what the knowledge is about: for example, that
I am conscious of perceiving a book, without being conscious of the book
perceived,—that I am conscious of remembering its contents without being
conscious of these contents remembered—and so forth.*

An act of knowledge existing and being what it is only by relation to
its object, it is manifest that the act can be known only through the
object to which it is correlative; and Reid’s supposition that an
operation can be known in consciousness to the exclusion of its object,
is impossible. For example, I see the inkstand. How can I be conscious
that my present modification exists,—that it is a perception and not
another mental state,—that it is a perception of sight, to the exclusion
of every other sense,—and finally, that it is a perception of the
inkstand, and of the inkstand only,—unless my own consciousness
comprehend within its sphere the object, which at once determines the
existence of the act, qualifies its kind, and distinguishes its
individuality? Annihilate the inkstand, you annihilate the perception;
annihilate the consciousness of the object, you annihilate the
consciousness of the operation. It undoubtedly sounds strange to say, I
am conscious of the inkstand, instead of saying, I am conscious of the
perception of the inkstand. This I admit, but the admission can avail
nothing to Dr. Reid, for the apparent incongruity of the expression
arises only from the prevalence of that doctrine of perception in the
schools of philosophy, which it is his principal merit to have so
vigorously assailed.†

This is Sir W. Hamilton’s first difference, on the subject of
Consciousness, from his predecessor, Reid. In being conscious of those
of our mental operations which regard external objects, we are,
according to Sir W. Hamilton, conscious of the objects. Consciousness,
therefore, is not solely of the ego and its modifications, but also of
the non-ego.

This first difference is not the only one. Consciousness, according to
Sir W. Hamilton, may be of things external to self, but it can only be
of things actually present. In the first place, they must be present in
time. We are not conscious of the past. Thus far Sir W. Hamilton agrees
with Reid, who holds that memory is of the past, consciousness only of
the present. Reid, however, is of opinion that memory is an “immediate
knowledge of the past,”[*] exactly as consciousness is an immediate
knowledge of the present. Sir W. Hamilton contends that this opinion of
Reid is “not only false,” but “involves a contradiction in terms.”
Memory is an act, and an act “exists only in the now:”‡ it can therefore
be cognizant only of what now is. In the case of memory, what now is, is
not the thing remembered, but a Edition: current; Page: [112] present
representation of it in the mind, which representation is the sole
object of consciousness. We are aware of the past, not immediately, but
mediately, through the representation.

An act of memory, is merely a present state of mind, which we are
conscious of, not as absolute, but as relative to, and representing,
another state of mind, and accompanied with the belief that the state of
mind, as now represented, has actually been. . . . All that is
immediately known in the act of memory, is the present mental
modification; that is, the representation and concomitant belief. . . .
So far is memory from being an immediate knowledge of the past, that it
is at best only a mediate knowledge of the past; while in philosophical
propriety, it is not a knowledge of the past at all, but a knowledge of
the present, and a belief of the past. . . . We may doubt, we may deny
that the representation and belief are true. We may assert that they
represent what never was, and that all beyond their present mental
existence is a delusion:[*]

but it is impossible for us to doubt or deny that of which we have
immediate knowledge.

Again, that of which we are conscious must not only be present in time,
it must also, if external to our minds, be present in place. It must be
in direct contact with our bodily organs. We do not immediately perceive
a distant object.

To say, for example, that we perceive by sight the sun or moon, is a
false or an elliptical expression. We perceive nothing but certain
modifications of light, in immediate relation to our organ of vision;
and so far from Dr. Reid being philosophically correct when he says that
“when ten men look at the sun or moon, they all see the same individual
object,” the truth is that each of these persons sees a different
object, because each person sees a different complement of rays, in
relation to his individual organ:*

to which, in another place, he adds, that each individual sees two
different objects, with his right and with his left eye.

It is not by perception, but by a process of reasoning, that we connect
the objects of sense with existences beyond the sphere of immediate
knowledge. It is enough that perception affords us the knowledge of the
non-ego at the point of sense. To arrogate to it the power of
immediately informing us of external things which are only the causes of
the object we immediately perceive, is either positively erroneous, or a
confusion of language arising from an inadequate discrimination of the
phænomena.†

Edition: current; Page: [113]
There can, I think, be no doubt that these remarks on knowledge of the
past and perception of the distant, are correct, and a great improvement
upon Reid.

It appears, then, that the true definition of Consciousness in Sir W.
Hamilton’s use of the term, would be Immediate Knowledge. And he
expressly says, “Consciousness and immediate knowledge are thus terms
universally convertible: and if there be an immediate knowledge of
things external, there is consequently the Consciousness of an outer
world.”* Immediate knowledge, again, he treats as universally
convertible with Intuitive knowledge:† and the terms are really
equivalent. We know intuitively, what we know by its own evidence—by
direct apprehension of the fact, and not through the medium of a
previous knowledge of something from which we infer it. Regarded in this
light, our author’s difference with Reid as to our being conscious of
outward objects, would appear, on his own showing, to be chiefly a
dispute about words: for Reid also says that we have an immediate and
intuitive knowledge of things without, aand (if Sir W. Hamilton
understands him rightly) that it is immediate and intuitive in the same
meaning and mode, as that claimed for us by Sir W. Hamiltona. Sir W.
Hamilton stretches the word Consciousness so as to include this
knowledge, while Reid, with greater regard for the origin and etymology
of the word, restricts it to the cases in which the mind is “conscia
sibi.”[*] Sir W. Hamilton has a right to his own use of the term; but
care must be taken that it do not serve as a means of knowingly or
unknowingly begging any question. One of the most disputed questions in
psychology is exactly this—Have we, or not, an immediate intuition of
material objects? and this question must not be prejudged by affirming
that those objects are in our consciousness. On the contrary, it is only
allowable to say that they are in our consciousness, after it bhadb been
already proved that we cognise them intuitively.

It is a little startling, after so much has been said of the limitation
of Consciousness to immediate knowledge, to find Sir W. Hamilton, in the
“Dissertations on Reid,” maintaining that “consciousness comprehends
every cognitive act; in other words, whatever we are not conscious of,
that we do not know.”‡ If consciousness comprehends all our knowledge,
but yet is limited to immediate knowledge, it follows that all our
knowledge must be immediate, and that we have, therefore, no knowledge
of the past or of the absent. Sir W. Hamilton might have cleared up this
difficulty by Edition: current; Page: [114] saying, as he had already
done, that our mediate cognitions—those of the past and the
absent—though he never hesitates to call them knowledge, are in strict
propriety Belief. We could then have understood his meaning. But the
explanation he actually gives is quite different. It is, that “all our
mediate cognitions are contained in our immediate.”[*] This is a
manifest attempt to justify himself in calling them, not belief, but
knowledge, like our immediate cognitions. But what is the meaning of
“contained?” If it means that our mediate cognitions are part of our
immediate, then they are themselves immediate, and we have no mediate
cognitions. Sir W. Hamilton has told us, that in the case of a
remembered fact, what we immediately cognise is but a present mental
representation of it, “accompanied with the belief that the state of
mind, as now represented, has actually been.”[†] Having said this, he
also says that the past fact, which does not now exist, is
“contained”[‡] in the representation and in the belief which do exist.
But if it is contained in them, it must have a present existence too,
and is not a past fact. Perhaps, however, by the word “contained,” all
that is meant is, that it is implied in them; that it is a necessary or
legitimate inference from them. But if it is only this, it remains
absent in time; and what is absent in time, our author has said, is not
a possible object of consciousness. If, therefore, a past fact is an
object of knowledge, we can know what we are not conscious of;
consciousness does not comprehend all our cognitions. To state the same
thing in another manner; a remembered fact is either a part of our
consciousness, or it is not. If it is, Sir W. Hamilton is wrong when he
says that we are not conscious of the past. If not, he is wrong, either
in saying that we can know the past, or in saying that what we are not
conscious of, we do not know.

This inconsistency, which emerges only in the “Dissertations,” I shall
not further dwell upon: it is chiefly important as showing that the most
complicated and elaborate version of Sir W. Hamilton’s speculations is
not always the freest from objection. The doctrine of his Lectures is,
that a part of our knowledge—the knowledge of the past, the future, and
the distant—is mediate and representative, but that such mediate
knowledge is not Consciousness; consciousness and immediate knowledge
being coextensive.

From our author’s different deliverances as above quoted, it appears
that he gives two definitions of Consciousness. In the one, it is
synonymous with direct, immediate, or intuitive knowledge; and we are
conscious not only of ourselves but of outward objects, since, in our
author’s opinion, we know these intuitively. According to the other
definition, consciousness is Edition: current; Page: [115] the mind’s
recognition of its own acts and affections. It is not at once obvious
how these two definitions can be reconciled: for Sir W. Hamilton would
have been the last person to say that the outward object is identical
with the mental act or affection. He must have meant that consciousness
is the mind’s recognition of its own acts and affections together with
all that is therein implied, or as he would say, contained. But this
involves him in a new inconsistency: for how can he then refuse the name
of consciousness to our mediate knowledge—to our knowledge or belief
(for instance) of the past? The past reality is certainly cimpliedc in
the present recollection of which we are conscious: and our author has
said that all our mediate knowledge is contained in our immediate, das
he has elsewhere said thatd knowledge of the outward object is contained
in our knowledge of the perception. If, then, we are conscious of the
outward object, why not of the past sensation or impression?

From the definition of Consciousness as “the recognition by the mind or
Ego of its own acts or affections,”[*] our author might be supposed to
think (as has been actually thought by many philosophers) that
consciousness is not the fact itself of knowing or feeling, but a
subsequent operation by which we become aware of that fact. This however
is not his opinion. By “the mind’s recognition of its acts and
affections” he does not mean anything different from the acts and
affections themselves. He denies that we have one faculty by which we
know or feel, and another by which we know that we know, and by which we
know that we feel. These are not, according to him, different facts, but
the same fact seen under another point of view. And he takes this
occasion for making a remark, of wide application in philosophy, which
it would be of signal service to all students of metaphysics to keep
constantly in mind; that difference of names often does not signify
difference of things, but only difference in the particular easpecte
under which a thing is considered.[†] On the real identity between our
various mental states and our consciousness of them, he seems to be of
the opinion which was maintained before him by Brown, and which is
stated by Mr. James Mill, with his usual clearness and force, in the
following passage:

Having a sensation, and having a feeling, are not two things. The thing
is one, the names only are two. I am pricked by a pin. The sensation is
one; but I may call it sensation, or a feeling, or a pain, as I please.
Now, when, having the sensation, I say I feel the sensation, I only use
a tautological expression; the sensation is not one thing, the feeling
another; the sensation is the feeling. When instead of the word Edition:
current; Page: [116] feeling, I use the word conscious, I do exactly the
same thing—I merely use a tautological expression. To say I feel a
sensation, is merely to say that I feel a feeling; which is an
impropriety of speech. And to say I am conscious of a feeling, is merely
to say that I feel it. To have a feeling is to be conscious; and to be
conscious is to have a feeling. To be conscious of the prick of the pin,
is merely to have the sensation. And though I have these various modes
of naming my sensation, by saying, I feel the prick of a pin, I feel the
pain of a prick, I have the sensation of a prick, I have the feeling of
a prick, I am conscious of the feeling; the thing named in all these
various ways is one and the same.

The same explanation will easily be seen to apply to ideas. Though at
present I have not the sensation, called the prick of a pin, I have a
distinct idea of it. The having an idea, and the not having it, are
distinguished by the existence or nonexistence of a certain feeling. To
have an idea, and the feeling of that idea, are not two things; they are
one and the same thing. To feel an idea, and to be conscious of that
feeling, are not two things; the feeling and the consciousness are but
two names for the same thing. In the very word feeling, all that is
implied in the word Consciousness is involved.

Those philosophers, therefore, who have spoken of Consciousness as a
feeling distinct from all other feelings, committed a mistake, and one,
the evil consequences of which have been most important; for, by
combining a chimerical ingredient with the elements of thought, they
involved their enquiries in confusion and mystery from the very
commencement.

It is easy to see what is the nature of the terms Conscious and
Consciousness, and what is the marking function which they are destined
to perform. It was of great importance, for the purpose of naming, that
we should not only have names to distinguish the different classes of
our feelings, but also a name applicable equally to all those classes.
This purpose is answered by the concrete term, Conscious, and the
abstract of it, Consciousness. Thus, if we are in any way sentient; that
is, have any of the feelings whatsoever of a living creature; the word
Conscious is applicable to the feeler, and Consciousness to the feeling:
that is to say, the words are Generical marks, under which all the names
of the subordinate classes of the feelings of a sentient creature are
included. When I smell a rose, I am conscious; when I have the idea of a
fire, I am conscious; when I remember, I am conscious; when I reason,
and when I believe, I am conscious; but believing and being conscious of
belief, are not two things, they are the same thing: though this same
thing I can name at one time without the aid of the generical mark,
while at another time it suits me to employ the generical mark.*

Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrine is exactly this, except that he expresses the
latter part of it in less perspicuous phraseology, saying that
consciousness is “the fundamental form, the generic condition” of all
the modes of our mental activity;† “in fact, the general condition of
their existence.”‡ But, while holding the same theory with Brown andf
Mill, he completes it by the addition that though our mental states and
our consciousness of them are Edition: current; Page: [117] only the
same fact, they are the same fact regarded in different relations.
Considered in themselves, as acts and feelings, or considered in
relation to the external object with which they are concerned, we do not
call them consciousness. It is when these mental modifications are
referred to a subject or ego, and looked at in relation to Self, that
consciousness is the term used: consciousness being “the
self-affirmation that certain modifications are known by me, and that
these modifications are mine.” In this self-affirmation, however, no
additional fact is introduced. It “is not to be viewed as anything
different from” the “modifications themselves.”* There is but one mental
phænomenon, the act of feeling: but as this implies an acting or feeling
Self, we give it a name which connotes its relation to the Self, and
that name is Consciousness. Thus, “consciousness and knowledge”—and I
think he would have added feeling (the mind’s “affections”) as well as
knowledge—

are not distinguished by different words as different things, but only
as the same thing considered in different aspects. The verbal
distinction is taken for the sake of brevity and precision, and its
convenience warrants its establishment. . . . Though each term of a
relation necessarily supposes the other, nevertheless one of these terms
may be to us the more interesting, and we may consider that term as the
principal, and view the other only as subordinate and correlative. Now,
this is the case in the present instance. In an act of knowledge, my
attention may be principally attracted either to the object known, or to
myself, as the subject knowing; and in the latter case, although no new
element be added to the act, the condition involved in it,—I know that I
know, becomes the primary and permanent matter of consideration. And
when, as in the philosophy of mind, the act of knowledge comes to be
specially considered in relation to the knowing subject, it is, at last,
in the progress of the science, found convenient, if not absolutely
necessary, to possess a scientific word in which this point of view
should be permanently and distinctively embodied.†

If any doubt could have existed, after this passage, of Sir W.
Hamilton’s opinion on the question, it would have been removed by one of
the fragments recently published by his editors, in continuation of the
“Dissertations on Reid.” I extract the words:

Consciousness is not to be regarded as aught different from the mental
modes or movements themselves. It is not to be viewed as an illuminated
place within which objects coming are presented to, and passing beyond
are withdrawn from, observation; nor is it to be considered even as an
observer—the mental modes as phænomena observed. Consciousness is just
the movements themselves, rising above a certain degree of intensity. .
. . It is only a comprehensive word for those mental movements which
rise at once above a certain degree of intension.‡

Edition: current; Page: [118]
We now pass to a question which is of no little importance to the
character of Sir W. Hamilton’s system of philosophy. We found, not long
ago, that he makes between Knowledge and Belief a broad distinction, on
which he lays great stress, and which plays a conspicuous part both in
his own speculations and in those of some of his followers. Let us now
look at this distinction in the light thrown upon it by those doctrines
of Sir W. Hamilton which are the subject of the present chapter.

Though Sir W. Hamilton allows a mediate, or representative, knowledge of
the past and the absent, he has told us that “in philosophical
propriety” it ought not to be called knowledge, but belief. We do not,
properly speaking, know a past event, but believe it, by reason of the
present recollection which we immediately know. We do not, properly
speaking, perceive or Edition: current; Page: [119] know the sun, but we
perceive and know an image in contact with our organs, and believe the
existence of the sun through “a process of reasoning,”[*] which connects
the image that we directly perceive, with something else as its cause.
Again, though we cannot know an Infinite or an Absolute Being, we may
and ought to believe in the reality of such a Being. But in all these
cases the belief itself, the conviction we feel of the existence of the
sun, and of the reality of the past event, and which according to Sir W.
Hamilton we ought to feel of the existence of ha Being who ish the
Infinite and the Absolute—this belief is a fact present in time and in
place—a phænomenon of our own mind; of this we are conscious; this we
immediately know. Such, it is impossible to doubt, is Sir W. Hamilton’s
opinion.

Let us now apply to this the general principle emphatically affirmed by
him, and forming the basis of his argument against Reid and Stewart on
the subject of Consciousness. “It is palpably impossible that we can be
conscious of an act, without being conscious of the object to which that
act is relative.”[†] “The knowledge of an operation necessarily involves
the knowledge of its object.” “It is impossible to make consciousness
conversant about the intellectual operations to the exclusion of their
objects,”[‡] and therefore, since we are conscious of our perceptions,
we must be conscious of the external objects perceived. Such is Sir W.
Hamilton’s theory. But perceptions are not the only mental operations we
are conscious of, which point to an external object. This is no less
true of beliefs. We are conscious of belief in a past event, in the
reality of a distant body, and (according to Sir W. Hamilton) in the
existence of the Infinite and the Absolute. Consequently, on Sir W.
Hamilton’s principle, we are conscious of the objects of those beliefs;
conscious of the past event, conscious of the distant body, conscious of
the Infinite and of the Absolute. To disclaim this conclusion would be
to bring down upon himself the language in which he criticized Reid and
Stewart; it would be to maintain “that I can know that I [believe]
without knowing what I [believe]—or that I can know the [belief] without
knowing what the [belief] is about: for example, that I am conscious of
[remembering a past event] without being conscious of [the past event
remembered]; that I am conscious of [believing in God], without being
conscious of the [God believed in].”[§] If it be true that “an act of
knowledge” exists, and is what it is, “only by relation to its object,”
this must be equally true of an act of belief: and it must be as
“manifest” of the one act as Edition: current; Page: [120] of the other,
“that it can be known only through the object to which it is
correlative.”[*] Therefore past events, distant objects, and the
Absolute, inasmuch as they are believed, are as much objects of
immediate knowledge as things finite and present: since they are
presupposed and implicitly contained in the mental fact of belief,
exactly as a present object is implicitly contained in the mental fact
of perception. Either, therefore, Sir W. Hamilton was wrong in his
doctrine that consciousness of our perceptions implies consciousness of
their external object, or if he was right in this, the distinction
between Belief and Knowledge collapses: all objects of Belief are
objects of Knowledge: Belief and Knowledge are the same thing: and he
was wrong in asserting that the Absolute ought to be believed, or wrong
in maintaining against Cousin that it is incapable of being known.

Another reasoner might escape from this dilemma by saying that the
knowledge of the object of belief, which is implied in knowledge of the
belief itself, is not knowledge of the object as existing, but knowledge
of it as believed—the mere knowledge what it is that we believe. And
this is true; but it could not be said by Sir W. Hamilton; for he
rejects the same reasonable explanation in the parallel case. He will
not allow it to be said that when we have what we call a perception, and
refer it to an external object, we are conscious not of the external
object as existing, but of ourselves as inferring an external existence.
He maintains that the actual outward existence of the object is a
deliverance of consciousness, because “it is impossible that we can be
conscious of an act without being conscious of the object to which that
act is relative.”[†] He cannot, then, reject as applied to the act of
Belief, a law which, when he has occasion for applying it to the acts of
Perception and Knowledge, he affirms to be common to all our mental
operations. If we can be conscious of an operation without being
conscious of its object, the reality of an external world is not indeed
subverted, but there is an end to Sir W. Hamilton’s theory of the mode
in which it is known, and to his particular mode of proving it.

The difficulty in which Sir W. Hamilton is thus involved seems to have
become, though very insufficiently, perceptible to himself. Towards the
end of his Lectures on Logic, after saying that “we may be equally
certain of what we believe as of what we know,” and that, “it has, not
without ground, been maintained by many philosophers, both in ancient
and modern times, that the certainty of all knowledge is, in its
ultimate analysis, resolved into a certainty of belief,”* he adds, “But,
on the other hand, the manifestation of this belief necessarily involves
knowledge; for we cannot believe without some consciousness or knowledge
of the belief, and consequently Edition: current; Page: [121] without
some consciousness or knowledge of the object of the belief.” The remark
which this tardy reflexion suggests to him is merely this: “The
consideration, however, of the relation of Belief and Knowledge does not
properly belong to Logic, except so far as it is necessary to explain
the nature of Truth and Error. It is altogether a metaphysical
discussion; and one of the most difficult problems of which Metaphysics
attempts the solution.”* Accordingly, he takes the extremely
unphilosophical liberty of leaving it unsolved. But when a thinker is
compelled by one part of his philosophy to contradict another part, he
cannot leave the conflicting assertions standing, and throw the
responsibility of his scrape on the arduousness of the subject. A
palpable self-contradiction is not one of the difficulties which can be
adjourned, as belonging to a higher department of science. Though it may
be a hard matter to find the truth, that is no reason for holding to
what is self-convicted of error. If Sir W. Hamilton’s theory of
consciousness is correct, it does not leave the difference between
Belief and Knowledge in a state of obscurity, but abolishes that
distinction entirely, and along with it a great part of his own
philosophy. If his premises are true, we not only cannot believe what we
do not know, but we cannot believe that of which we are not conscious;
the distinction between our immediate and our mediate or representative
cognitions, and the doctrine of things believable but not knowable, must
both succumb; or if these can be saved, it must be by abandoning the
proposition, which is at the root of so much of his philosophy, that
consciousness of an operation is consciousness of the object of the
operation.

But when Sir W. Hamilton began to perceive that if his theory is correct
nothing can be believed except in so far as it is known, he did not
therefore renounce the attempt to distinguish Belief from Knowledge. In
the very same Lecture, he says, “Knowledge and Belief differ not only in
degree but in kind. Knowledge is a certainty founded upon insight;
Belief is a certainty founded upon feeling. The one is perspicuous and
objective; the other is obscure and subjective. Each, however, supposes
the other: and an assurance is said to be a knowledge or a belief,
according as the one element or the other preponderates.”† If Sir W.
Hamilton had bestowed any sufficient consideration on the difficulty, he
would hardly have consented to pay himself with such mere words. If each
of his two certainties supposes the other, it follows that whenever we
have a certainty founded upon feeling, we have a parallel certainty
founded upon insight. We therefore have always insight when we are
certain; and we are never certain except to the extent to which we have
insight. It is not a case in which we can talk of one or the other
element preponderating. They must be equal and coextensive. Edition:
current; Page: [122] The whole of what we know we must believe; and the
whole of what we believe we must know: for we know that we believe it,
and the act of belief “can only be known through the object to which it
is correlative.” Our conviction is not divided, in varying proportions,
between knowledge and belief: the two must always keep abreast of one
another.

All this follows, whatever may be the meaning of the “insight” which
forms the distinction in kind between belief and knowledge. But what is
this insight? “The immediate consciousness of an object” (he goes on to
say) “is called an intuition, an insight.”* So that if knowledge is
distinguished from belief by being grounded on insight, it is
distinguished by being grounded on immediate consciousness. But belief
also supposes immediate consciousness, since “we cannot believe without
some consciousness or knowledge of the belief, and consequently without
some consciousness or knowledge of the object of the belief.” Not merely
without some consciousness, but, if our author’s theory is correct,
without a consciousness coextensive with the belief. As far as we
believe, so far we are conscious of the belief, and so far, therefore,
if the theory be true, we are conscious of the thing believed.

But though Sir W. Hamilton cannot extricate himself from this
entanglement, having, by the premises he laid down, cut off his own
retreat, other thinkers can find a way through it. For, in truth, what
can be more absurd than the notion that belief of anything implies
knowledge of the thing believed? Were this so, there could be no such
thing as false belief. Every day’s experience shows that belief of the
most peremptory kind—assurance founded on the most intense “feeling,” is
compatible with total ignorance of the thing which is the object of
belief; though of course not with ignorance of the belief itself. And
this absurdity is a full refutation of the theory which leads to it—that
consciousness of an operation involves consciousness of that about which
the operation is conversant. The theory does not seem so absurd when
affirmed of knowledge as of belief, because, (the term knowledge being
only applied in common parlance to what is regarded as true, while
belief may confessedly be false,) to say that if we are conscious of our
knowledge, we must be conscious of that which we know, is not so
manifestly ridiculous, as it is to affirm that if we are conscious of a
mistaken belief, we must be conscious of a non-existent fact. Yet the
one proposition must be equally true with the other, if consciousness of
an act involves consciousness of the object of the act. It is over the
ruins of this false theory that we must force our way out of the
labyrinth in which Sir W. Hamilton has imprisoned us. It may be true, or
it may not, that an external world is an object of immediate knowledge.
But assuredly we cannot conclude that we have an immediate knowledge of
external things, because Edition: current; Page: [123] we have an
immediate knowledge of our cognitions of them; whether those cognitions
are to be termed belief, with Reid, or knowledge, with Sir W. Hamilton.*

Edition: current; Page: [124] Edition: current; Page: [125]


CHAPTER IX: Of the Interpretation of Consciousness

according to all philosophers, the evidence of Consciousness, if only we
can obtain it pure, is conclusive. This is an obvious, but by no means a
mere identical proposition. If consciousness be defined as intuitive
knowledge, it is indeed an identical proposition to say, that if we
intuitively know anything, we do know it, and are sure of it. But the
meaning lies in the implied assertion, that we do know some things
immediately, or intuitively. That we must do so is evident, if we know
anything; for what we know mediately, depends for its evidence on our
previous knowledge of something else: unless, therefore, we knew
something immediately, we could not know anything mediately, and
consequently could not know anything at all. That imaginary being, a
complete Sceptic, might be supposed to answer, that perhaps we do not
know anything at all. I shall not reply to this problematical antagonist
in the usual manner, by telling him that if he does not know anything, I
do. I put to him the simplest case conceivable of immediate knowledge,
and ask, if we ever feel anything? If so, then, at the moment of
feeling, do we know that we feel? Or if he will not call this knowledge,
will he deny that when we have a feeling, we have at least some sort of
assurance, or conviction, of having it? This assurance or conviction is
what other people mean by knowledge. If he dislikes the word, I am
willing in discussing with him to employ some other. By whatever name
this assurance is called, it is the test to which we bring all our other
convictions. He may say it is not certain; but such as it may be, it is
our model of certainty. We consider all our other assurances and
convictions as more or less certain, according as they approach the
standard of this. I have a conviction that there are icebergs in the
Arctic seas. I have not had the evidence of my senses for it: I never
saw an iceberg. Neither do I intuitively believe it by a law of my mind.
My conviction is mediate, grounded on testimony, and on inferences from
physical laws. When I say I am convinced of it, I mean that the evidence
is equal to that of my senses. I am as certain of the fact as if I had
seen it. And, on a more complete analysis, when I say I am convinced of
it, what I am convinced of is that if I were in the Arctic seas I should
see it. We mean by knowledge, and by certainty, an assurance similar and
equal to that afforded by our senses: if the evidence Edition: current;
Page: [126] in any other case can be brought up to this, we desire no
more. If a person is not satisfied with this evidence, it is no concern
of anybody but himself, nor, practically, of himself, since it is
admitted that this evidence is what we must, and may with full
confidence, act upon. Absolute scepticism, if there be such a thing, may
be dismissed from discussion, as raising an irrelevant issue, for in
denying all knowledge it denies none. The dogmatist may be quite
satisfied if the doctrine he maintains can be attacked by no arguments
but those which apply to the evidence of the senses. If his evidence is
equal to that, he needs no more; nay, it is philosophically maintainable
that by the laws of psychology we can conceive no more, and that this is
the certainty which we call perfect.

The verdict, then, of consciousness, or, in other words, our immediate
and intuitive conviction, is admitted, on all hands, to be a decision
without appeal. The next question is, to what does consciousness bear
witness? And here, at the outset, a distinction manifests itself, which
is laid down by Sir W. Hamilton, and stated, in a very lucid manner, in
the first volume of his Lectures. I give it in his own words.

A fact of consciousness is that whose existence is given and guaranteed
by an original and necessary belief. But there is an important
distinction to be here made, which has not only been overlooked by all
philosophers, but has led some of the most distinguished into no
inconsiderable errors.

The facts of consciousness are to be considered in two points of view;
either as evidencing their own ideal or phænomenal existence, or as
evidencing the objective existence of something else beyond them. A
belief in the former is not identical with a belief in the latter. The
one cannot, the other may possibly, be refused. In the case of a common
witness, we cannot doubt the fact of his personal reality, nor the fact
of his testimony as emitted,—but we can always doubt the truth of that
which his testimony avers. So it is with consciousness. We cannot
possibly refuse the fact of its evidence as given, but we may hesitate
to admit that beyond itself of which it assures us. I shall explain by
taking an example. In the act of External Perception, consciousness
gives as a conjunct fact, the existence of Me or Self as perceiving, and
the existence of something different from Me or Self as perceived. Now
the reality of this, as a subjective datum—as an ideal phænomenon—it is
absolutely impossible to doubt without doubting the existence of
consciousness, for consciousness is itself this fact; and to doubt the
existence of consciousness is absolutely impossible; for as such a doubt
could not exist except in and through consciousness, it would,
consequently, annihilate itself. We should doubt that we doubted. As
contained—as given—in an act of consciousness, the contrast of mind
knowing and matter known cannot be denied.

But the whole phænomenon as given in consciousness may be admitted, and
yet its inference disputed. It may be said, consciousness gives the
mental subject as perceiving an external object, contradistinguished
from it as perceived: all this we do not, and cannot, deny. But
consciousness is only a phænomenon;—the contrast between the subject and
object may be only apparent, not real; the object given as an external
reality, may only be a mental representation which the mind is, by an
unknown law, determined unconsciously to produce, and to mistake for
something Edition: current; Page: [127] different from itself. All this
may be said and believed, without self-contradiction,—nay, all this has,
by the immense majority of modern philosophers, been actually said and
believed.

In like manner, in an act of Memory, consciousness connects a present
existence with a past. I cannot deny the actual phænomenon, because my
denial would be suicidal, but I can without self-contradiction assert
that consciousness may be a false witness in regard to any former
existence; and I may maintain, if I please, that the memory of the past,
in consciousness, is nothing but a phænomenon, which has no reality
beyond the present. There are many other facts of consciousness which we
cannot but admit as ideal phænomena, but may discredit as guaranteeing
aught beyond their phænomenal existence itself. The legality of this
doubt I do not at present consider, but only its possibility; all that I
have now in view being to show that we must not confound, as has been
done, the double import of the facts, and the two degrees of evidence
for their reality. This mistake has, among others, been made by Mr.
Stewart. . . .

With all the respect to which the opinion of so distinguished a
philosopher as Mr. Stewart is justly entitled, I must be permitted to
say, that I cannot but regard his assertion that the present existence
of the phænomena of consciousness and the reality of that to which these
phænomena bear witness, rest on a foundation equally solid—as wholly
untenable. The second fact, the fact testified to, may be worthy of all
credit—as I agree with Mr. Stewart in thinking that it is; but still it
does not rest on a foundation equally solid as the fact of the testimony
itself. Mr. Stewart confesses that of the former no doubt had ever been
suggested by the boldest sceptic; and the latter, in so far as it
assures us of our having an immediate knowledge on the external
world,—which is the case alleged by Mr. Stewart,—has been doubted, nay
denied, not merely by sceptics, but by modern philosophers almost to a
man. This historical circumstance, therefore, of itself, would create a
strong presumption, that the two facts must stand on very different
foundations; and this presumption is confirmed when we investigate what
these foundations themselves are.

The one fact,—the fact of the testimony, is an act of consciousness
itself; it cannot, therefore, be invalidated without self-contradiction.
For, as we have frequently observed, to doubt of the reality of that of
which we are conscious is impossible: for as we can only doubt through
consciousness, to doubt of consciousness is to doubt of consciousness by
consciousness. If, on the one hand, we affirm the reality of the doubt,
we thereby explicitly affirm the reality of consciousness, and
contradict our doubt; if, on the other hand, we deny the reality of
consciousness, we implicitly deny the reality of our denial itself.
Thus, in the act of perception, consciousness gives, as a conjunct fact,
an ego or mind, and a non-ego or matter, known together, and
contradistinguished from each other. Now, as a present phænomenon, this
double fact cannot possibly be denied. I cannot, therefore, refuse the
fact, that, in perception, I am conscious of a phænomenon which I am
compelled to regard as the attribute of something different from my mind
or self. This I must perforce admit, or run into self-contradiction. But
admitting this, may I not still, without self-contradiction, maintain
that what I am compelled to view as the phænomenon of something
different from me is nevertheless (unknown to me) only a modification of
my mind? In this I admit the fact of the testimony of consciousness as
given, but deny the truth of its report. Whether this denial of the
truth of consciousness as a witness is or is not legitimate, we are not,
at this moment, to consider: all I have in view at present is, as I
said, to show that we must Edition: current; Page: [128] distinguish in
consciousness two kinds of facts,—the fact of consciousness testifying,
and the fact of which consciousness testifies; and that we must not, as
Mr. Stewart has done, hold that we can as little doubt of the fact of
the existence of an external world, as of the fact that consciousness
gives in mutual contrast, the phænomenon of self in contrast to the
phænomenon of not-self.*

He adds, that since no doubt has been, or can be, entertained of the
facts given in the act of consciousness itself, “it is only the
authority of these facts as evidence of something beyond
themselves,—that is, only the second class of facts,—which become matter
of discussion; it is not the reality of consciousness that we have to
prove, but its veracity.”[*]

By the conception and clear exposition of this distinction, Sir W.
Hamilton has contributed materially to make the issues involved in the
great question in hand, more intelligible; and the passage is a
considerable item for the appreciation both of his philosophy and of his
philosophical powers. It is one of the proofs that, whatever be the
positive value of his achievements in metaphysics, he had a greater
capacity for the subject than many metaphysicians of high reputation,
and particularly than his two distinguished predecessors in the same
school of thought, Reid and Stewart.

There are, however, some points in this long extract which are open to
criticism. The distinction it draws, is, in the main, beyond question,
just. Among the facts which Sir W. Hamilton considers as revelations of
consciousness, there is one kind which, as he truly says, no one does or
can doubt, another kind which they can and do. The facts which cannot be
doubted are those to which the word consciousness is by most
philosophers confined: the facts of internal consciousness; “the mind’s
own acts and affections.”[†] What we feel, we cannot doubt that we feel.
It is impossible to us to feel, and to think that perhaps we feel not,
or to feel not, and think that perhaps we feel. What admits of being
doubted, is the revelation which consciousness is supposed to make (and
which our author considers as itself consciousness) of an external
reality. But according to him, though we may doubt this external
reality, we are compelled to admit that consciousness testifies to it.
We may disbelieve our consciousness; but we cannot doubt what its
testimony is. This assertion cannot be granted in the same unqualified
manner as the others. It is true that I cannot doubt my present
impression: I cannot doubt that when I perceive colour or weight, I
perceive them as in an object. Neither can I doubt that when I look at
two fields, I perceive which of them is the farthest off. The majority
of philosophers, however, would not say that perception of distance by
the Edition: current; Page: [129] eye is testified by consciousness;
because although we really do so perceive distance, they believe it to
be an acquired perception. It is at least possible to think that the
reference of our sensible impressions to an external object is, in like
manner, acquired; and if so, though a fact of our consciousness in its
present artificial state, it would have no claim to the title of a fact
of consciousness generally, aor to the unlimited credence given to what
is originally consciousnessa. This point of psychology we shall have to
discuss farther on.

Another remark needs to be made. All the world admits with our author,
that it is impossible to doubt a fact of internal consciousness. To
feel, and not to know that we feel, is an impossibility. But Sir W.
Hamilton is not satisfied to let this truth rest on its own evidence. He
wants a demonstration of it. As if it were not sufficiently proved by
consciousness itself, he attempts to prove it by a reductio ad absurdum.
No one, he says, can doubt consciousness, because, doubt being itself
consciousness, to doubt consciousness would be to doubt that we doubt.
He sets so high a value on this argument, that he is continually
recurring to it in his writings; it actually amounts to a feature of his
philosophy.* Yet it seems to me no better than a fallacy. It treats
doubt as something positive, like certainty, forgetting that doubt is
uncertainty. Doubt is not a state of consciousness, but the negation of
a state of consciousness. Being nothing positive, but simply the absence
of a belief, it seems to be the one intellectual fact which may be true
without self-affirmation of its truth; without our either believing or
disbelieving that we doubt. If doubt is anything other than merely
negative, it means an insufficient assurance; a disposition to believe,
with an inability to believe confidently. But there are degrees of
insufficiency; and if we suppose, for argument’s sake, that it is
possible to doubt consciousness, it may be possible to doubt different
facts of consciousness in different degrees. The general uncertainty of
consciousness might be the one fact that appeared least uncertain. The
saying of Socrates, that the only thing he knew was Edition: current;
Page: [130] that he knew nothing, expresses a conceivable and not
inconsistent state of mind.[*] The only thing he felt perfectly sure of
may have been that he was sure of nothing else. Omitting Socrates (who
was no sceptic as to the reality of knowledge, but only as to its having
yet been attained) and endeavouring to conceive the hazy state of mind
of a person who doubts the evidence of his senses, it is quite possible
to suppose him doubting even whether he doubts. Most people, I should
think, must have found themselves in something like this predicament as
to particular facts, of which their assurance is all but perfect; they
are not quite certain that they are uncertain.*

But though our author’s proof of the position is as untenable as it is
superfluous, all agree with him in the position itself, that a real fact
of consciousness cannot be doubted or denied. Let us now, therefore,
return to his distinction between the facts “given in the act of
consciousness,”[†] and those “to the reality of which it only bears
evidence.”[‡] These last, or, in other words, “the veracity of
consciousness,” Sir W. Hamilton thinks it Edition: current; Page: [131]
possible to doubt or deny; he even says, that such facts, more or fewer
in number, have been doubted or denied by nearly the whole body of
modern philosophers. But this is a statement of the point in issue
between Sir W. Hamilton and modern philosophers, the correctness of
which, I will venture to affirm that very few if any of them would
admit. He represents “nearly the whole body of modern philosophers”[*]
as in the peculiar and paradoxical position, of believing that
consciousness declares to them and to all mankind the truth of certain
facts, and then of disbelieving those facts. That great majority of
philosophers of whom Sir W. Hamilton speaks, would, I apprehend,
altogether deny this statement. They never dreamed of disputing the
veracity of consciousness. They denied what Sir W. Hamilton thinks bitb
impossible to deny; the fact of its testimony. They thought it did not
testify to the facts to which he thinks it testifies. Had they thought
as he does respecting the testimony, they would have thought as he does
respecting the facts. As it is, many of them maintained that
consciousness gives no testimony to anything beyond itself; that
whatever knowledge we possess, or whatever belief we find in ourselves,
of anything but the feelings and operations of our own minds, has been
acquired subsequently to the first beginnings of our intellectual life,
and was not witnessed to by consciousness when it received its first
impressions. Others, again, did believe in a testimony of consciousness,
but not in the testimony ascribed to it by Sir W. Hamilton. Facts, to
which in his opinion it testifies, some of them did not believe at all,
others did not believe them to be known intuitively; nay, many of them
both believed the facts, and believed that they were known intuitively,
and if they differed from Sir W. Hamilton, differed in the merest shadow
of a shade; yet it is with these last, as we shall see, that he has his
greatest quarrel. In his contest, therefore, with (as he says) the
majority of philosophers, Sir W. Hamilton addresses his arguments to the
wrong point. He thinks it needless to prove that the testimony to which
he appeals, is really given by Consciousness, for that he regards as
undenied and undeniable: but he is incessantly proving to us that we
ought to believe our consciousness, a thing which few, if any, of his
opponents denied.* It is true his appeal is always to the same argument,
but that he is never tired of reiterating. It is stated the most
systematically in the first Dissertation on Reid, that “on the
Philosophy of Common Sense.” After Edition: current; Page: [132] saying
that there are certain primary elements of cognition, manifesting
themselves to us as facts of which consciousness assures us, he
continues,

How, it is asked, do these primary propositions—these cognitions at
first hand—these fundamental facts, feelings, beliefs, certify us of
their own veracity? To this the only possible answer is, that as
elements of our mental constitution—as the essential conditions of our
knowledge, they must by us be accepted as true. To suppose their
falsehood, is to suppose that we are created capable of intelligence, in
order to be made the victims of delusion; that God is a deceiver, and
the root of our nature a lie:*

that man is “organized for the attainment, and actuated by the love of
truth, only to become the dupe and victim of a perfidious creator.”† It
appears, therefore, that the testimony of consciousness must be
believed, because to disbelieve it, would be to impute mendacity and
perfidy to the Creator.

But there is a preliminary difficulty to be here resolved, which may be
stated without irreverence. If the proof of the trustworthiness of
consciousness is the veracity of the Creator, on what does the Creator’s
veracity itself rest? Is it not on the evidence of consciousness? The
divine veracity can only be known in two ways, 1st, by intuition, or
2ndly, through evidence. If it is known by intuition, it is itself a
fact of consciousness, and to have ground for believing it, we must
assume that consciousness is trustworthy. Those who say that we have a
direct intuition of God, are only saying in other words that
consciousness testifies to him. If we hold, on the contrary, with our
author, that God is not known by intuition, but proved by evidence, that
evidence must rest, in the last resort, on consciousness. All proofs of
religion, natural or revealed, must be derived either from the testimony
of the senses, or from internal feelings of the mind, or from reasonings
of which one or other of these sources supplied the premises. Religion,
thus itself resting on the evidence of consciousness, cannot be invoked
to prove that consciousness ought to be believed. We must already trust
our consciousness, before we can have any evidence of the truth of
religion.

I know not whether it is from an obscure sense of this objection to his
argument, that Sir W. Hamilton adopts what, in every other point of
view, is a very extraordinary limitation of it. After representing the
veracity of the Creator as staked on the truth of the testimony of
Consciousness, he is content to claim this argument as not amounting to
proof, but only to a primâ facie presumption. “Such a supposition” as
that of a perfidious creator, “if gratuitous, is manifestly
illegitimate.” “The data of our original consciousness must, it is
evident, in the first instance” (the italics are the Edition: current;
Page: [133] author’s), “be presumed true. It is only if proved false,”
which citc can only be by showing them to be inconsistent with one
another, “that their authority can, in consequence of that proof, be, in
the second instance, disallowed.”[*] “Neganti incumbit probatio. Nature
is not gratuitously to be assumed to work, not only in vain, but in
counteraction of herself; our faculty of knowledge is not, without a
ground, to be supposed an instrument of illusion.”* It is making a very
humble claim for the veracity of the Creator, that it should be held
valid merely as a presumption, in the absence of contrary evidence; that
the Divine Being, like a prisoner at the bar, should be presumed
innocent until proved guilty. Far, however, from intending this remark
in any invidious sense against Sir W. Hamilton, I regard it as one of
his titles to honour, that he has not been afraid, as many men would
have been, to subject a proposition surrounded by reverence to the same
logical treatment as any other statement, and has not felt himself
obliged, as a philosopher, to consider it from the first as final. My
complaint dcould only bed, that his logic is not sufficiently
consistente; and that thee divine veracity is entitled either to more or
to less weight than he accords to it. He is bound by the laws of correct
reasoning to prove his premise without the aid of the conclusion which
he means to draw from it. If he can do this—if the divine veracity is
certified by stronger evidence than the testimony of consciousness, it
may be appealed to, not merely as a presumption, but as a proof. If not,
it is entitled to no place in the discussion, even as a presumption.
There is no intermediate position for it, good enough for the one
purpose, but not good enough for the other. It would be a new view of
the fallacy of petitio principii to contend that a conclusion is no
proof of the premises from which it is deduced, but is primâ facie
evidence of them.

Our author, however, cannot be convicted of petitio principii. Though he
has not stated, I think he has enabled us to see, in what manner he
avoided it. True, he has deduced the trustworthiness of consciousness
from the veracity of the Deity; and the veracity of the Deity can only
be known from the evidence of consciousness. But he may fall back upon
the distinction between facts given in consciousness itself, and facts
“to the reality of which it only bears evidence.”[†] It is for the
trustworthiness of these last, that he assigns as presumptive evidence
(which the absence of counter-evidence raises into proof) the divine
veracity. That veracity itself, he may Edition: current; Page: [134]
say, is proved by consciousness, but to prove it requires only the other
class of facts of consciousness, those given in the act of consciousness
itself. There are thus two steps in the argument. “The phænomena of
consciousness considered merely in themselves,” with reference to which
“scepticism is confessedly impossible,”* suffice (we must suppose him to
think) for proving the divine veracity; and that veracity, being proved,
is in its turn a reason for trusting the testimony which consciousness
pronounces to facts without and beyond itself.

Unless, therefore, Sir W. Hamilton was guilty of a paralogism, by
adducing religion in proof of what is necessary to the proof of
religion, his opinion must have been that our knowledge of God rests
upon the affirmation which Consciousness makes of itself, and not of
anything beyond itself; that the divine existence and attributes may be
proved without assuming that consciousness testifies to anything but our
own feelings and mental operations. If this be so, we have Sir W.
Hamilton’s authority for affirming, that even the most extreme form of
philosophical scepticism, the Nihilism (as our author calls it)[*] of
Hume, which denies the objective existence of both Matter and Mind, does
not touch the evidences of Natural Religion. And it really does not
touch any evidences but such as religion can well spare. But what a mass
of religious prejudice has been directed against this philosophical
doctrine, on the strength of what we have now Sir W. Hamilton’s
authority for treating as a mere misapprehension.†

But something more is necessary to render the divine veracity available
in support of the testimony of consciousness, against those, if such
there be, who admit the fact of the testimony, but hesitate to admit its
truth. The divine veracity can only be implicated in the truth of
anything, by proving that the Divine Being intended it to be believed.
As it is not pretended that he has made any revelation in the matter,
his intention can only be inferred from the fresultf: and our author
draws the inference from his having made it an original and
indestructible part of our nature that our consciousness should declare
to us certain facts. Now this is what the philosophers who disbelieve
the facts, would not, any of them, admit. Many indeed have Edition:
current; Page: [135] admitted that we have a natural tendency to believe
something which they considered to be an illusion: but it cannot be
affirmed that God intended us to do whatever we have a natural tendency
to. On every theory of the divine government, it is carried on,
intellectually as well as morally, not by the mere indulgence of our
natural tendencies, but by the regulation and control of them. One
philosopher, Hume, has said that the tendency in question seems to be an
“instinct,” and has called a psychological doctrine, which he regarded
as groundless, as “universal and primary opinion of all men.” But he
never dreamed of saying that we are compelled by our nature to believe
it; on the contrary, he says that this illusive opinion “is soon
destroyed by the slightest philosophy.”[*] Of all eminent thinkers, the
one who comes nearest to our author’s description of those who reject
the testimony of consciousness, is Kant. That philosopher did maintain
that there is an illusion inherent in our constitution; that we cannot
help conceiving as belonging to Things themselves, attributes with which
they are only clothed by the laws of our sensitive and intellectual
faculties.[†] But he gdrew a marked distinction between an illusion and
a delusion. Heg did not believe in a mystification practised on us by
the Supreme Being, nor would he have admitted that God intended us
permanently to mistake the conditions of our mental conceptions for
properties of the things themselves. If God has provided us with the
means of correcting an error, it is probable that he does not intend us
to be misled by it: and in matters speculative as well as practical, it
surely is more religious to see the purposes of God in the dictates of
our deliberate reason, than in those of a “blind and powerful instinct
of nature.”[‡]

As regards almost all, however, if not all philosophers, it may truly be
said, that the questions which have divided them have never turned on
the veracity of consciousness. Consciousness, in the sense usually
attached to it by philosophers,—consciousness of the mind’s own feelings
and operations, cannot, as our author truly says, be disbelieved. The
inward fact, the feeling in our own minds, was never doubted, since to
do so would be to doubt that we feel what we feel. What our author calls
the testimony of consciousness to something beyond itself, may be, and
is, denied; but what is denied, has almost always been that
consciousness gives the testimony; not that, if given, it must be
believed.

At first sight it might seem as if there could not possibly be any doubt
Edition: current; Page: [136] whether our consciousness does or does not
affirm any given thing. Nor can there, if consciousness means, as it
usually does, self-consciousness. If consciousness tells me that I have
a certain thought or sensation, I assuredly have that thought or
sensation. But if consciousness, as with Sir W. Hamilton, means a power
which can tell me things that are not phænomena of my own mind, there is
immediately the broadest divergence of opinion as to what are the things
htoh which consciousness testifies. There is nothing which people do not
think and say that they know by consciousness, provided they do not
remember any time when they did not know or believe it, and are not
aware in what manner they came by the belief. For Consciousness, in this
extended sense, is, as iIi have so often observed, but another word for
Intuitive Knowledge: and whatever other things we may know in that
manner, we certainly do not know by intuition what knowledge is
intuitive. It is a subject on which both the vulgar and the ablest
thinkers are constantly making mistakes. No one is better aware of this
than Sir W. Hamilton. I transcribe a few of the many passages in which
he has acknowledged it. “Errors” may arise by attributing to
“intelligence as necessary and original data, what are only contingent
generalizations from experience, and consequently, make no part of its
complement of native truths.”* And again: “Many philosophers have
attempted to establish on the principles of common sense propositions
which are not original data of consciousness; while the original data of
consciousness, from which their propositions were derived, and to which
they owed their whole necessity and truth—these data the same
philosophers were (strange to say) not disposed to admit.”† It fares
still worse with the philosophers chargeable with this error, when Sir
W. Hamilton comes into personal controversy with them. M. Cousin’s mode
of proceeding, for example, he characterizes thus: “Assertion is
substituted for proof; facts of consciousness are alleged, which
consciousness never knew; and paradoxes that baffle argument, are
promulgated as intuitive truths, above the necessity of confirmation.”‡
M. Cousin’s particular misinterpretation of consciousness was, as we
saw, that of supposing that each of its acts testifies to three things,
of which three Edition: current; Page: [137] Sir W. Hamilton thinks that
it testifies only to one. Besides the finite element, consisting of a
Self and a Not-self, M. Cousin believes that there are directly revealed
in Consciousness an Infinite (God) and a relation between this Infinite
and the Finite.[*] But it is not only M. Cousin who, in our author’s
opinion, mistakes the testimony of consciousness. He brings the same
charge against a thinker with whom he agrees much oftener than with M.
Cousin; against Reid. That philosopher, as we have seen, is of opinion,
contrary to Sir W. Hamilton, that we have an immediate knowledge of
things past. This is to be conscious of them in Sir W. Hamilton’s sense
of the word, though not in Reid’s. Finally, Sir W. Hamilton imputes a
similar error, no longer to any particular metaphysician, but to the
world at large. He says that we do not see the sun, but only a luminous
image, in immediate contiguity to the eye, and that no two persons see
the same sun, but every person a different one. Now it is assuredly the
universal belief of mankind that all of them see the same sun, and that
this is the very sun which rises and sets, and which is 95 (or according
to more recent researches 92) millions of miles distant from the earth.
Nor can any of the appeals of Reid and Sir W. Hamilton from the
sophistries of metaphysicians to Common Sense and the universal
sentiment of mankind, be more emphatic than that to which Sir W.
Hamilton here lays himself open from Reid and from the non-metaphysical
world.*

Edition: current; Page: [138]
We see, therefore, that it is not enough to say that something is
testified by Consciousness, and refer all dissentients to Consciousness
to prove it. Substitute for Consciousness the equivalent phrase (in our
author’s acceptation at least) Intuitive Knowledge, and it is seen that
this is not a thing which can be proved by mere introspection of
ourselves. Introspection can show us a present belief or conviction,
attended with a greater or a less difficulty in accommodating the
thoughts to a different view of the subject: but that this belief, or
conviction, or knowledge, if we call it so, is intuitive, no mere
introspection can ever show; unless we are at liberty to assume that
every mental process which is now as unhesitating and as rapid as
intuition, was intuitive at its outset. Reid, in his commencements at
least, often expressed himself as if he believed this to be the case:
Sir W. Hamilton, wiser than Reid, knew better. With him (at least in his
better moments) the question, what is and is not revealed by
Consciousness, is a question for philosophers. “The first problem of
philosophy” is “to seek out, purify, and establish, by intellectual
analysis and criticism, the elementary feelings or beliefs, in which are
given the elementary truths of which all are in possession:” this
problem, he admits, is “of no easy accomplishment;” and the “argument
from common sense” is thus

manifestly dependent on philosophy as an art, as an acquired dexterity,
and cannot, notwithstanding the errors which they have so frequently
committed, be taken out of the hands of the philosophers. Common Sense
is like Common Law. Each may be laid down as the general rule of
decision; but in the one case it must be left to the Edition: current;
Page: [139] jurist, in the other to the philosopher, to ascertain what
are the contents of the rule; and though in both instances the common
man may be cited as a witness for the custom or the fact, in neither can
he be allowed to officiate as advocate or as judge.*

So far, good. But now, it being conceded that the question, what do we
know intuitively, or, in Sir W. Hamilton’s phraseology, what does our
consciousness testify, is not, as might be supposed, a matter of simple
self-examination, but of science, it has still to be determined in what
manner science should set about it. And here emerges the distinction
between two different methods of studying the problems of metaphysics,
forming the radical difference between the two great schools into which
metaphysicians are fundamentally divided. One of these I shall call, for
distinction, the introspective method; the other, the psychological.

The elaborate and acute criticism on the philosophy of Locke, which is
perhaps the most striking portion of M. Cousin’s Lectures on the History
of Philosophy, sets out with a remark which sums up the characteristics
of the two great schools of mental philosophy, by a summary description
of their methods. M. Cousin observes, that Locke went wrong from the
beginning, by placing before himself, as the question to be first
resolved, the origin of our ideas.[*] This was commencing at the wrong
end. The proper course would have been to begin by determining what the
ideas now are; to ascertain what it is that consciousness actually tells
us, postponing till afterwards the attempt to frame a theory concerning
the origin of any of the mental phænomena.

I accept the question as M. Cousin states it, and I contend, that no
attempt to determine what are the direct revelations of consciousness,
can be successful, or entitled to any regard, unless preceded by what M.
Cousin says ought only to follow it, an inquiry into the origin of our
acquired ideas. For we have it not in our power to ascertain, by any
direct process, what Consciousness told us at the time when its
revelations were in their pristine purity. It only offers itself to our
inspection as it exists now, when those original revelations are
overlaid and buried under a mountainous heap of acquired notions and
perceptions.

It seems to M. Cousin that if we examine, with care and minuteness, our
present states of consciousness, distinguishing and defining every
ingredient which we find to enter into them—every element that we seem
to recognise as real, and cannot, by merely concentrating our attention
upon it, analyse into anything simpler—we reach the ultimate and primary
truths, which are the sources of all our knowledge, and which cannot be
Edition: current; Page: [140] denied or doubted without denying or
doubting the evidence of consciousness itself, that is, the only
evidence which there is for anything. I maintain this to be a
misapprehension of the conditions imposed on inquirers by the
difficulties of psychological investigation. To begin the inquiry at the
point where M. Cousin takes it up, is in fact to beg the question. For
he must be aware, if not of the fact, at least of the belief of his
opponents, that the laws of the mind—the laws of association according
to one class of thinkers, the Categories of the Understanding according
to another—are capable of creating, out of those data of consciousness
which are uncontested, purely mental conceptions, which become so
identified in thought with all our states of consciousness, that we
seem, and cannot but seem, to receive them by direct intuition; and, for
example, the belief in Matter, in the opinion of some of these thinkers,
is, or at least may be, thus produced. Idealists, and Sceptics, contend
that the belief in Matter is not an original fact of consciousness, as
our sensations are, and is therefore wanting in the requisite which, in
M. Cousin’s and Sir W. Hamilton’s opinion, gives to our subjective
convictions objective authority. Now, be these persons right or wrong,
they cannot be refuted in the mode in which M. Cousin and Sir W.
Hamilton attempt to do so—by appealing to Consciousness itself. For we
have no means of interrogating consciousness in the only circumstances
in which it is possible for it to give a trustworthy answer. Could we
try the experiment of the first consciousness in any infant—its first
reception of the impressions which we call external; whatever was
present in that first consciousness would be the genuine testimony of
Consciousness, and would be as much entitled to credit, indeed there
would be as little possibility of discrediting it, as our sensations
themselves. But we have no means of now ascertaining, by direct
evidence, whether we were conscious of outward and extended objects when
we first opened our eyes to the light. That a belief or knowledge of
such objects is in our consciousness now, whenever we use our eyes or
our muscles, is no reason for concluding that it was there from the
beginning, until we have settled the question whether it could possibly
have been brought in since. If any mode can be pointed out in which
within the compass of possibility it might have been brought in, the
hypothesis must be examined and disproved before we are entitled to
conclude that the conviction is an original deliverance of
consciousness. The proof that any of the alleged Universal Beliefs, or
Principles of Common Sense, are affirmations of consciousness, supposes
two things; that the beliefs exist, and that lthere are no means by
which they couldl have been acquired. The first is in most cases
undisputed, but the second is a subject of inquiry which often taxes the
utmost resources of psychology. Edition: current; Page: [141] Locke was
therefore right in believing that “the origin of our ideas” is the main
stress of the problem of mental science, and the subject which must be
first considered in forming the theory of the Mind.[*] Being unable to
examine the actual contents of our consciousness until our earliest,
which are necessarily our most firmly knit associations, those which are
most intimately interwoven with the original data of consciousness, are
fully formed, we cannot study the original elements of mind in the facts
of our present consciousness. Those original elements can only come to
light as residual phænomena, by a previous study of the modes of
generation of the mental facts which are confessedly not original; a
study sufficiently thorough to enable us to apply its results to the
convictions, beliefs, or supposed intuitions which seem to be original,
and to determine whether some of them may not have been generated in the
same modes, so early as to have become inseparable from our
consciousness before the time mto which memory goes backm. This mode of
ascertaining the original elements of mind I calln, for want of a better
word,n the psychological, as distinguished from the simply introspective
mode. It is the known and approved method of physical science, adapted
to the necessities of psychology.*

It might be supposed from incidental expressions of Sir W. Hamilton,
that he was alive to the need of a methodical scientific investigation,
to determine what portion of our “natural beliefs” are really original,
and what are inferences, or acquired impressions, mistakenly deemed
intuitive. To the declarations already quoted to this effect, the
following may be added. Speaking of Descartes’ plan, of commencing
philosophy by a reconsideration Edition: current; Page: [142] of all our
fundamental opinions,[*] he says, “There are among our prejudices, or
pretended cognitions, a great many hasty conclusions, the investigation
of which requires much profound thought, skill, and acquired knowledge.
. . . To commence philosophy by such a review, it is necessary for a man
to be a philosopher before he can attempt to become one.”* And he
elsewhere bestows high praise upon Aristotle for not falling “into the
error of many modern philosophers, in confounding the natural and
necessary with the habitual and acquired connexions of thought,” nor
attempting “to evolve the conditions under which we think from the
tendencies generated by thinking;”† a praise which cannot be bestowed on
our author himself. But, notwithstanding the ample concession which he
appeared to make when he admitted that the problem was one of extreme
difficulty, essentially scientific, and ought to be reserved for
philosophers, I regret to say that he as completely sets at naught the
only possible method of solving it, as M. Cousin himself. He even
expresses his contempt for that method. Speaking of Extension, he says,
“It is truly an idle problem to attempt imagining the steps by which we
may be supposed to have acquired the notion of Extension, when, in fact,
we are unable to imagine to ourselves the possibility of that notion not
being always in our possession.”‡ That things which we “are unable to
imagine to ourselves the possibility of,” may be, and many of them must
be, true, was a doctrine which we thought we had learnt from the author
of the Philosophy of the Conditioned. That we cannot imagine a time at
which we had no knowledge of Extension, is no evidence that there has
not been such a time. There are mental laws, recognised by Sir W.
Hamilton himself, which would inevitably cause such a state of things to
become inconceivable to us, even if it once existed. There are
artificial inconceivabilities equal in strength to any natural. Indeed
it is questionable if there are any natural inconceivabilities, or if
anything is inconceivable to us for any other reason than because Nature
does not afford the combinations in experience which are necessary to
make it conceivable.

I do not think that there can be found, in all Sir W. Hamilton’s
writings, a single instance in which, before registering a belief as a
part of our consciousness from the beginning, he thinks it necessary to
ascertain that it ocannoto have grown up subsequently. He demands,
indeed, “that no fact be assumed as a fact of consciousness but what is
ultimate and simple.” But Edition: current; Page: [143] to pronounce it
ultimate, the only condition he requires is that we be not able to
“reduce it to a generalization from experience.” This condition is
realized by its possessing the “character of necessity.” “It must be
impossible not to think it. In fact, by its necessity alone can we
recognise it as an original datum of intelligence, and distinguish it
from any mere result of generalization and custom.”* In this Sir W.
Hamilton is at one with the whole of his own section of the
philosophical world; with Reid, with Stewart, with Cousin, with Whewell,
pand we may add, with Kantp.† The test by which they all decide a belief
to be a part of our primitive consciousness—an original intuition of the
mind—is the necessity of thinking it. Their proof that we must always,
from the beginning, have had the belief, is the impossibility of getting
rid of it now. This argument, applied to any of the disputed questions
of philosophy, is doubly illegitimate: neither the major nor the minor
premise is admissible. For, in the first place, the very fact that the
qquestions areq disputed, disproves the alleged impossibility. Those
against rwhose dissentr it is needful to defend the belief which
Edition: current; Page: [144] is affirmed to be necessary, are
unmistakeable examples that it is not necessary. It may be a necessary
belief to those who think it so; they may personally be quite incapable
of not holding it. But even if this incapability extended to all
mankind, it might be merely the effect of a strong association; Edition:
current; Page: [145] like the impossibility of believing Antipodes; and
it cannot be shown that even where the impossibility is, for the time,
real, it might not, as in that case, be overcome. The history of science
teems with inconceivabilities which have been conquered, and supposed
necessary truths which have first ceased to be thought necessary, then
to be thought true, and have finally come to be deemed impossible.*
These philosophers, Edition: current; Page: [146] therefore, and among
them Sir W. Hamilton, mistake altogether the true conditions of
psychological investigation, when, instead of proving a belief to be an
original fact of consciousness by showing that it scannot, by any known
means,s have been acquired, they conclude that it was not acquired, for
the reason, often false, and never sufficiently substantiated, that our
consciousness cannot get rid of it now.

Since, then, Sir W. Hamilton not only neglects, but repudiates, the only
scientific mode of ascertaining our original beliefs, what does he mean
by Edition: current; Page: [147] treating the question as one of
science, and in what manner does he apply science to it? Theoretically,
he claims for science an exclusive jurisdiction over the whole domain,
but practically he gives it nothing to do except to settle the relations
of the supposed intuitive beliefs among themselves. It is the province
of science, he thinks, to resolve some of these beliefs into others. He
prescribes, as tat rule of judgment, what he calls “the Law of
Parcimony.” No greater number of ultimate beliefs are to be postulated
than is strictly indispensable. Where one such belief can be looked upon
as a particular case of another—the belief in Matter, for instance, of
the cognition of a Non-ego—the more special of the two necessities of
thought merges in the more general one. This identification of two
necessities of thought, and subsumption of one of them under the other,
he is not wrong in regarding as a function of science. He affords an
example of it, when, in a manner which we shall hereafter characterize,
he denies to Causation the character, which philosophers of his school
have commonly assigned to it, of an ultimate belief, and attempts to
identify it with another and more general law of thought. This limited
function is the only one which, it seems to me, is reserved for science
in Sir W. Hamilton’s mode of studying the primary facts of
consciousness. In the mode he practises of ascertaining them to be facts
of consciousness, there is nothing for science to do. For, to call them
so because in his opinion he himself, and those who agree with him,
cannot get rid of the belief in them, does not seem exactly a scientific
process.* It is, however, characteristic of what I have called the
introspective, Edition: current; Page: [148] in contradistinction to the
psychological, method of metaphysical inquiry. The difference between
these methods will now be exemplified by showing them at work on a
particular question, the most fundamental one in philosophy, the
distinction between the Ego and the Non-ego.

We shall first examine what Sir W. Hamilton has done by his method, and
shall afterwards attempt to exemplify the use which can be made of the
other.

Edition: current; Page: [149]


CHAPTER X: Sir William Hamilton’s View of the Different Theories Respecting the Belief in an External World

sir w. hamilton brings a very serious charge against the great majority
of philosophers. He accuses them of playing fast and loose with the
testimony of consciousness; rejecting it when it is inconvenient, but
appealing to it as conclusive when they have need of it to establish any
of their opinions. “No philosopher has ever openly thrown off allegiance
to the authority of consciousness.”* No one denies “that as all
philosophy is evolved from consciousness, so, on the truth of
consciousness, the possibility of all philosophy is dependent.”† But if
any testimony of consciousness be supposed false,

the truth of no other fact of consciousness can be maintained. The legal
brocard, Falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus, is a rule not more applicable
to other witnesses than to consciousness. Thus every system of
philosophy which implies the negation of any fact of consciousness is
not only necessarily unable, without self-contradiction, to establish
its own truth by any appeal to consciousness; it is also unable, without
self-contradiction, to appeal to consciousness against the falsehood of
any other system. If the absolute and universal veracity of
consciousness be once surrendered, every system is equally true, or
rather all are equally false; philosophy is impossible, for it has now
no instrument by which truth can be discovered, no standard by which it
can be tried; the root of our nature is a lie. But though it is thus
manifestly the common interest of every scheme of philosophy to preserve
intact the integrity of consciousness, almost every scheme of philosophy
is only another mode in which this integrity has been violated. If,
therefore, I am able to prove the fact of this various violation, and to
show that the facts of consciousness have never, or hardly ever, been
fairly evolved, it will follow, as I said, that no reproach can be
justly addressed to consciousness as an ill-informed, or vacillating, or
perfidious witness, but to those only who were too proud or too
negligent to accept its testimony, to employ its materials, and obey its
laws.‡

That nearly all philosophers have merited this imputation, our author
Edition: current; Page: [150] endeavours to show by a classified
enumeration of the various theories which they have maintained
respecting the perception of material objects. No instance can be better
suited for trying the dispute. The question of an external world is the
great battle-ground of metaphysics, not so much from its importance in
itself, as because while it relates to the most familiar of all our
mental acts, it forcibly illustrates the characteristic differences
between the two metaphysical methods.

“We are immediately conscious in perception,” says Sir W. Hamilton,

of an ego and a non-ego, known together, and known in contrast to each
other. This is the fact of the Duality of Consciousness. It is clear and
manifest. When I concentrate my attention in the simplest act of
perception, I return from my observation with the most irresistible
conviction of two facts, or rather two branches of the same fact; that I
am, and that something different from me exists. In this act I am
conscious of myself as the perceiving subject, and of an external
reality as the object perceived; and I am conscious of both existences
in the same indivisible moment of intuition. The knowledge of the
subject does not precede, nor follow, the knowledge of the object;
neither determines, neither is determined by the other. Such is the fact
of perception revealed in consciousness, and as it determines mankind in
general in their almost equal assurance of the reality of an external
world, as of the existence of our own minds.[*]

We may, therefore, lay it down as an undisputed truth, that
consciousness gives, as an ultimate fact, a primitive duality; a
knowledge of the ego in relation and contrast to the non-ego; and a
knowledge of the non-ego in relation and contrast to the ego. The ego
and non-ego are thus given in an original synthesis, as conjoined in the
unity of knowledge, and in an original antithesis, as opposed in the
contrariety of existence. In other words, we are conscious of them in an
indivisible act of knowledge together and at once, but we are conscious
of them as, in themselves, different and exclusive of each other.

Again, consciousness not only gives us a duality, but it gives its
elements in equal counterpoise and independence. The ego and
non-ego—mind and matter—are not only given together, but in absolute
co-equality. The one does not precede, the other does not follow: and in
their mutual relation, each is equally dependent, equally independent.
Such is the fact as given in and by consciousness.

Or rather (he should have said) such is the answer we receive, when we
examine and interrogate our present consciousness. To assert more than
this, merely on this evidence, is to beg the question instead of solving
it.

Philosophers have not, however, been content to accept the fact in its
integrity, but have been pleased to accept it only under such
qualifications as it suited their systems to devise. In truth, there are
just as many different philosophical systems originating in this fact,
as it admits of various possible modifications. An enumeration of these
modifications, accordingly, affords an enumeration of philosophical
theories.

In the first place, there is the grand division of philosophers into
those who do, Edition: current; Page: [151] and those who do not, accept
the fact in its integrity. Of modern philosophers, almost all are
comprehended under the latter category, while of the former, if we do
not remount to the schoolmen and the ancients, I am only aware of a
single philosopher before Reid,[*] who did not reject, at least in part,
the fact as consciousness affords it.

As it is always expedient to possess a precise name for a precise
distinction, I would be inclined to denominate those who implicitly
acquiesce in the primitive duality as given in consciousness, the
Natural Realists, or Natural Dualists, and their doctrine, Natural
Realism or Natural Dualism.

This is, of course, the author’s own doctrine.

In the second place, the philosophers who do not accept the fact, and
the whole fact, may be divided and subdivided into various classes by
various principles of distribution.

The first subdivision will be taken from the total, or partial,
rejection of the import of the fact. I have previously shown that to
deny any fact of consciousness as an actual phænomenon is utterly
impossible.

(But it is very far from impossible to believe that something which we
now confound with consciousness, may have been altogether foreign to
consciousness awhen this was unmingled with acquired impressionsa.)

But though necessarily admitted as a present phænomenon, the import of
this phænomenon—all beyond our actual consciousness of its existence—may
be denied. We are able, without self-contradiction, to suppose, and
consequently to assert, that all to which the phænomenon of which we are
conscious refers, is a deception; [say rather, an unwarranted
inference;] that for example, the past, to which an act of memory
refers, is only an illusion involved in our consciousness of the
present,—that the unknown subject to which every phænomenon of which we
are conscious involves a reference, has no reality beyond this reference
itself,—in short, that all our knowledge of mind or matter is only a
consciousness of various bundles of baseless appearances. This doctrine,
as refusing a substantial reality to the phænomenal existence of which
we are conscious, is called Nihilism; and consequently, philosophers, as
they affirm or deny the authority of consciousness in guaranteeing a
substratum or substance to the manifestation of the ego and non-ego, are
divided into Realists or Substantialists, and into Nihilists or
Non-Substantialists. Of positive or dogmatic Nihilism there is no
example in modern philosophy. . . . But as a sceptical conclusion from
the premises of previous philosophers, we have an illustrious example of
Nihilism in Hume; and the celebrated Fichte admits that the speculative
principles of his own idealism would, unless corrected by his practical,
terminate in this result.*

The Realists, or Substantialists, those who do believe in a substratum,
but reject the testimony of consciousness to an immediate cognizance of
an Edition: current; Page: [152] Ego and a Non-ego, our author divides
into two classes, according as they admit the real existence of two
substrata, or only of one. These last, whom he denominates Unitarians or
Monists, either acknowledge the ego alone, or the non-ego alone, or
regard the two as identical. Those who admit the ego alone, looking upon
the non-ego as a product evolved from it (i.e. as something purely
mental) are the Idealists. Those who admit the non-ego alone, and regard
the ego as evolved from it (i.e. as purely material) are the
Materialists. The third class acknowledge the equipoise of the two, but
deny their antithesis, maintaining “that mind and matter are only
phænomenal modifications of the same common substance. This is the
doctrine of Absolute Identity, a doctrine of which the most illustrious
representatives among recent philosophers are Schelling, Hegel, and
Cousin.”*

There remain those who admit the coequal reality of the Ego and the
Non-ego, of mind and matter, and also their distinctness from one
another, but deny that they are known immediately. These are Dualists,
but

are distinguished from the Natural Dualists of whom we formerly spoke,
in this—that the latter establish the existence of the two worlds of
mind and matter on the immediate knowledge we possess of both series of
phænomena—a knowledge of which consciousness assures us; whereas the
former, surrendering the veracity of consciousness to our immediate
knowledge of material phænomena, and consequently, our immediate
knowledge of the existence of matter, still endeavour, by various
hypotheses and reasonings, to maintain the existence of an unknown
external world. As we denominate those who maintain a Dualism as
involved in the fact of consciousness, Natural Dualists; so we may style
those dualists who deny the evidence of consciousness to our immediate
knowledge of aught beyond the sphere of mind, Hypothetical Dualists, or
Cosmothetic Idealists.

To the class of Cosmothetic Idealists, the great majority of modern
philosophers are to be referred. Denying an immediate or intuitive
knowledge of the external reality, whose existence they maintain, they,
of course, hold a doctrine of mediate or representative perception; and,
according to the various modifications of that doctrine, they are again
subdivided into those who view, in the immediate object of perception, a
representative entity present to the mind, but not a mere mental
modification, and into those who hold that the immediate object is only
a representative modification of the mind itself. It is not always easy
to determine to which of these classes some philosophers belong. To the
former, or class holding the cruder hypothesis of representation,
certainly belong the followers of Democritus and Epicurus, those
Aristotelians who held the vulgar doctrine of species (Aristotle himself
was probably a natural dualist), and in recent times, among many others,
Malebranche, Berkeley, Clarke, Newton, Abraham Tucker, &c. To these is
also, but problematically, to be referred, Locke. To the second, or
class holding the finer hypothesis of representation, belong, without
any doubt, many of the Platonists, Leibnitz, Arnauld, Crousaz,
Condillac, Kant, &c., and to this class is also probably to be referred
Descartes.†

In our own country the best known and typical specimen of this mode of
Edition: current; Page: [153] thinking, is Brown; and it is upon him
that our author discharges most of the shafts which this class of
thinkers, as being the least distant from him of all his opponents,
copiously receive from him.*

With regard to the various opinions thus enumerated, I shall first make
a remark of general application, and shall then advert particularly to
the objects of Sir W. Hamilton’s more especial animadversion, the
Cosmothetic Idealists.

Concerning all these classes of thinkers, except the Natural Realists,
Sir W. Hamilton’s statement is, that they deny some part of the
testimony of consciousness, and by so doing invalidate the appeals which
they nevertheless make to consciousness, as a voucher for their own
doctrines. If he had said that they all run counter, in some particular,
to the general sentiment of mankind—that they all deny some common
opinion, some natural belief (meaning by natural, not one which rests on
a necessity of our nature, but merely one which, in common with
innumerable varieties of false opinion, mankind have a strong tendency
to adopt); had he said only this, no one could have contested its truth;
but it would not have been a reductio ad absurdum of his opponents. For
all philosophers, Sir W. Hamilton as much as the rest, deny some common
opinions, which others might call natural beliefs, but which those who
deny them consider, and have a right to consider, as natural prejudices;
held, nevertheless, by the generality of Edition: current; Page: [154]
mankind in the persuasion of their being self-evident, or, in other
words, intuitive, and deliverances of consciousness. Some of the points
on which Sir W. Hamilton is at issue with natural beliefs, relate to the
very subject in hand—the perception of external things. We have found
him maintaining that we do not see the sun, but an image of it, and that
no two persons see the same sun; in contradiction to as clear a case as
could be given of natural belief. And we shall find him affirming, in
opposition to an equally strong natural belief, that we immediately
perceive extension only in our own organs, and not in the objects we see
or touch. Beliefs, therefore, which seem among the most natural that can
be entertained, are sometimes, in his opinion, delusive; and he has told
us that to discriminate which these are, is not within the competence of
everybody, but only of philosophers. He would say, of course, that the
beliefs which he rejects were not in our consciousness originally. And
nearly all his opponents say the same thing of those which they reject.
Those, indeed, who, like Kant, believe that there are elements present,
even at the first moment of internal consciousness, which do not exist
in the object, but are derived from the mind’s own laws, are fairly open
to Sir W. Hamilton’s criticism. It is not my business to justify, in
point of consistency, any more than of conclusiveness, theb reasoning,
by which Kant, after getting rid of the outward reality of all the
attributes of Body, persuades himself that he demonstrates the
externality of Body itself.* But, as regards all existing schools of
thought not descended from Kant, Sir W. Hamilton’s accusation is without
ground.

There is something more to be said respecting the mixed multitude of
metaphysicians whom our author groups together under the title of
Cosmothetic Idealists, and whose mode of thought he judges more harshly
than that of any other school. He represents them as holding the
doctrine that we perceive external objects, not by an immediate, but by
a mediate or representative perception. And he recognises three
divisions of them, according to three different forms in which this
hypothesis may be entertained.† The supposed representative object may
be regarded, first, as not a Edition: current; Page: [155] state of
mind, but something else; either external to the mind, like the species
sensibiles of some of the ancients, and the “motions of the brain” of
some of the early moderns;[*] or in the mind, like the Ideas of
Berkeley. Secondly, it may be regarded as a state of mind, but a state
different from the mind’s act in perceiving or being conscious of it: of
this kind, perhaps, are the Ideas of Locke. Or, thirdly, as a state of
mind identical with the act by which we are said to perceive it. This
last is the form in which, as Sir W. Hamilton truly says, the doctrine
was held by Brown.*

Now, the first two of these three opinions may fairly be called what our
author calls them—theories of mediate or representative perception. The
object which, in these theories, the mind is supposed directly to
perceive, is a tertium quid, which by the one theory is, and by the
other is not, a state or modification of mind, but in both is distinct
equally from the act of perception, and from the external object: and
the mind is cognizant of the external object vicariously, through this
third thing, of which alone it has immediate cognizance—of which alone,
therefore, it is, in Sir W. Hamilton’s sense of the word, conscious.
Against both these theories Reid, Stewart, and our author, are
completely triumphant, and I am in no way interested in pressing for a
rehearing of the cause.

But the third opinion, which is Brown’s, cannot with any justness of
thought or propriety of language be called a theory of mediate or
representative perception. Had Sir W. Hamilton taken half the pains to
understand Brown which he took to understand far inferior thinkers, he
never would have described Brown’s doctrine in terms so inappropriate.

Representative knowledge is always understood by our author to be
knowledge of a thing by means of an image of it; by means of something
which is like the thing itself. “Representative knowledge,” he says, “is
only deserving of the name of knowledge in so far as it is conformable
with the intuitions which it represents.”† The representation must stand
in a relation to what it represents, like that of a picture to its
original: as the representation in memory of a past impression of sense,
does to that past impression; as a representation in imagination does to
a supposed possible presentation of sense; and as the Ideas of the
earlier Cosmothetic Idealists were supposed to do to the outward objects
of which they were the image or impress. But the Mental Modifications of
Brown and those who think with him, are not supposed to bear any
resemblance to the objects which excite them.[†] These objects are
supposed to be unknown to us, except as the causes of the mental
modifications. The only relation between the two is Edition: current;
Page: [156] that of cause and effect. Brown, being free from the vulgar
errord that a cause must be like its effect, and admitting no knowledge
of the cause (beyond its bare existence) except the effect itself,
naturally found nothing in it which it was possible to compare with the
effect, or in virtue of which any resemblance could be affirmed to exist
between the two. In another place, Sir W. Hamilton makes an ostensible
distinction between the fact of resembling, and that of truly
representing, the objects; but defines the last expression to mean,
affording us “such a knowledge of their nature as we should have were an
immediate intuition of the reality in itself competent to man.”* No one
who is at all acquainted with Brown’s opinions will pretend him to have
maintained that we have anything of this sort. He did not believe that
the mental modification afforded us any knowledge whatever of the nature
of the external object. There is no need to quote passages in proof of
this; it is a fact patent to whoever reads his Lectures.[*] It is the
more strange that Sir W. Hamilton should have failed to recognise this
opinion of Brown, because it is exactly the opinion which he himself
holds respecting our knowledge of objects in respect of their Secondary
Qualities. These, he says, are “in their own nature occult and
inconceivable,” and are known only in their effects on us, that is, by
the mental modifications which they produce.†

Further, Brown’s is not only not a theory of representative perception,
but it is not even a theory of mediate perception. He assumes no tertium
quid, no object of thought intermediate between the mind and the outward
object. He recognises only the perceptive act; which with him means, and
is always declared to mean, the mind itself perceiving. It will hardly
be pretended that the mind itself is the “representative object”
interposed by him between itself and the outward thing which is acting
upon it; and if it is not, there certainly is no other. But if Brown’s
theory is not a theory of mediate perception, it loses all that
essentially distinguishes it from Sir W. Hamilton’s own doctrine. For
Brown, also, thinks that we have, on the occasion of certain sensations,
an instantaneous and irresistible conviction of an outward object. And
if this conviction is immediate, and necessitated by the constitution of
our nature, in what does it differ from our author’s direct
consciousness? Consciousness, immediate knowledge, and intuitive
knowledge, are, Sir W. Hamilton tells us, convertible expressions; and
if it be granted that whenever our senses are affected by a material
object, we immediately and intuitively recognise that object as existing
and distinct Edition: current; Page: [157] from us, it requires a great
deal of ingenuity to make out any substantial difference between this
immediate intuition of an external world, and Sir W. Hamilton’s direct
perception of it.

The distinction which our author makes, resolves itself, as explained by
him, into the difference of which he has said so much, but of which he
seemed to have so confused an idea, between Belief and Knowledge. In
Brown’s opinion,[*] and I will add, in Reid’s, the mental modification
which we experience from the presence of an object, raises in us an
irresistible belief that the object exists. No, says Sir W. Hamilton: it
is not a belief, but a knowledge: we have indeed a belief, and our
knowledge is certified by the belief; but this belief of ours regarding
the object is a belief that we know it.

In perception, consciousness gives, as an ultimate fact, a belief of the
knowledge of the existence of something different from self. As
ultimate, this belief cannot be reduced to a higher principle; neither
can it be truly analysed into a double element. We only believe that
this something exists, because we believe that we know (are conscious
of) this something as existing; the belief of the existence is
necessarily involved in the belief of the knowledge of the existence.
Both are original, or neither. Does consciousness deceive us in the
latter, it necessarily deludes us in the former; and if the former,
though a fact of consciousness, is false, the latter, because a fact of
consciousness, is not true. The beliefs contained in the two
propositions,

1°. I believe that a material world exists;

2°. I believe that I immediately know a material world existing (in
other words, I believe that the external reality itself is the object of
which I am conscious in perception),

though distinguished by philosophers, are thus virtually identical. The
belief of an external world was too powerful, not to compel an
acquiescence in its truth. But the philosophers yielded to nature, only
in so far as to coincide in the dominant result. They falsely
discriminated the belief in the existence, from the belief in the
knowledge. With a few exceptions, they held fast by the truth of the
first; but they concurred, with singular unanimity, in abjuring the
second.*

Accordingly, Brown is rebuked because, while rejecting our natural
belief that we know the external object, he yet accepts our natural
belief that it exists as a sufficient warrant for its existence. But
what real distinction is there between Brown’s intuitive belief of the
existence of the object, and Sir W. Hamilton’s intuitive knowledge of
it? Just three pages previous, Sir W. Hamilton had said, “Our knowledge
rests ultimately on certain facts of consciousness, which as primitive,
and consequently incomprehensible, are given less in the form of
cognitions than of beliefs.”† The consciousness of an external world is,
on his own showing, primitive and incomprehensible; it therefore is less
a cognition than a belief. But if we do not so much Edition: current;
Page: [158] know as believe an external world, what is meant by saying
that we believe that we know it? Either we do not know, but only believe
it, and if so, Brown and the other philosophers assailed were right; or
knowledge and belief, in the case of ultimate facts, are identical, and
then, believing that we know is only believing that we believe, which
according to our author’s and to all rational principles, is but another
word for simple believing.

It would not be fair, however, to hold our author to his own confused
use of the terms Belief and Knowledge. He never succeeds in making
anything like an intelligible distinction between these two notions
considered generally, but in particular cases we may be able to find
something which he is attempting to express by them. In the present case
his meaning seems to be, that Brown’s Belief in an external object,
though instantaneous and irresistible, was supposed to be suggested to
the mind by its own sensation; ewhich suggestion Brown regarded as a
case of a more general law,[*] whereby every fact suggests the intuitive
belief of a cause or antecedent with which it is invariably connected:e
while Sir W. Hamilton’s Knowledge of the object is supposed to arise
along with the sensation, and to be co-ordinate with it. And this is
what Sir W. Hamilton means by calling Brown’s a mediate, his own an
immediate cognition of the object: the real difference being that, on
Sir W. Hamilton’s theory, the cognition of the ego or foff its
modification, and that of the non-ego, are simultaneous, while on
Brown’s the one immediately precedes the other. Our author expresses
this meaning, though much less clearly, when he declares Brown’s theory
to be “that in perception, the external reality is not the immediate
object of consciousness, but that the ego is only determined in some
unknown manner to represent the non-ego, which representation, though
only a modification of mind or self, we are compelled by an illusion of
our nature, to mistake for a modification of matter, or non-self.”* This
being our author’s conception of the doctrine which he has to refute,
let us see in what manner he proceeds to refute it.

“You will remark,” he says,

that Brown (and Brown only speaks the language of all the philosophers
who do not allow the mind a consciousness of aught beyond its own
states,) misstates the phænomenon when he asserts that, in perception,
there is a reference from the internal to the external, from the known
to the unknown. That this is not the fact, our observation of the
phænomenon will at once convince you. In an act of perception, I am
conscious of something as self and of something as not self: this is the
simple fact. The philosophers, on the contrary, who will not accept this
fact, Edition: current; Page: [159] misstate it. They say that we are
conscious of nothing but a certain modification of mind; but this
modification involves a reference to,—in other words, a representation
of,—something external as its object. Now this is untrue. We are
conscious of no reference, of no representation: we believe that the
object of which we are conscious is the object which exists.

To this argument (of the worth of which something has been said already)
I shall return presently. But he subjoins a second.

Nor could there possibly be such reference or representation; for
reference or representation supposes a knowledge already possessed of
the object referred to or represented; but perception is the faculty by
which our first knowledge is acquired, and therefore cannot suppose a
previous knowledge as its condition.”*

And further on:

Mark the vice of the procedure. We can only, 1°, assert the existence of
an external world inasmuch as we know it to exist; and we can only, 2°,
assert that one thing is representative of another, inasmuch as the
thing represented is known, independently of the representation. But how
does the hypothesis of a representative perception proceed? It actually
converts the fact into an hypothesis: actually converts the hypothesis
into a fact. On this theory, we do not know the existence of an external
world, except on the supposition that that which we do know, truly
represents it as existing. The hypothetical realist cannot, therefore,
establish the fact of the external world, except upon the fact of its
representation. This is manifest. We have, therefore, next to ask him,
how he knows the fact, that the external world is actually represented.
A representation supposes something represented, and the representation
of the external world supposes the existence of that world. Now the
hypothetical realist, when asked how he proves the reality of the outer
world, which, ex hypothesi, he does not know, can only say that he
infers its existence from the fact of its representation. But the fact
of the representation of an external world supposes the existence of
that world; therefore he is again at the point from which he started. He
has been arguing in a circle.†

Let me first remark that this reasoning assumes the whole point in
dispute; it presupposes that the supposition which it is brought to
disprove is impossible. The theory of the third form of Cosmothetic
Idealism is, that though we are conscious only of the sensations which
an object gives us, we are determined by a necessity of our nature,
which some call an instinct, others an intuition, others a fundamental
law of belief, to ascribe these sensations to something external, as
their substratum, or as their cause. There is surely nothing à priori
impossible in this supposition. The supposed instinct or intuition seems
to be of the same family with many other Laws of Thought, or Natural
Beliefs, which our author not only admits without scruple, but enjoins
obedience to, under the usual sanction, that otherwise our intelligence
must be a lie. In the present case, however, he, Edition: current; Page:
[160] without the smallest warrant, excludes this from the list of
possible hypotheses. He says that we cannot infer a reality from a
mental representation, unless we already know the reality independently
of the mental representation. Now he could hardly help being aware that
this is the very matter in dispute. Those who hold the opinion he argues
against, do not admit the premise upon which he argues. They say that we
may be, and are, necessitated to infer a cause, of which we know nothing
whatever except its effect. And why not? Sir W. Hamilton thinks us
entitled to infer a substance from attributes, though he allows that we
know nothing of the substance except its attributes.

But this is not the worst, and there are few specimens of our author in
which his deficiencies as a philosopher stand out in a stronger light.
As Burke in politics, so Sir W. Hamilton in metaphysics, was too often a
polemic rather than a connected thinker: the generalizations of both,
often extremely valuable, seem less the matured convictions of a
scientific mind, than weapons snatched up for the service of a
particular quarrel. If Sir W. Hamilton can only seize upon something
which will strike a hard blow at an opponent, he seldom troubles himself
how much of his own edifice may be knocked down by the shock. Had he
examined the argument he here uses, sufficiently to determine whether he
could stand by it as a deliberate opinion, he would have perceived that
it committed him to the doctrine that there is no such thing as
representative knowledge. But it is one of Sir W. Hamilton’s most
positive tenets that there is representative knowledge, and that Memory,
among other things, is an example of it. Let us turn back to his
discussion of that subject, and see what he, at that time, considered
representative knowledge to be.

Every act, and consequently every act of knowledge, exists only as it
now exists; and as it exists only in the Now, it can be cognizant only
of a now-existent object. But the object known in memory is, ex
hypothesi, past; consequently, we are reduced to the dilemma, either of
refusing a past object to be known in memory at all, or of admitting it
to be only mediately known, in and through a present object. That the
latter alternative is the true one, it will require a very few
explanatory words to convince you. What are the contents of an act of
memory? An act of memory is merely a present state of mind which we are
conscious of not as absolute, but as relative to, and representing,
another state of mind, and accompanied with the belief that the state of
mind, as now represented, has actually been. I remember an event I
saw—the landing of George IV at Leith. This remembrance is only a
consciousness of certain imaginations, involving the conviction that
these imaginations now represent ideally what I formerly really
experienced. All that is immediately known in the act of memory, is the
present mental modification, that is, the representation and concomitant
belief. Beyond this mental modification we know nothing; and this mental
modification is not only known to consciousness, but only exists in and
by consciousness. Of any past object, real or ideal, the mind knows and
can know nothing, for, ex hypothesi, no such object now exists; or if it
be Edition: current; Page: [161] said to know such an object, it can
only be said to know it mediately, as represented in the present mental
modification. Properly speaking, however, we know only the actual and
present, and all real knowledge is an immediate knowledge. What is said
to be mediately known, is, in truth, not known to be, but only believed
to be: for its existence is only an inference resting on the belief,
that the mental modification truly represents what is in itself beyond
the sphere of knowledge.*

Had Sir W. Hamilton totally forgotten all this, when a few lectures
afterwards, having then in front of him a set of antagonists who needed
the theory here laid down, he repudiated it—denying altogether the
possibility of the mental state so truly and clearly expressed in this
passage, and affirming that we cannot possibly recognise a mental
modification to be representative of something else, unless we have a
present knowledge of that something else, otherwise obtained?[*] With
merely the alteration of putting instead of a past state of mind, a
present external object, the Cosmothetic Idealists might borrow his
language down to the minutest detail. They, too, believe that the mental
modification is a present state of mind, which we are conscious of, not
as absolute, but as relative to, and representing, “an external object,
and accompanied with the belief that the object as now represented,
actually” is: that we know something (viz. matter) only “as represented
in the present mental modification,” and that “its existence is only an
inference, resting on the belief that the mental modification truly
represents what is in itself beyond the sphere of knowledge.” They do
not, strictly speaking, require quite so much as this: for the word
“represents,” especially with “truly” joined to it, suggests the idea of
a resemblance, such as does, in reality, exist between the picture of a
fact in memory, and the present impression to which it corresponds; but
the Cosmothetic Idealists only maintain that the mental modification
arises from something, and that the reality of this unknown something is
testified by a natural belief. That they apply to one case the same
theory which our author applies to another, does not, of course, prove
them to be right; but it proves the suicidal character (to use one of
his favourite expressions)[†] of our author’s argument, when he scouts
the supposition of an instinctive inference from a known effect to an
unknown cause, as an hypothesis which can in no possible case be
legitimate; forgetful that its legitimacy is required by his own
psychology, one of the leading doctrines of which is entirely grounded
on it.

It is not only in treating of Memory, that Sir W. Hamilton requires a
process of thought precisely similar to that which, when employed by
opponents, he declares to be radically illegitimate. I have already
mentioned[*] Edition: current; Page: [162] that in his opinion our
perceptions of sight are not perceptions of the outward object, but of
its image, a “modification of light in immediate relation to our organ
of vision,” and that no two persons see the same sun; propositions in
direct conflict with the “natural beliefs” to which he so often refers,
and to which Reid, not without reason, appeals in this instance;[†] for
assuredly people in general are as firmly convinced that what they see
is the real sun, as that what they touch is the real table. Let us hear
Sir W. Hamilton once more on this subject.

It is not by perception, but by a process of reasoning, that we connect
the objects of sense with existences beyond the sphere of immediate
knowledge. It is enough that perception affords us the knowledge of the
non-ego at the point of sense. To arrogate to it the power of
immediately informing us of external things, which are only the causes
of the object we immediately perceive, is either positively erroneous,
or a confusion of language arising from an inadequate discrimination of
the phænomenon.*

Here is a case in which we know something to be a representation,
though, in our author’s opinion, that which it represents not only is
not, at the present time, known to us, but never was, and never will be
so. The Cosmothetic Idealists desire only the same liberty which Sir W.
Hamilton here exercises, of concluding from a phænomenon directly known,
to something unknown which is the cause of the phænomenon. They
postulate the possibility that what our author holds to be true of the
non-ego at a distance, may be true of the non-ego at the point of sense,
namely, that it is not known immediately, but as a necessary inference
from what is known. To shut the door upon this supposition as inherently
inadmissible, and make an exactly similar one ourselves as often as our
system requires it, does not befit a philosopher, or a critic of
philosophers.†

Edition: current; Page: [163]
In the controversy with Brown, which forms the second paper in the
Discussions,[*] and much of which his reproduced verbatim inh our
author’s Lectures,[†] the argument which I have now examined does not
iappear.i In the room of it, we have the following argument. If Brown is
right, “the mind either knows the reality of what it represents, or it
does not.” The first supposition is dismissed for the absurdities it
involves, and because it is inconsistent with Brown’s doctrine. But if
the mind does not know the reality of what it represents, the
“alternative remains, that the mind is blindly determined to represent,
and truly to represent, the reality which it does not know.” And if so,
the mind “either blindly determines itself” or “is blindly determined”
by a supernatural power. The latter supposition he rejects because it
involves a standing miracle; the former as “utterly irrational, Edition:
current; Page: [164] inasmuch as it would explain an effect, by a cause
wholly inadequate to its production. On this alternative, knowledge is
supposed to be the effect of ignorance,—intelligence of stupidity—life
of death.”* All this artillery is directed against the simple
supposition that by a law of our nature, a modification of our own minds
may assure us of the existence of an unknown cause. The author’s
persistent ignorance of Brown’s opinion isj surprising. Brown knows
nothing of the mental modification as truly representing the unknown
reality; he claims no knowledge as arising out of ignorance, no
intelligence growing out of stupidity. He claims only an instinctive
belief implanted by nature; and the menacing alternative, that the mind
must either determine itself to this belief, or be determined to it by a
special interference of Providence, could be applied with exactly as
much justice to the earth’s motion. But though Sir W. Hamilton’s weapon
falls harmless upon Brown, it recoils with terrible effect upon his own
theories of representative cognition. A remembrance, for example, does
represent, and truly represent, the past fact remembered: and we do,
through that representation, mediately know the past fact, which in any
other sense of the word, according to our author, we do not know.
Although therefore the conclusion “that the mind is blindly determined
to represent, and truly to represent, the reality which it does not
know,” is not obligatory upon Brown, it is upon Sir W. Hamilton. On his
own showing he has to choose between the absurdity that the mind
“blindly determines itself,” and the perpetual miracle of its being
determined by divine interference. This is one of the weakest
exhibitions of Sir W. Hamilton that I have met with in his writings. For
the difficulty by which he thought to overwhelm Brown, and which does
not touch Brown, but falls back upon himself, is no difficulty at all,
but the merest moonshine. The transcendent absurdity, as he considers
it, that the mind should be blindly determined to represent, and truly
to represent, the reality which “it does not know,” instead of an
absurdity, is the exact expression of a fact. It is a literal
description of what takes place in an act of memory. As often as we
recollect a past event, and on the faith of that recollection, believe
or know that the event really happened, the mind, by its constitution,
is “blindly determined to represent, and truly to represent” a fact
which, except as witnessed by that representation, “it does not know.”†

Edition: current; Page: [165]
It may generally, I think, be observed of Sir W. Hamilton, that his most
recherché arguments are his weakest: they certainly are so in the
present case. It would have been wiser in him to have been contented
with his first and simpler argument, that Brown’s doctrine conflicts
with consciousness, Edition: current; Page: [166] inasmuch as “we are
conscious of no reference, of no representation:”[*] or, to speak more
clearly, we are not aware that the existence of an external reality is
suggested to us by our sensations. We seem to become aware of both at
once.

The fact is as alleged, but it proves nothing, being consistent with
Brown’s doctrine. Whether the belief in a non-ego arose in our first act
of perception, simultaneously with the sensation, or not until suggested
by the sensation, we have, as I before remarked, no means of directly
ascertaining.[†] As far as depends on direct evidence, the subject is
inscrutable. But this we may know, that even if the suggestion theory
were true, the belief suggested would by the laws of association become
so intimately blended with the sensation suggesting it, that long before
we were able to reflect on our mental operations, we should have become
entirely incapable of thinking of the two things as other than
simultaneous. An appeal to consciousness avails nothing, when, even
though the doctrine opposed were true, the appeal might equally, and
with the same plausibility, be made. The facts are Edition: current;
Page: [167] alike consistent with both opinions, and, for aught that
appears, Brown’s is as likely to be true as Sir W. Hamilton’s. The
difference between them, as already observed, is extremely small, and I
will add, supremely unimportant. If the reality of matter is certified
to us by an irresistible belief, it matters little whether we reach the
belief by two steps, or by only one.

The really important difference of opinion on the subject of Perception,
between Brown and Sir W. Hamilton, is far other than this. It is, that
Sir W. Hamilton believes us to have a direct intuition not solely of the
reality of matter, but also of its primary qualities, Extension,
Solidity, Figure, &c., which, according to him, we know as in the
material object, and not as modifications of ourselves: while Brown
believed that matter is suggested to us only as an unknown something,
all whose attributes, as known or conceived by us, are resolvable into
affections of our senses. In Brown’s opinion we are cognizant of a
non-ego in the perceptive act, only in the indefinite form of something
external; all else we are able to know of it is only that it produces
certain affections in us: which is also our author’s opinion as regards
the Secondary Qualities. The difference therefore, between Brown and Sir
W. Hamilton, is not of the kind which Sir W. Hamilton considers it to
be, but consists mainly in this, that Brown really held what Sir W.
Hamilton held only verbally, the doctrine of the Relativity ofn our
knowledge. I shall attempt, further on, to show that on the point on
which they really differed, Brown was right, and Sir W. Hamilton totally
wrong.*

The considerations which have now been adduced are subversive of a great
mass of triumphant animadversion by our author on the ignorance Edition:
current; Page: [168] and carelessness of Brown, and some milder
criticism on Reid. Sir W. Hamilton thinks it astonishing that neither of
these philosophers should have recognised Natural Realism, and the third
form of Cosmothetic Idealism, as two different modes of thought. Reid,
whom he makes a great point of claiming as a Natural Realist, was, he
says, quite unaware of the possibility of the other opinion, and did not
guard against it by his language, leaving it, therefore, open to dispute
whether, instead of being a Natural Realist, he was not, like Brown, a
Cosmothetic Idealist of the third class; while Brown, on the other hand,
never conceived Natural Realism, nor thought it possible that Reid held
any other than his own opinion, as he invariably affirms him to have
done.[*] I apprehend that both philosophers are entirely clear of the
blame thus imputed to them. Reid never imagined Brown’s doctrine, nor
Brown Reid’s, as anything different from his own, because in truth they
were not different. If the distinction between a Natural Realist and a
Cosmothetic Idealist of the third class, be that the latter believes the
existence of the external object to be inferred from, or suggested by,
our sensations, while the former holds it to be neither the one nor the
other, but to be apprehended in consciousness simultaneously and
co-ordinately with the sensations, Reid was as much a Cosmothetic
Idealist as Brownp. The question does not concern philosophy, but the
history of philosophy, which is Sir W. Hamilton’s strongest point, and
was not at all a strong point with either Brown or Reid; but the matter
of fact is worth the few pages necessary for clearing it up, because Sir
W. Hamilton’s vast and accurate learning goes near to obtaining for his
statements, on any such matter, implicit confidence, and it is therefore
important to show that even where he is strongest, he is sometimes
wrong.

In the severe criticism on Brown from which I have quoted, and which,
though in some respects unjust, in others I cannot deny to be well
merited, some of the strongest expressions have reference to the gross
misunderstanding of Reid, of which Brown is alleged to have been guilty
in not perceiving him to have been a Natural Realist. “We proceed,” says
our author,

to consider the greatest of all Brown’s errors, in itself and in its
consequences, his misconception of the cardinal position of Reid’s
philosophy, in supposing that philosopher as a hypothetical realist, to
hold with himself the third form of the representative hypothesis, and
not, as a natural realist, the doctrine of an intuitive Perception.*

Brown’s transmutation of Reid from a natural to a hypothetical realist,
as a misconception of the grand and distinctive tenet of a school by one
even of its Edition: current; Page: [169] disciples, is without a
parallel in the whole history of philosophy; and this portentous error
is prolific; chimæra chimæram parit. Were the evidence of the mistake
less unambiguous, we should be disposed rather to question our own
perspicacity than to tax so subtle an intellect with so gross a
blunder.*

And he did, in time, feel some misgiving as to his “own perspicacity.”
When, in preparing an edition of Reid, he was obliged to look more
closely into that author’s statements, we find a remarkable lowering of
the high tone of these sentences; and he felt obliged, in revising the
paper for the Discussions, to write “This is too strong,” after a
passage in which he had said that “Brown’s interpretation of the
fundamental tenet of Reid’s philosophy is not a simple misconception,
but an absolute reversal of its real and even unambiguous import.”† Well
would it have been for Brown’s reputation if all Sir W. Hamilton’s
attempts to bring home blunders to him, had been as little successful as
this.

In the work in which Reid first brought his opinions before the world,
the Inquiry into the Human Mind, his language is so unequivocally that
of a Cosmothetic Idealist, that it admits of no mistake. It is almost
more unambiguous than that of Brown himself. The external object is
always said to be perceived through the medium of “natural signs:” these
signs being our sensations, interpreted by a natural instinct. Our
sensations, he says, belong to that

class of natural signs which . . . though we never before had any notion
or conception of the thing signified, do suggest it, or conjure it up,
as it were, by a natural kind of magic, and at once give us a conception
and create a belief of it.‡

I take it for granted that the notion of hardness, and the belief of it,
is first got by means of that particular sensation which, as far back as
we can remember, does invariably suggest it, and that, if we had never
had such a feeling, we should never have had our notion of hardness.§

Again,

when a coloured body is presented, there is a certain apparition to the
eye, or to the mind, which we have called the appearance of colour. Mr.
Locke calls it an idea, and, indeed, it may be called so with the
greatest propriety. This idea can have no existence but when it is
perceived. It is a kind of thought, and can only be the act of a
percipient or thinking being. By the constitution of our nature, we are
led to conceive this idea as a sign of something external, and are
impatient till we learn its meaning.¶

Edition: current; Page: [170]
I must be excused if I am studious to prove, by an accumulation of
citations, that these are not passing expressions of Reid, but the
deliberate doctrine of his treatise.

I think it appears from what hath been said, that there are natural
suggestions; particularly, that sensation suggests the notion of present
existence, and the belief that what we perceive or feel does now exist.
. . . And, in like manner, certain sensations of touch, by the
constitution of our nature, suggest to us extension, solidity, and
motion.*

By an original principle of our constitution, a certain sensation of
touch both suggests to the mind the conception of hardness, and creates
the belief of it: or, in other words, this sensation is a natural sign
of hardness.†

The word gold has no similitude to the substance signified by it; nor is
it in its own nature more fit to signify this than any other substance;
yet, by habit and custom, it suggests this and no other. In like manner,
a sensation of touch suggests hardness, although it hath neither
similitude to hardness, nor, as far as we can perceive, any necessary
connexion with it. The difference betwixt these two signs lies only in
this—that, in the first, the suggestion is the effect of habit and
custom; in the second, it is not the effect of habit, but of the
original constitution of our minds.‡

Extension, therefore, seems to be a quality suggested to us [the italics
are Reid’s] by the very same sensations which suggest the other
qualities above mentioned. When I grasp a ball in my hand, I perceive it
at once hard, figured, and extended. The feeling is very simple, and
hath not the least resemblance to any quality of body. Yet it suggests
to us three primary qualities perfectly distinct from one another, as
well as from the sensation which indicates them. When I move my hand
along the table, the feeling is so simple that I find it difficult to
distinguish it into things of different natures, yet it immediately
suggests hardness, smoothness, extension, and motion—things of very
different natures, and all of them as distinctly understood as the
feeling which suggests them.§

The feelings of touch, which suggest primary qualities, have no names,
nor are they ever reflected upon. They pass through the mind
instantaneously, and serve only to introduce the notion and belief of
external things, which by our constitution, are connected with them.
They are natural signs, and the mind immediately passes to the thing
signified, without making the least reflection upon the sign, or
observing that there was any such thing.¶

This passage, with many others of like import, Sir W. Hamilton might
usefully have meditated on, before he laid so much stress on the
testimony of consciousness that the apprehension is not through the
medium of a sign.

Edition: current; Page: [171]
Let a man press his hand against the table—he feels it hard. But what is
the meaning of this? The meaning undoubtedly is, that he hath a certain
feeling of touch, from which he concludes, without any reasoning or
comparing ideas, that there is something external really existing, whose
parts stick so firmly together, that they cannot be displaced without
considerable force. There is here a feeling, and a conclusion drawn from
it, or some way suggested by it. . . . The hardness of the table is the
conclusion, the feeling is the medium by which we are led to that
conclusion.*

How a sensation should instantly make us conceive and believe the
existence of an external thing altogether unlike to it, I do not pretend
to know; and when I say that the one suggests the other, I mean not to
explain the manner of their connexion, but to express a fact, which
every one may be conscious of, namely, that by a law of our nature, such
a conception and belief constantly and immediately follow the
sensation.†

There are three ways in which the mind passes from the appearance of a
natural sign to the conception and belief of the thing signified—by
original principles of our constitution, by custom, and by reasoning.
Our original perceptions are got in the first of these ways. . . . In
the first of these ways, Nature, by means of the sensations of touch,
informs us of the hardness and softness of bodies; of their extension,
figure, and motion; and of that space in which they move and are
placed.‡

In the testimony of Nature given by the senses, as well as in human
testimony given by language, things are signified to us by signs: and in
one as well as the other, the mind, either by original principles or by
custom, passes from the sign to the conception and belief of the things
signified. . . . The signs in original perceptions are sensations, of
which Nature hath given us a great variety, suited to the variety of the
things signified by them. Nature hath established a real connexion
between the signs and the things signified, and Nature hath also taught
us the interpretation of the signs—so that, previous to experience, the
sign suggests the thing signified, and creates the belief of it.§

It is by one particular principle of our constitution that certain
features express anger; and by another particular principle, that
certain features express benevolence. It is, in like manner, by one
particular principle of our constitution that a certain sensation
signifies hardness in the body which I handle; and it is by another
particular principle that a certain sensation signifies motion in that
body.¶

I doubt if it would be possible to extract from Brown himself an equal
number of passagesq expressing as clearly and positively, and in terms
as irreconcilable with any other opinion, the doctrine which our author
terms the third form of Cosmothetic Idealism; in the exact shape, too,
in which Edition: current; Page: [172] Brown held it, unencumbered by
the gratuitous addition which Sir W. Hamilton fastens on him, that the
sign must “truly represent” the thing signified,—a notion which Reid
takes good care that he shall not be supposed to entertain, since he
repeatedly declares that there is no resemblance between them. That
Reid, at least when he wrote the Inquiry, was a Cosmothetic Idealist;
that up to that time it had never occurred to him that the rconvictionsr
of the existence and qualities of external objects could be regarded as
anything but suggestions by, and conclusions from, our sensations—is too
obvious to be questioned by any one who has the text fresh in his
recollection. Accordingly Sir W. Hamilton acknowledges as much in his
edition of Reid, both in the foot-notes and in the appended
“Dissertations.” After restating his own doctrine, that our natural
beliefs assure us of outward objects, only by assuring us that we are
immediately conscious of them, he adds, “Reid himself seems to have
become obscurely aware of this condition: and though he never retracted
his doctrine concerning the mere suggestion of extension, we find in his
Essays on the Intellectual Powers assertions in regard to the immediate
perception of external things, which would tend to show that his later
views were more in unison with the necessary convictions of mankind.”*
And in another place he says of the doctrine maintained by Reid “in his
earlier work,” that it is one which “if he did not formally retract in
his later writings, he did not continue to profess.”† It is hard that
Brown should be charged with blundering to a degree which is
“portentous” and “without a parallel in the whole history of
philosophy,” for attributing to Reid an opinion which Sir W. Hamilton
confesses that Reid maintained in one of his only two important
writings, and did not retract in the other. But Sir W. Hamilton is still
more wrong than he confesses. He is in a mistake when he says that Reid,
though he did not retract the opinion, did not continue to profess it.
For some reason, not apparent, he did cease to employ the word
Suggestion. But he continued to use terms equivalent to it.

Every different perception is conjoined with a sensation that is proper
to it. The one is the sign, the other thing signified.‡

I touch the table gently with my hand, and I feel it to be smooth, hard,
and cold. These are qualities of the table perceived by touch: but I
perceive them by means of a sensation which indicates them.§

Observing that the agreeable sensation is raised when the rose is near,
and ceases when it is removed, I am led by my nature to conclude some
quality to be in the rose, Edition: current; Page: [173] which is the
cause of this sensation. This quality in the rose is the object
perceived; and that act of my mind by which I have the conviction and
belief of this quality, is what in this case I call perception.*

Of this passage even Sir W. Hamilton honestly says in a foot-note, that
it “appears to be an explicit disavowal of the doctrine of an intuitive
or immediate perception.”[*] Again:

When a primary quality is perceived, the sensation immediately leads our
thought to the quality signified by it, and is itself forgot. . . . The
sensations belonging to primary qualities . . . carry the thought to the
external object, and immediately disappear and are forgot. Nature
intended them only as signs; and when they have served that purpose they
vanish.†

Nature has connected our perception of external objects with certain
sensations. If the sensation is produced, the corresponding perception
follows, even when there is no object, and in that case is apt to
deceive us.‡

In perception, whether original or acquired, there is something which
may be called the sign, and something which is signified to us, or
brought to our knowledge by that sign. In original perception, the signs
are the various sensations which are produced by the impressions made
upon our organs. The things signified, are the objects perceived in
consequence of those sensations, by the original constitution of our
nature. Thus, when I grasp an ivory ball in my hand, I have a certain
sensation of touch. Although this sensation be in the mind, and have no
similitude to anything material; yet, by the laws of my constitution, it
is immediately followed by the conception and belief, that there is in
my hand a hard smooth body of a spherical figure, and about an inch and
a half in diameter. This belief is grounded neither upon reasoning, nor
upon experience; it is the immediate effect of my constitution, and this
I call original perception.§

All these are as unequivocal, and the last passage as full and precise a
statement of Cosmothetic Idealism, as any in the Inquiry. In the
“Dissertations” appended to Reid,¶ Sir W. Hamilton, who never fails in
candour, acknowledges in the fullest manner the inferences which may be
drawn from passages like these, but thinks that they are balanced by
others which “seem to harmonize exclusively with the conditions of
natural presentationism,”∥ and on the whole is “decidedly of opinion
that, as the great end—the governing principle of Reid’s doctrine was to
reconcile philosophy with the necessary convictions of mankind, he
intended a doctrine of natural, consequently a doctrine of presentative,
realism; and that he would have at once surrendered, as erroneous, every
statement Edition: current; Page: [174] which was found at variance with
such a doctrine.”* But it is clear that the doctrine of perception
through natural signs did not, in Reid’s opinion, contradict “the
necessary convictions of mankind;” being brought into harmony with them
by his doctrine, that the signs, after they have served their purpose,
are “forgot,” which, as he conclusively shows in many places, it was
both natural and inevitable that they should be. The passages which Sir
W. Hamilton cites as inconsistent with any doctrine but Natural
Realism,[*] are those in which Reid affirms that we perceive objects
immediately, and that the external things which really exist are the
very ones which we perceive. But Reid evidently did not think these
expressions inconsistent with the doctrine that the notion and belief of
external objects are irresistibly suggested through natural signs.
Having this notion and belief irresistibly suggested, is what he means
by perceiving the external object. He says so in more than one of the
passages I have just quoted: and neither in his chapter on Perception,
nor anywhere else, does he speak of perception as implying anything
more. In that chapter he says, “If we attend to that act of our mind
which we call the perception of an external object of sense, we shall
find in it these three things: First, some conception or notion of the
object perceived; Secondly, a strong and irresistible conviction and
belief of its present existence; and, Thirdly, that this conviction and
belief are immediate, and not the effect of reasoning.”† We see in this
as in a hundred other places, what Reid meant when he said that our
perception of outward objects is immediate. He did not mean that it is
not a conviction suggested by something else, but only that the
conviction is not the effect of reasoning. “This conviction is not only
irresistible, but it is immediate; that is, it is not by a train of
reasoning and argumentation that we come to be convinced of the
existence of what we perceive.”‡ As Nature has given us the signs, so it
is by an original law of our nature that we are enabled to interpret
them. When Reid means anything but this in contending for an immediate
perception of objects, he merely means to deny that it takes place
through an image in the brain or in the mind, as maintained by
Cosmothetic Idealists of the first or the second class.

The only plausible argument produced by Sir W. Hamilton in proof of
Reid’s Natural Realism, and against his having held, as Brown
thought,[†] Brown’s own opinion, is, that when in the speculations of
Arnauld he had before him exactly the same opinion, he failed to
recognise it.§ But on a Edition: current; Page: [175] careful
examination of Reid’s criticism on Arnauld, it will be seen, that as
long as Reid had to do with Arnauld’s direct statement of his opinion,
he found nothing sin it differents from his own; but was puzzled, and
thought that Arnauld attempted to unite inconsistent opinions, because,
after throwing over the “ideal theory,” and saying that the only real
ideas are our perceptions, he maintained that it is still true, in a
sense, that we do not perceive things directly, but through our ideas.
What! asks Reid, do we perceive things through our perceptions? But if
we merely put the word sensations instead of perceptions, the doctrine
is exactly that of Reid in the Inquiry—that we perceive things through
our sensations. Most probably Arnauld meant this, but was not so
understood by Reid. If he meant anything else, his opinion was not the
same as Reid’s, and we need no explanation of Reid’s not recognising
it.[*]

One of the collateral indications that Reid’s opinion agreed with
Brown’s, and not with Sir W. Hamilton’s, is that in treating this
question he seldom or never uses the word Knowledge, but only Belief. On
Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrine, the distinction between these two terms,
however vaguely and mistily conceived by him, is indispensable. The
total absence of any recognition of it in Reid, shows that of the two
opinions, if there was one which he had never conceived the possibility
of, it was not Brown’s, as Sir W. Hamilton supposes, but Sir W.
Hamilton’s. In our author’s mind this indication ought to have decided
the question: for in the case of another philosopher he, on precisely
the same evidence, brings in a verdict of Cosmothetic Idealism. Krug’s
system, he says, as first promulgated, “was, like Kant’s, a mere
Cosmothetic Idealism; for while he allowed a knowledge of the internal
world, he only allowed a belief of the external.”*

It is true, Reid did not believe in what our author terms
“representative perception,” if by this be meant perception through an
image in the mind, supposed, like the picture of a fact in memory, to be
like its original. But neither (as I have repeatedly observed) did
Brown. What Brown held was exactly the doctrine of Reid in the passages
that I have extracted. He thought that certain sensations, irresistibly,
and by a law of our nature, suggest, without any process of reasoning,
and without the intervention of any tertium quid, the notion of
something external, and an invincible belief in its real existence. If
representative perception be this, both Reid and Brown believed in it:
if anything else, Brown believed tint it no more than Reid. Not only was
Reid a Cosmothetic Idealist of Brown’s exact type, but Edition: current;
Page: [176] in stating his own doctrine, he has furnished, as far as I
am aware, the clearest and best statement extant of their common
opinion. They differed, indeed, as to our having, in this or in any
other manner, an intuitive perception of any of the attributes of
objects; Reid, like Sir W. Hamilton, affirming, while Brown denied, that
we have a direct intuition of the Primary Qualities of bodies. But Brown
did not deny, nor would Sir W. Hamilton accuse him of denying, the wide
difference between his opinion and Reid’s on this latter point.

Before closing this chapter, I will notice the curious fact, that after
insisting with so much emphasis upon the recognition of an Ego and a
Non-ego as an element in all consciousness, Sir W. Hamilton is obliged
to admit that the distinction is in certain cases a mistake, and that
our consciousness sometimes recognises a Non-ego where there is only an
Ego. It is a doctrine of his, repeated in many parts of his works, that
in our internal consciousness there is no non-ego. Even the remembrance
of a past fact, or the mental image of an absent object, is not a thing
separable or distinguishable from the mind’s act in remembering, but is
another name for that act itself. Now it is certain, that in thinking of
an absent or an imaginary object, we naturally imagine ourselves to be
thinking of an objective something, distinguishable from the thinking
act. Sir W. Hamilton, being obliged to acknowledge this, resolves the
difficulty in the very manner for which he so often rebukes other
thinkers—by representing this apparent testimony of consciousness as a
kind of illusion. “The object,” he says, “is in this case given as
really identical with the conscious ego, but still consciousness
distinguishes it, as an accident, from the ego, as the subject of that
accident: it projects, as it were, this subjective phænomenon from
itself,—views it at a distance,—in a word, objectifies it.”* But if, in
one half of the domain of consciousness—the internal half—it is in the
power of consciousness to “project” out of itself what is merely one of
its own acts, and regard it as external and a non-ego, why are those
accused of declaring consciousness a lie, who think that this may
possibly be the case with the other half of its domain also, and that
the non-ego altogether may be but a mode in which the mind represents to
itself the possible modifications of the ego? How the truth stands in
respect to this matter I will endeavour, in the following chapter, to
investigate. For the present, I content myself with asking, why the same
liberty in the interpretation of Consciousness, which Sir W. Hamilton’s
own doctrine cannot dispense with, should be held to be an
insurmountable objection to the ucounter-doctrine.u

Edition: current; Page: [177]


CHAPTER XI: The Psychological Theory of the Belief in an External World

we have seen Sir W. Hamilton at work on the question of the reality of
Matter, by the introspective method, and, as it seems, with little
result. Let us now approach the same subject by the psychological. I
proceed, therefore, to state the case of those who hold that the belief
in an external world is not intuitive, but an acquired product.

This theory postulates the following psychological truths, all of which
are proved by experience, and are not contested, though their force is
seldom adequately felt, by Sir W. Hamilton and the other thinkers of the
introspective school.

It postulates, first, that the human mind is capable of Expectation. In
other words, that after having had actual sensations, we are capable of
forming the conception of Possible sensations; sensations which we are
not feeling at the present moment, but which we might feel, and should
feel if certain conditions were present, the nature of which conditions
we have, in many cases, learnt by experience.

It postulates, secondly, the laws of the Association of Ideas. So far as
we are here concerned, these laws are the following: 1st. Similar
phænomena tend to be thought of together. 2nd. Phænomena which have
either been experienced or conceived in close contiguity to one another,
tend to be thought of together. The contiguity is of two kinds;
simultaneity, and immediate succession. Facts which have been
experienced or thought of simultaneously, recall the thought of one
another. Of facts which have been experienced or thought of in immediate
succession, the antecedent, or the thought of it, recalls the thought of
the consequent, but not conversely. 3rd. Associations produced by
contiguity become more certain and rapid by repetition. When two
phænomena have been very often experienced in conjunction, and have not,
in any single instance, occurred separately either in experience or in
thought, there is produced between them what has been called
Inseparable, or less correctly, Indissoluble Association: by which is
not meant that the association must inevitably last to the end of
life—that no subsequent experience or process of thought can possibly
Edition: current; Page: [178] avail to dissolve it; but only that as
long as no such experience or process of thought has taken place, the
association is irresistible; it is impossible for us to think the one
thing disjoined from the other. 4th. When an association has acquired
this character of inseparability—when the bond between the two ideas has
been thus firmly riveted, not only does the idea called up by
association become, in our consciousness, inseparable from the idea
which suggested it, but the facts or phænomena answering to those ideas
come at last to seem inseparable in existence: things which we are
unable to conceive apart, appear incapable of existing apart; and the
belief we have in their coexistence, though really a product of
experience, seems intuitive. Innumerable examples might be given of this
law. One of the most familiar, as well as the most striking, is that of
our acquired perceptions of sight. Even those who, with Mr. Bailey,
consider the perception of distance by the eye as not acquired, but
intuitive, admit that there are many perceptions of sight which, though
instantaneous and unhesitating, are not intuitive.[*] What we see is a
very minute fragment of what we think we see. We see artificially that
one thing is hard, another soft. We see artificially that one thing is
hot, another cold. We see artificially that what we see is a book, or a
stone, each of these being not merely an inference, but a heap of
inferences, from the signs which we see, to things not visible. aWe see,
and cannot help seeing, what we have learnt to infer, even when we know
that the inference is erroneous, and that the apparent perception is
deceptive. We cannot help seeing the moon larger when near the horizon,
though we know that she is of precisely her usual size. We cannot help
seeing a mountain as nearer to us and of less height, when we see it
through a more than ordinarily transparent atmosphere.a

Setting out from these premises, the Psychological Theory maintains,
that there are associations naturally and even necessarily generated by
the order of our sensations and of our reminiscences of sensation,
which, supposing no intuition of an external world to have existed in
consciousness, would inevitably generate the belief, and would cause it
to be regarded as an intuition.

What is it we meanb, or what is it which leads us to say, that the
objects we perceive areb external to us, and not a part of our own
thoughts? We mean, that there cis concernedc in our perceptions
something which exists when we are not thinking of it; which existed
before we had ever thought of Edition: current; Page: [179] it, and
would exist if we were annihilated; and further, that there exist things
which we never saw, touched, or otherwise perceived, and things which
never have been perceived by man. This idea of something which is
distinguished from our fleeting impressions by what, in Kantian
language, is called Perdurability; something which is fixed and the
same, while our impressions vary; something which exists whether we are
aware of it or not, and which is always square (or of some other given
figure) whether it appears to us square or round—constitutes altogether
our idea of external substance. Whoever can assign an origin to this
complex conception, has accounted for what we mean by the belief in
matter. Now all this, according to the Psychological Theory, is but the
form impressed by the known laws of association, upon the conception or
notion, obtained by experience, of Contingent Sensations; by which are
meant, sensations that are not in our present consciousness, and
dindividuallyd never were in our consciousness at all, but which in
virtue of the laws to which we have learnt by experience that our
sensations are subject, we know that we should have felt under given
supposable circumstances, and under these same circumstances, might
still feel.

I see a piece of white paper on a table. I go into another roome. If the
phænomenon always followed me, or if, when it did not follow me, I
believed it to disappear è rerum naturâ, I should not believe it to be
an external object. I should consider it as a phantom—a mere affection
of my senses: I should not believe that there had been any Body there.
But,e though I have ceased to see it, I am persuaded that the paper is
still there. I no longer have the sensations which it gave me; but I
believe that when I again place myself in the circumstances in which I
had those sensations, that is, when I go again into the room, I shall
again have them; and further, that there has been no intervening moment
at which this would not have been the case. Owing to this fpropertyf of
my mind, my conception of the world at any given instant consists, in
only a small proportion, of present sensations. Of these I may at the
time have none at all, and they are in any case a most insignificant
portion of the whole which I apprehend. The conception I form of the
world existing at any moment, comprises, along with the sensations I am
feeling, a countless variety of possibilities of sensation: namely, the
whole of those which past observation tells me that I could, under any
supposable circumstances, experience at this moment, together with an
indefinite and illimitable multitude of others which though I do not
know that I could, yet it is possible that I might, experience in
circumstances not known to me. These various possibilities are the
important Edition: current; Page: [180] thing to me in the world. My
present sensations are generally of little importance, and are moreover
fugitive: the possibilities, on the contrary, are permanent, which is
the character that mainly distinguishes our idea of Substance or Matter
from our notion of sensation. These possibilities, which are conditional
certainties, need a special name to distinguish them from mere vague
possibilities, which experience gives no warrant for reckoning upon.
Now, as soon as a distinguishing name is given, though it be only to the
same thing regarded in a different aspect, one of the most familiar
experiences of our mental nature teaches us, that the different name
comes to be considered as the name of a different thing.

There is another important peculiarity of these certified or guaranteed
possibilities of sensation; namely, that they have reference, not to
single sensations, but to sensations joined together in groups. When we
think of anything as a material substance, or body, we either have had,
or we think that on some given supposition we should have, not some one
sensation, but a great and even an indefinite number and variety of
sensations, generally belonging to different senses, but so linked
together, that the presence of one announces the possible presence at
the very same instant of any or all of the rest. In our mind, therefore,
not only is this particular Possibility of sensation invested with the
quality of permanence when we are not actually feeling any of the
sensations at all; but when we are feeling some of them, the remaining
sensations of the group are conceived by us in the form of Present
Possibilities, which might be realized at the very moment. And as this
happens in turn to all of them, the group as a whole presents itself to
the mind as permanent, in contrast not solely with the temporariness of
my bodily presence, but also with the temporary character of each of the
sensations composing the group; in other words, as a kind of permanent
substratum, under a set of passing experiences or manifestations: which
is another leading character of our idea of substance or matter, as
distinguished from sensation.

Let us now take into consideration another of the general characters of
our experience, namely, that in addition to fixed groups, we also
recognise a fixed Order in our sensations; an Order of succession,
which, when ascertained by observation, gives rise to the ideas of Cause
and Effect, according to what I hold to be the true theory of that
relation, and is gon any theoryg the source of all our knowledge hwhath
causes produce what effects. Now, of what nature is this fixed order
among our sensations? It is a constancy of antecedence and sequence. But
the constant antecedence and sequence do not generally exist between one
actual sensation and another. Very few such sequences are presented to
us by experience. In almost all Edition: current; Page: [181] the
constant sequences which occur in Nature, the antecedence and
consequence do not obtain between sensations, but between the groups we
have been speaking about, of which a very small portion is actual
sensation, the greater part being permanent possibilities of sensation,
evidenced to us by a small and variable number of sensations actually
present. Hence, our ideas of causation, power, activity, do not become
connected in thought with our sensations as actual at all, save in the
few physiological cases where these figure by themselves as the
antecedents in some uniform sequence. Those ideas become connected, not
with sensations, but with groups of possibilities of sensation. The
sensations conceived do not, to our habitual thoughts, present
themselves as sensations actually experienced, inasmuch as not only any
one or any number of them may be supposed absent, but none of them need
be present. We find that the modifications which are taking place more
or less regularly in our possibilities of sensation, are mostly quite
independent of our consciousness, and of our presence or absence.
Whether we are asleep or awake the fire goes out, and puts an end to one
particular possibility of warmth and light. Whether we are present or
absent the corn ripens, and brings a new possibility of food. Hence we
speedily learn to think of Nature as made up solely of these groups of
possibilities, and the active force in Nature as manifested in the
modification of some of these by others. The sensations, though the
original foundation of the whole, come to be looked upon as a sort of
accident depending on us, and the possibilities as much more real than
the actual sensations, nay, as the very realities of which these are
only the representations, appearances, or effects. When this state of
mind has been arrived at, then, and from that time forward, we are never
conscious of a present sensation without instantaneously referring it to
some one of the groups of possibilities into which a sensation of that
particular description enters; and if we do not yet know to what group
to refer it, we at least feel an irresistible conviction that it must
belong to some group or other; i.e. that its presence proves the
existence, here and now, of a great number and variety of possibilities
of sensation, without which it would not have been. The whole set of
sensations as possible, form a permanent background to any one or more
of them that are, at a given moment, actual; and the possibilities are
conceived as standing to the actual sensations in the relation of a
cause to its effects, or of canvas to the figures painted on it, or of a
root to the trunk, leaves, and flowers, or of a substratum to that which
is spread over it, or, in transcendental language, of Matter to Form.

When this point has been reached, the Permanent Possibilities in
question have assumed such unlikeness of aspect, and such difference of
iapparent Edition: current; Page: [182] relationi to us, from any
sensations, that it would be contrary to all we know of the constitution
of human nature that they should not be conceived as, and believed to
be, at least as different from sensations as sensations are from one
another. Their groundwork in sensation is forgotten, and they are
supposed to be something intrinsically distinct from it. We can withdraw
ourselves from any of our (external) sensations, or we can be withdrawn
from them by some other agency. But though the sensations cease, the
possibilities remain in existence; they are independent of our will, our
presence, and everything which belongs to us. We find, too, that they
belong as much to other human or sentient beings as to ourselves. We
find other people grounding their expectations and conduct upon the same
permanent possibilities on which we ground ours. But we do not find them
experiencing the same actual sensations. Other people do not have our
sensations exactly when and as we have them: but they have our
possibilities of sensation; whatever indicates a present possibility of
sensations to ourselves, indicates a present possibility of similar
sensations to them, except so far as their organs of sensation may vary
from the type of ours. This puts the final seal to our conception of the
groups of possibilities as the fundamental reality in Nature. The
permanent possibilities are common to us and to our fellow-creatures;
the actual sensations are not. That which other people become aware of
when, and on the same grounds, as I do, seems more real to me than that
which they do not know of unless I tell them. The world of Possible
Sensations succeeding one another according to laws, is as much in other
beings as it is in me; it has therefore an existence outside me; it is
an External World.

If this explanation of the origin and growth of the idea of Matter, or
External Nature, contains nothing at variance with natural laws, it is
at least an admissible supposition, that the element of Non-ego which
Sir W. Hamilton regards as an original datum of consciousness, and which
we certainly do find in jwhat we now call ourj consciousness, may not be
one of its primitive elements—may not have existed at all in its first
manifestations. But if this supposition be admissible, it ought, on Sir
W. Hamilton’s principles, to be received as true. The first of the laws
laid down by him for the interpretation of Consciousness, the law (as he
terms it) of Parcimony, forbids to suppose an original principle of our
nature in order to account for phænomena which admit of possible
explanation from known causes. If the supposed ingredient of
consciousness be one which might grow up (though we cannot prove that it
did grow up) through later experience; and if, when it had so grown up,
it would, by known laws of our nature, appear as completely intuitive as
our sensations themselves; we are bound, according to Sir W. Hamilton’s
and all sound philosophy, to assign to it that origin. Edition: current;
Page: [183] Where there is a known cause adequate to account for a
phænomenon, there is no justification for ascribing it to an unknown
one. And what evidence does Consciousness furnish of the intuitiveness
of an impression, except instantaneousness, apparent simplicity, and
unconsciousness on our part of how the impression came into our minds?
These features can only prove the impression to be intuitive, on the
hypothesis that there are no means of accounting for them otherwise. If
they not only might, but naturally would, exist, even on the supposition
that it is not intuitive, we must accept the conclusion to which we are
led by the Psychological Method, and which the Introspective Method
furnishes absolutely nothing to contradict.

Matter, then, may be defined, a Permanent Possibility of Sensation. If I
am asked, whether I believe in matter, I ask whether the questioner
accepts this definition of it. If he does, I believe in matter: and so
do all Berkeleians. In any other sense than this, I do not. But I affirm
with confidence, that this conception of Matter includes the whole
meaning attached to it by the common world, apart from philosophical,
and sometimes from theological, theories. The reliance of mankind on the
real existence of visible and tangible objects, means reliance on the
reality and permanence of Possibilities of visual and tactual
sensations, when no such sensations are actually experienced. We are
warranted in believing that this is the meaning of Matter in the minds
of many of its most esteemed metaphysical champions, though they
themselves would not admit as much: for example, of Reid, Stewart, and
Brown. For these three philosophers alleged that all mankind, including
Berkeley and Hume, really believed in Matter, inasmuch as unless they
did, they would not have turned aside to save themselves from running
against a post. Now all which this manœuvre really proved is, that they
believed in Permanent Possibilities of Sensation. We have therefore the
kunintentionalk sanction of these three eminent defenders of the
existence of matter, for affirming, that to believe in Permanent
Possibilities of Sensation lisl believing in Matter. It is hardly
necessary, after such authorities, to mention Dr. Johnson,[*] or any one
else who resorts to the argumentum baculinum of knocking a stick against
the ground. Sir W. Hamilton, a far subtler thinker than any of these,
never reasons in this manner. He never supposes that a disbeliever in
what he means by Matter, ought in consistency to act in any different
mode from those who believe in it. He knew that the belief on which all
the practical consequences depend, is the belief in Permanent
Possibilities of Sensation, Edition: current; Page: [184] and that if
nobody believed in a material universe in any other sense, life would go
on exactly as it now does. He, however, did believe in more than this,
but, I think, only because it had never occurred to him that mere
Possibilities of Sensation could, to our artificialized consciousness,
present the character of objectivity which, as we have now shown, they
not only can, but unless the known laws of the human mind were
suspended, must necessarily, present.

Perhaps it may be objected, that the very possibility of framing such a
notion of Matter as Sir W. Hamilton’s—the capacity in the human mind of
imagining an external world which is anything more than what the
Psychological Theory makes it—amounts to a disproof of the theory. If
(it may be said) we had no revelation in consciousness, of a world which
is not in some way or other identified with sensation, we should be
unable to have the notion of such a world. If the only ideas we had of
external objects were ideas of our sensations, supplemented by an
acquired notion of permanent possibilities of sensation, we must (it is
thought) be incapable of conceiving, and therefore still more incapable
of fancying that we perceive, things which are not sensations at all. It
being evident however that some philosophers believe this, and it being
maintainable that the mass of mankind do so, the existence of a
perdurable basis of sensations, distinct from sensations themselves, is
proved, it might be said, by the possibility of believing it.

Let me first restate what I apprehend the belief to be. We believe that
we perceive a something closely related to all our sensations, but
different from those which we are feeling at any particular minute; and
distinguished from sensations altogether, by being permanent and always
the same, while these are fugitive, variable, and alternately displace
one another. But these attributes of the object of perception are
properties belonging to all the possibilities of sensation which
experience guarantees. The belief in such permanent possibilities seems
to me to include all that is essential or characteristic in the belief
in substance. I believe that Calcutta exists, though I do not perceive
it, and that it would still exist if every percipient inhabitant were
suddenly to leave the place, or be struck dead. But when I analyse the
belief, all I find in it is, that were these events to take place, the
Permanent Possibility of Sensation which I call Calcutta would still
remain; that if I were suddenly transported to the banks of the Hoogly,
I should still have the sensations which, if now present, would lead me
to affirm that Calcutta exists here and now. We may infer, therefore,
that both philosophers and the world at large, when they think of
matter, conceive it really as a Permanent Possibility of Sensation. But
the majority of philosophers fancy that it is something more; and the
world at large, though they have really, as I conceive, nothing in their
minds but a Permanent Possibility of Sensation, would, if asked the
question, undoubtedly agree Edition: current; Page: [185] with the
philosophers: and though this is sufficiently explained by the tendency
of the human mind to infer difference of things from difference of
names, I acknowledge the obligation of showing how it can be possible to
believe in an existence transcending all possibilities of sensation,
unless on the hypothesis that such an existence actually is, and that we
actually perceive it.

The explanation, however, is not difficult. It is an admitted fact, that
we are capable of all conceptions which can be formed by generalizing
from the observed laws of our sensations. Whatever relation we find to
exist between any one of our sensations and something different from it,
that same relation we have no difficulty in conceiving to exist between
the sum of all our sensations and something different from them. The
differences which our consciousness recognises between one sensation and
another, give us the general notion of difference, and inseparably
associate with every sensation we have, the feeling of its being
different from other things: and when once this association has been
formed, we can no longer conceive anything, without being able, and even
being compelled, to form also the conception of something different from
it. This familiarity with the idea of something different from each
thing we know, makes it natural and easy to form the notion of something
different from all things that we know, collectively as well as
individually. It is true we can form no conception of what such a thing
can be; our notion of it is merely negative; but the idea of ma
substance, apart from its relation to the impressions which we conceive
it as makingm on our senses, is a merely negative one. There is thus no
psychological obstacle to our forming the notion of a something which is
neither a sensation nor a possibility of sensation, even if our
consciousness does not testify to it; and nothing is more likely than
that the Permanent Possibilities of sensation, to which our
consciousness does testify, should be confounded in our minds with this
imaginary conception. All experience attests the strength of the
tendency to mistake mental abstractions, even negative ones, for
substantive realities; and the Permanent Possibilities of sensation
which experience guarantees, are so extremely unlike in many of their
properties to actual sensations, that since we are capable of imagining
something which transcends sensation, there is a great natural
probability that we should suppose these to be it.

But this natural probability is converted into certainty, when we take
into consideration that universal law of our experience which is termed
the law of Causation, and which makes us nmentally connect with the
beginning of everything, somen antecedent condition, or Cause. The case
of Causation is one of the most marked of all the cases in which we
extend to the sum total of our consciousness, a notion derived from its
parts. It is a striking Edition: current; Page: [186] example of our
power to conceive, and our tendency to believe, that a relation which
subsists between every individual item of our experience and some other
item, subsists also between our experience as a whole, and something not
within the sphere of experience. By this extension to the sum of all our
experiences, of the internal relations obtaining between its several
parts, we are led to consider sensation itself—the aggregate whole of
our sensations—as deriving its origin from antecedent existences
transcending sensation. That we should do this, is a consequence of the
particular character of the uniform sequences, which experience
discloses to us among our sensations. As already remarked, the constant
antecedent of a sensation is seldom another sensation, or set of
sensations, actually felt. It is much oftener the existence of a group
of possibilities, not necessarily including any actual sensations,
except such as are required to show that the possibilities are really
present. Nor are actual sensations indispensable even for this purpose;
for the presence of the object (which is nothing more than the immediate
presence of the possibilities) may be made known to us by the very
sensation which we refer to it as its effect. Thus, the real antecedent
of an effect—the only antecedent which, being invariable and
unconditional, we consider to be the cause—may be, not any sensation
really felt, but solely the presence, at that or the immediately
preceding moment, of a group of possibilities of sensation. Hence it is
not with sensations as actually experienced, but with their Permanent
Possibilities, that the idea of Cause comes to be identified: and we, by
one and the same process, acquire the habit of regarding Sensation in
general, like all our individual sensations, as an Effect, and also that
of conceiving as the causes of most of our individual sensations, not
other sensations, but general possibilities of sensation. If all these
considerations put together do not completely explain and account for
our conceiving these Possibilities as a class of independent and
substantive entities, I know not what psychological analysis can be
conclusive.

It may perhaps be said, that the preceding theory gives, indeed, some
account of the idea of Permanent Existence which forms part of our
conception of matter, but gives no explanation of our believing these
permanent objects to be external, or out of ourselves. I apprehend, on
the contrary, that the very idea of anything out of ourselves is derived
solely from the knowledge experience gives us of the Permanent
Possibilities. Our sensations we carry with us wherever we go, and they
never exist where we are not; but when we change our place we do not
carry away with us the Permanent Possibilities of Sensation: they remain
until we return, or arise and cease under conditions with which our
presence has in general nothing to do. And more than all—they are, and
will be after we have ceased to feel, Permanent Possibilities of
sensation to other beings than ourselves. Thus our actual sensations and
the permanent possibilities of sensation, stand Edition: current; Page:
[187] out in obtrusive contrast to one another: and when the idea of
Cause has been acquired, and extended by generalization from the parts
of our experience to its aggregate whole, nothing can be more natural
than that the Permanent Possibilities should be classed by us as
existences generically distinct from our sensations, but of which our
sensations are the effect.*

The same theory which accounts for our ascribing to an aggregate of
possibilities of sensation, a permanent existence which our sensations
themselves do not possess, and consequently a greater reality than
belongs to our sensations, also explains our attributing greater
objectivity to the Primary Qualities of bodies than to the Secondary.
For the sensations which correspond to what are called the Primary
Qualities (as soon at least as we come to apprehend them by two senses,
the eye as well as the touch) are always present when any part of the
group is so. But colours, tastes, smells, and the like, being, in
comparison, fugacious, are not, in the same degree, conceived as being
always there, even when nobody is present to perceive them. The
sensations answering to the Secondary Qualities are only occasional,
those to the Primary, constant. The Secondary, moreover, vary with
different persons, and with the temporary sensibility of our organs; the
Primary, when perceived at all, are, as far as we know, the same to all
persons and at all times.

Edition: current; Page: [188]


CHAPTER XII: The Psychological Theory of the Belief in Matter, How Far Applicable to Mind

if the deductions in the preceding chapter are correctly drawn from
known and admitted laws of the human mind, the doctrine which forms the
basis of Sir W. Hamilton’s system of psychology, that Mind and Matter,
an ego and a non-ego, are original data of consciousness, is deprived of
its foundation. Although these two elements, an Ego and a Non-ego, are
in a(what we call)a our consciousness now, and are, or seem to be,
inseparable from it, there is no reason for believing that the latter of
them, the non-ego, was in consciousness from the beginning; since, even
if it was not, we can perceive a way in which it not only might, but
must have grown up. We can see that, supposing it absent in the first
instance, it would inevitably be present now, not as a deliverance of
consciousness in Sir W. Hamilton’s sense, for to call it so is to beg
the question; but as an instantaneous and irresistible suggestion and
inference, which has become by long repetition undistinguishable from a
direct intuition. I now propose to carry the inquiry a step farther, and
to examine whether the Ego, as a deliverance of consciousness, stands
onb firmer ground than the Non-ego; whether, at the first moment of our
experience, we already have in our consciousness the conception of Self
as a permanent existence; or whether it is formed subsequently, and
admits of a similar analysis to that which we have found that the notion
of Not-self is susceptible of.

It is evident, in the first place, that our knowledge of mind, like that
of matter, is entirely relative; Sir W. Hamilton indeed affirms this of
mind, in can evenc more unqualified manner than he believes it of
matter, making no ddistinction between Primary and Secondaryd Qualities.

In so far as mind is the common name for the states of knowing, willing,
feeling, desiring, &c., of which I am conscious, it is only the name for
a certain series of connected phænomena or qualities, and consequently
expresses only what is Edition: current; Page: [189] known. But in so
far as it denotes that subject or substance in which the phænomena of
knowing, willing, &c., inhere—something behind or under these
phænomena—it expresses what, in itself, or in its absolute existence, is
unknown.*

We have no conception of Mind itself, as distinguished from its
conscious manifestations. We neither know nor can imagine it, except as
represented by the succession of manifold feelings which metaphysicians
call by the name of States or Modifications of Mind. It is nevertheless
true that our notion of Mind, as well as of Matter, is the notion of a
permanent something, contrasted with the perpetual flux of the
sensations and other feelings or mental states which we refer to it; a
something which we figure as remaining the same, while the particular
feelings through which it reveals its existence, change. This attribute
of Permanence, supposing that there were nothing else to be considered,
would admit of the same explanation when predicated of Mind, as of
Matter. The belief I entertain that my mind exists when it is not
feeling, nor thinking, nor conscious of its own existence, resolves
itself into the belief of a Permanent Possibility of these states. If I
think of myself as in dreamless sleep, or in the sleep of death, and
believe that I, or in other words my mind, is or will be existing
through these states, though not in conscious feeling, the most
scrupulous examination of my belief will not detect in it any fact
actually believed, except that my capability of feeling is not, in that
interval, permanently destroyed, and is suspended only because it does
not meet with the combination of econditionse which would call it into
action: the moment it did meet with that combination it would revive,
and remains, therefore, a Permanent Possibility. Thus far, there seems
no hindrance to our regarding Mind as nothing but the series of our
sensations (to which must now be added our internal feelings), as they
actually occur, with the addition of infinite possibilities of feeling
requiring for their actual realization conditions which may or may not
take place, but which as possibilities are always in existence, and many
of them present.f

Edition: current; Page: [190]
In order to the further understanding of the bearings of this theory of
the Ego, it is advisable to consider it in its relation to three
questions, which may very naturally be asked with reference to it, and
which often have been asked, and sometimes answered very erroneously. If
the theory is correct, and my Mind is but a series of feelings, or, as
it has been called, a thread of consciousness, however supplemented by
believed Possibilities of consciousness which are not, though they might
be, realized; if this is all that Mind, or Myself, amounts to, what
evidence have I (it is asked) of the existence of my fellow-creatures?
What evidence of a hyperphysical world, or, in one word, of God? and,
lastly, what evidence of immortality?

Dr. Reid unhesitatingly answers, None.[*] If the doctrine is true, I am
alone in the universe.

I hold this to be one of Reid’s most palpable mistakes. Whatever
evidence to each of the three points there is on the ordinary theory,
exactly that same evidence is there on this.

In the first place, as to my fellow-creatures. Reid seems to have
imagined that if I myself am only a series of feelings, the proposition
that I have any fellow-creatures, or that there are any Selves except
mine, is but words without a meaning. But this is a misapprehension. All
that I am compelled to admit if I receive this theory, is that other
people’s Selves also are but series of feelings, like my own. Though my
Mind, as I am capable of conceiving it, be nothing but the succession of
my feelings, and though Mind itself may be merely a possibility of
feelings, there is nothing in that doctrine to prevent my conceiving,
and believing, that there are other successions of feelings besides
those of which I am conscious, and that these are as real as my own. The
belief is completely consistent with the metaphysical theory. Let us now
see whether the theory takes away the grounds of it.

What are those grounds? By what evidence do I know, or by what
considerations am I led to believe, that there exist other sentient
creatures; that the walking and speaking figures which I see and hear,
have sensations and thoughts, or in other words, possess Minds? The most
strenuous Intuitionist does not include this among the things that I
know by direct intuition. I conclude it from certain things, which my
experience of my own Edition: current; Page: [191] states of feeling
proves to me to be marks of it. These marks are of two kinds, antecedent
and subsequent; the previous conditions requisite for feeling, and the
effects or consequences of it. I conclude that other human beings have
feelings like me, because, first, they have bodies like me, which I
know, in my own case, to be the antecedent condition of feelings; and
because, secondly, they exhibit the acts, and other outward signs, which
in my own case I know by experience to be caused by feelings. I am
conscious in myself of a series of facts connected by an uniform
sequence, of which the beginning is modifications of my body, the middle
is feelings, the end is outward demeanour. In the case of other human
beings I have the evidence of my senses for the first and last links of
the series, but not for the intermediate link. I find, however, that the
sequence between the first and last is as regular and constant in those
other cases as it is in mine. In my own case I know that the first link
produces the last through the intermediate link, and could not produce
it without. Experience, therefore, obliges me to conclude that there
must be an intermediate link; which must either be the same in others as
in myself, or a different one: I must either believe them to be alive,
or to be automatons: and by believing them to be alive, that is, by
supposing the link to be of the same nature as in the case of which I
have experience, and which is in all other respects similar, I bring
other human beings, as phænomena, under the same generalizations which I
know by experience to be the true theory of my own existence. And in
doing so I conform to the legitimate rules of experimental enquiry. The
process is exactly parallel to that by which Newton proved that the
force which keeps the planets in their orbits is identical with that by
which an apple falls to the ground. It was not incumbent on Newton to
prove the impossibility of its being any other force; he was thought to
have made out his point when he had simply shown, that no other force
need be supposed. We know the existence of other beings by
generalization from the knowledge of our own: the generalization merely
postulates that what experience shows to be a mark of the existence of
something within the sphere of our consciousness, may be concluded to be
a mark of the same thing beyond that sphere.

This logical process loses none of its legitimacy on the supposition
that neither Mind nor Matter is anything but a permanent possibility of
feeling. Whatever sensation I have, I at once refer it to one of the
permanent groups of possibilities of sensation which I call material
objects. But among these groups I find there is one (my own body) which
is not only composed, like the rest, of a mixed multitude of sensations
and possibilities of sensation, but is also connected, in a peculiar
manner, with all my sensations. Not only is this special group always
present as an antecedent condition of every sensation I have, but the
other groups are only enabled to convert their respective possibilities
of sensation into actual sensations, by means Edition: current; Page:
[192] of some previous change in that particular one. I look about me,
and though there is only one group (or body) which is connected with all
my sensations in this peculiar manner, I observe that there is a great
multitude of other bodies, closely resembling in their sensible
properties (in the sensations composing them as groups) this particular
one, but whose modifications do not call up, as those of my own body do,
a world of sensations in my consciousness. Since they do not do so in my
consciousness, I infer that they do it out of my consciousness, and that
to each of them belongs a world of consciousness of its own, to which it
stands in the same relation in which what I call my own body stands to
mine. And having made this generalization, I find that all other facts
within my reach gaccordg with it. Each of these bodies exhibits to my
senses a set of phænomena (composed of acts and other manifestations)
such as I know, in my own case, to be effects of consciousness, and such
as might be looked for if each of the bodies has really in connexion
with it a world of consciousness. All this is as good and genuine an
inductive process on the theory we are discussing, as it is on the
common theory. Any objection to it in the one case would be an equal
objection in the other. I have stated the postulate required by the one
theory: the common theory is in need of the same. If I could not, from
my personal knowledge of one succession of feelings, infer the existence
of other successions of feelings, when manifested by the same outward
signs, I could just as little, from my personal knowledge of a single
spiritual substance, infer by generalization, when I find the same
outward indications, the existence of other spiritual substances.

As the theory leaves the evidence of the existence of my
fellow-creatures exactly as it was before, so does it also with that of
the existence of God. Supposing me to believe that the Divine Mind is
simply the series of the Divine thoughts and feelings prolonged through
eternity, that would be, at any rate, believing God’s existence to be as
real as my own. And as for evidence, the argument of Paley’s Natural
Theology, or, for that matter, of his Evidences of Christianity, would
stand exactly where it does.[*] The Design argument is drawn from the
analogy of human experience. From the relation which human works bear to
human thoughts and feelings, it infers a corresponding relation between
works, more or less similar but superhuman, and superhuman thoughts and
feelings. If it proves these, nobody but a metaphysician needs care
whether or not it proves a mysterious Edition: current; Page: [193]
substratum for them. Again, the arguments for Revelation undertake to
prove by testimony, that within the sphere of human experience works
were done requiring a greater than human power, and words said requiring
a greater than human wisdom. These positions, and the evidences of them,
neither lose nor gain anything by our supposing that the wisdom only
means wise thoughts and volitions, and that the power means thoughts and
volitions followed by imposing phænomena.

As to immortality, it is precisely as easy to conceive that a succession
of feelings, a thread of consciousness, may be prolonged to eternity, as
that a spiritual substance for ever continues to exist: and any evidence
which would prove the one, will prove the other. Metaphysical
theologians may lose the à priori argument by which they have sometimes
flattered themselves with having proved that a spiritual substance, by
the essential constitution of its nature, cannot perish. But they had
better drop this argument in any case. To do them justice, they seldom
insist on it now.

The notion that metaphysical Scepticism, even at the utmost length to
which it ever has been, or is capable of being, carried, has for its
logical consequence atheism, is grounded on an entire misapprehension of
the Sceptical argument, and has no locus standi except for persons who
think that whatever accustoms people to a rigid scrutiny of evidence is
unfavourable to religious belief. This is the opinion, doubtless, of
those who do not believe in any religion, and seemingly of a great
number who do: but it is not the opinion of Sir W. Hamilton, who says
that “religious disbelief and philosophical scepticism are not merely
not the same, but have no natural connexion;”* and who, as we have seen,
makes use of the veracity of the Deity as his principal argument for
trusting the testimony of consciousness to the substantiality of Matter
and of Mind, which would have been a gross petitio principii if he had
thought that our assurance of the divine attributes required that the
objective existence of Matter and Mind should be first recognised.

The theory, therefore, which resolves Mind into a series of feelings,
with a background of possibilities of feeling, can effectually withstand
the most invidious of the arguments directed against it. But, groundless
as are the extrinsic objections, the theory has intrinsic difficulties
which we have not yet set forth, and which it seems to me beyond the
power of metaphysical analysis to remove. Besides present feelings, and
possibilities of present feeling, there is another class of phænomena to
be included in an enumeration of the elements making up our conception
of Mind. The thread of consciousness which composes the mind’s
phænomenal life, consists not Edition: current; Page: [194] only of
present sensations, but likewise, in part, of memories and expectations.
Now what are these? In themselves, they are present feelings, states of
present consciousness, and in that respect not distinguished from
sensations. They all, moreover, resemble some given sensations or
feelings, of which we have previously had experience. But they are
attended with the peculiarity, that each of them involves a belief in
more than its own present existence. A sensation involves only this: but
a remembrance of sensation, even if not referred to any particular date,
involves the suggestion and belief that a sensation, of which it is a
copy or representation, actually existed in the past: and an expectation
involves the belief, more or less positive, that a sensation or other
feeling to which it directly refers, will exist in the future. Nor can
the phænomena involved in these two states of consciousness be
adequately expressed, without saying that the belief they include is,
that I myself formerly had, or that I myself, and no other, shall
hereafter have, the sensations remembered or expected. The fact believed
is, that the sensations did actually form, or will hereafter form, part
of the self-same series of states, or thread of consciousness, of which
the remembrance or expectation of those sensations is the part now
present. If, therefore, we speak of the Mind as a series of feelings, we
are obliged to complete the statement by calling it a series of feelings
which is aware of itself as past and future; and we are reduced to the
alternative of believing that the Mind, or Ego, is something different
from any series of feelings, or possibilities of them, or of accepting
the paradox, that something which ex hypothesi is but a series of
feelings, can be aware of itself as a series.

The truth is, that we are here face to face with that final
inexplicability, at which, as Sir W. Hamilton observes, we inevitably
arrive when we reach ultimate facts; and in general, one mode of stating
it only appears more incomprehensible than another, because the whole of
human language is accommodated to the one, and is so incongruous with
the other, that it cannot be expressed in any terms which do not deny
its truth. The real stumbling block is perhaps not in any theory of the
fact, but in the fact itself. The true incomprehensibility perhaps is,
that something which has ceased, or is not yet in existence, can still
be, in a manner, present: that a series of feelings, the infinitely
greater part of which is past or future, can be gathered up, as it were,
into a single present conception, accompanied by a belief of reality. I
think, by far the wisest thing we can do, is to accept the inexplicable
fact, without any theory of how it takes place; and when we are obliged
to speak of it in terms which assume a theory, to use them with a
reservation as to their meaning.

I have stated the difficulties attending the attempt to frame a theory
of Mind, or the Ego, similar to what I have called the Psychological
Theory of Edition: current; Page: [195] Matter, or the Non-ego. No such
difficulties attend the theory in its application to Matter; and I leave
it, as set forth, to pass for whatever it is worth as an antagonist
doctrine to that of Sir W. Hamilton and the Scottish School, respecting
the non-ego as a deliverance of consciousness.*

Edition: current; Page: [196]


hAPPENDIX TO THE TWO PRECEDING CHAPTERS

This attempt to bring out into distinctness the mode in which the
notions of Matter and Mind, considered as Substances, may have been
generated in us by the mere order of our sensations, has naturally
received from those whose metaphysical opinions were already made up, a
much greater amount of opposition than of assent. I think I have
observed, however, that the repugnance shown to it by writers has been
in tolerably correct proportion to the evidence they give of deficiency
in that indispensable aptitude of a metaphysician, facility in placing
himself at the point of view of a theory different from his own: and
that those who have ever (if the expression may be pardoned) thought
themselves into the Berkeleian or any other Idealistic scheme of
philosophy, however little favourable towards other parts of the present
volume, have either let this part of it alone, or expressed more or less
approbation of it. Those who are completely satisfied with the popular
every-day notion of Matter, or whose metaphysics have been adopted from
any of the Realistic thinkers who undertake to legitimate that common
notion, are usually content with going round the counter-theory on the
outside, and seldom place themselves sufficiently at the centre of it to
perceive what a person ought to think or do, who occupies that position.
They no longer, indeed, commit so gross a blunder as that which, not
very long ago, even Reid, Stewart, and Brown rushed blindly into—that of
charging a Berkeleian with inconsistency if he did not walk into the
water or into the fire. Acquaintance with the German metaphysicians, and
(it is but just to add) the teachings of Sir W. Hamilton, have had that
much of beneficial result. But if such thinkers as these three could
pass judgment on Berkeley’s doctrine while showing by such conclusive
proof that they had never understood its very alphabet—that, however
much consideration they may have given to the mere arguments of
Berkeley, they had not begun to realize his doctrine in their own
minds—to look at the sensible universe as he saw it, and see what
consequences would follow; it is not wonderful that those who have got
on a few steps further than this, have still much to do, before they are
able to accommodate their conceptive faculties to the conditions of what
I have called the Psychological Theory, and follow that theory correctly
into the ramification of its applications.

In principle, I must admit that my opponents, as a body, have referred
the Psychological Theory to the right test. They have aimed at showing
that its attempt to account for the belief in Matter (I say Matter only,
because I do not profess to have adequately accounted for the belief in
Mind) implies or requires that the belief should already exist, as a
condition of its own Edition: current; Page: [197] production. The
objection, if true, is conclusive; but they are not very particular
about the proof of its truth. They, one and all, think their case made
out, if I employ, in any part of the exposition, the language of common
life—a language constructed on the basis of the notions into the origin
of which I am inquiring. If I say, that after we have seen a piece of
paper on a table, our belief that it is still there during our absence
means a belief that if we went again into the room we should see it,
they cry out, Here is belief in Matter already assumed; the idea of
going into a room implies belief in matter. If, as a proof that
modifications may take place in our possibilities of sensation while the
sensations are not in actual consciousness, I say that whether we are
asleep or awake the fire goes out, I am told that I am assuming a
knowledge of ourselves as a substance, and of the difference between
being asleep and awake. They forget that to go into a room, to be asleep
or awake, are expressions which have a meaning in the Psychological
Theory as well as in theirs; that every assertion that can be made about
the external world, which means anything on the Realistic theory, has a
parallel meaning on the Psychological. Going into a room, on the
Psychological theory, is a mere series of sensations felt, and
possibilities of sensation inferred,* but distinguishable from every
other combination of sensations and possibilities, and which, with
others like to itself, forms as vast and variegated a picture of the
universe as can be had on the other theory; indeed, as I maintain, the
very same picture. The Psychological theory requires that we should have
a conception of this series of actual and contingent sensations, as
distinct from any other; but it does not require that we should have
referred these sensations to a substance ulterior to all sensation or
possibility of sensation. To suppose so, is to commit the same kind of
misapprehension, though in a less extreme degree, which Reid, Stewart,
and Brown committed.

When, in attempting an intelligible discussion of an abstruse
metaphysical question, I have occasion to speak of any combination of
physical facts, I must speak of it by the only names there are for it. I
must employ language, every word of which expresses, not things as we
perceive them, or as we may have conceived them originally, but things
as we conceive them now. I was addressing readers, all of whom had the
acquired notion of Matter, and nearly all of them the belief in it: and
it was my business to show, to these believers in Matter, a possible
mode in which the notion and belief of it might have been acquired, even
if Matter, in the metaphysical meaning of the term, did not exist. In
endeavouring to point out to them, by what facts the notion might have
been generated, it was competent to me to Edition: current; Page: [198]
state those facts in the language which was not only the most
intelligible, but, to the minds I was addressing, the truest. The real
paralogism would have been, if I had said anything implying, not the
existence of Matter, but that the belief in it or the notion of it was
part of the facts by which I was maintaining that this belief and notion
may have been generated. But in no single instance have any adversaries
whom I am aware of, been able to show this: and if they fairly placed
themselves at the point of view of the Psychological explanation, they
would see that I could not, in any circumstances whatever, have been
reduced to this necessity: because there is, as I have said, for every
statement which can be made concerning material phænomena in terms of
the Realistic theory, an equivalent meaning in terms of Sensation and
Possibilities of Sensation alone, and a meaning which would justify all
the same processes of thought.[*] In fact, almost all philosophers who
have narrowly examined the subject, have decided that Substance need
only be postulated as a support for phænomena, or as a bond of connexion
to hold a group or series of otherwise unconnected phænomena together:
let us only, then, think away the support, and suppose the phænomena to
remain, and to be held together in the same groups and series by some
other agency, or without any agency but an internal law, and every
consequence follows without Substance, for the sake of which Substance
was assumed. The Hindoos thought that the earth required to be supported
by an elephant; but the earth turned out quite capable of supporting
itself, and “hanging self-balanced” on its own “centre.”[†] Descartes
thought that a material medium filling the whole space between the earth
and the sun, was required to enable them to act on one another;[‡] but
it has been found sufficient to suppose an immaterial law of attraction,
and the medium and its vortices dropped off as superfluities.

To dispel some of the haze which seems still to hang about the data
assumed by the Psychological theory of the belief in Matter, it will be
well that, as I have stated what laws and capacities, in one word what
conditions, that theory postulates in the mind itself, I should also
state what conditions it postulates in Nature; in that which, to use the
Kantian phraseology, is given to the mind, as distinguished from the
mind’s own constitution.

First, then, it postulates Sensations; and a certain Order among
sensations. And the Order postulated, is of more kinds than one.

In the first place, there is the mere fact of succession. Sensations
exist before and after one another. This is as much a primordial fact as
sensation itself; it is a feature always present in sensation, and we
have the strongest Edition: current; Page: [199] ground that can ever be
had for regarding it as ultimate, because every genesis we assign to any
other fact of perception or thought, includes it as a condition. I shall
be told, that this is postulating the reality of Time: and it is so, if
by Time be understood an indefinite succession of successions, unequal
in rapidity. But an entity called Time, and regarded as not a succession
of successions, but as something in which the successions take place, I
do not and need not postulate.* Neither do I decide whether this
inseparable attribute of our sensations is annexed to them by the laws
of mind, or given in the sensations themselves; nor whether, at this
great height of abstraction, the distinction does not disappear. Let me
say also, that I have never pretended to account by association for the
idea of Time. It is the seeming infinity of Time, as of Space, which,
after Mr. James Mill,[*] I have tendered that explanation of: and that
of this it is the true and sufficient one, is to me obvious.

Sensations are not only successive, they are also simultaneous: it often
happens that several of them are felt, apparently at the same instant.
This attribute of sensations is not so evidently primordial as their
succession. There are philosophers who think that the sensations deemed
simultaneous are very rapidly successive, their distinction from other
cases of succession being that they may succeed one another in any
order. I do not agree in this opinion; but, even supposing it correct,
we should equally have to postulate the distinction. We should have to
assume that plurality of sensations exists in two modes, one consciously
successive, the other felt as simultaneous, and that the mind is able to
distinguish between the one sort and the other.

Besides this twofold order inherent in sensations, of being either
successive or simultaneous, there is an order within that order: they
are successive or simultaneous in constant combinations. The same
antecedent sensation is followed by the same consequent sensation; the
same sensation is accompanied by the same set of simultaneous
sensations. I use these expressions for shortness, for the uniformity of
order is not quite so simple as this. The consequent sensation is not
always actually felt after the Edition: current; Page: [200] antecedent,
nor are all the synchronous sensations actually felt whenever one of
them is felt. But the one which is felt gives us assurance, grounded on
experience, that each of the others, if not felt, is feelable, i.e.,
will be felt if the other facts be present which are the known
antecedent conditions of such a sensation as it is. For example, I have
the sensations of colour and of a visible disk, which are parts of our
present conception of a cast-iron ball. I infer that there are, now or
presently to be had by me, simultaneously with those visual sensations,
another feeling, called the sensation of hardness. But I do not have
this last sensation inevitably and at once. Why? Because (as I also know
by experience) no sensation of hardness is ever felt unless preceded by
a condition, the same in all cases, but itself sensational, the
sensations of muscular exertion and pressure. The visual sensation is
synchronous, not necessarily with the actual sensation of hardness, but
with a present possibility of that sensation. When we feel the one, we
are not always feeling the other, but we know that it is to be felt on
the ordinary terms: we know that so soon as the muscular sensations take
place which are the observed preliminary to every sensation of hardness,
that particular sensation of hardness will certainly be had,
simultaneously with the visual sensation. This is what is meant by
saying that a Body is a group of simultaneous possibilities of
sensation, not of simultaneous sensations. It rarely happens that the
sensations which enter into the group can all be experienced at once;
because many of them are never had without a long series of antecedent
sensations, including volitions, which may be incompatible with the
sensations and volitions necessary for having others. The sensations
which we receive when we study the internal structure of a closed body,
are not to be obtained without having previously the complex series of
sensations and volitions concerned in the operation of opening it. The
sensations we receive from the complicated process by which food
nourishes us, must be long waited for after our first sight of the food,
and many of them are not even then to be had without our being led up to
them through a long series of muscular and other sensations. But the
very first sensations we have, that are sufficient to identify the
group, guarantee to us the possibility or potentiality of all the
others. The potentiality becomes actuality on the occurrence of certain
known conditions sine quâ non of each, which are conditions not of
having that particular sensation at a given moment, but of having any
sensation of that kind; conditions which, when analysed, are themselves
also merely sensational. Any one who had thrown his mind, by an act of
imagination, into the Psychological theory, would see at a glance all
these applications and developments of it, even if he did not follow
them out into detail. But men will not, and mostly cannot, throw their
minds into any theory with which they are not familiar; and the bearings
and consequences of the Psychological theory will have to be Edition:
current; Page: [201] developed and minutely expounded innumerable times,
before it will be seen as it is, and have whatever chance it deserves of
being accepted as true.

I have postulated, first, Sensations; secondly, succession and
simultaneousness of sensations; thirdly, an uniform order in their
succession and simultaneousness, such that they are united in groups,
the component sensations of which are in such a relation to one another,
that when we experience one, we are authorized to expect all the rest,
conditionally on certain antecedent sensations called organic, belonging
to the kind of each. This is all we need postulate with regard to the
groups, considered in themselves, or considered in relation to the
perceiving Subject. Let us examine whether it is necessary to postulate
anything additional respecting the groups considered in relation to one
another.

In Dr. M‘Cosh’s opinion, the Psychological theory overlooks this part of
the subject.* In quoting the analysis of our conception of Matter into
Resistance, Extension, and Figure, together with miscellaneous powers of
exciting other sensations, he observes, “There is a palpable omission
here, for it omits those powers by which one body operates upon another;
thus the sun has a power to make wax white, and fire to make lead
fluid.”[*] If Dr. M‘Cosh had entered even a very little way into the
mode of thought which he is combating, he must have seen that after
mentioning the attribute of exciting sensations, it could not be
necessary to add that of making something else excite sensations. If
Body altogether is only conceived as a power of exciting sensations, the
action of one body upon another is simply the modification by one such
power, of the sensations excited by another; or, to use a different
expression, the joint action of two powers of exciting sensations. It is
easy for any one competent to such enquiries who will make the attempt,
to understand how one group of Possibilities of Sensation can be
conceived as destroying or modifying another such group.

Let there be granted a synchronous group, connected by the contingent
simultaneousness already described, which renders each of the component
sensations a mark of the possibility of having all the others; while
each, independently of the others, has conditions sine quâ non of its
own, also sensational, but of the kind which, in common language, we
call organic, and refer to an internal sense. Let us suppose that these
organic conditions, Edition: current; Page: [202] instead of existing
for one or more sensations of the group and not for the rest, do not at
present exist for any of them. The whole of the possibilities of
sensation which form the group, and which mutually testify to each
other’s presence, are now dormant: but they are ready to start into
actuality at any moment, when the conditions sine quâ non which belong
to them separately are realized: and whenever any of them thus starts
up, it informs us (so far as our experience happens to have reached)
what others are ready to do so in the same manner. This dormancy of all
the possibilities, while, as real possibilities guaranteeing one
another, they continue to exist, constitutes, on the Psychological
theory, the fact which is at the bottom of the assertion that the body
is in existence when we are not perceiving it. This fact is all that we
need postulate to account for our conceiving the groups of Possibilities
of Sensation as permanent and independent of us; for our projecting them
into objectivity; and for our conceiving them as perhaps capable of
being Possibilities of Sensation to other beings in like manner as to
ourselves, as soon as we have conceived the idea of other sentient
beings than ourselves. And since we do actually recognise other sentient
beings as existing, and receive impressions from them which entirely
accord with this hypothesis, we accept the hypothesis as a truth, and
believe that the Permanent Possibilities of Sensation really are common
to ourselves and other beings.

Having thus arrived at the conception of an absent group of
Possibilities, there is surely no more difficulty in conceiving the
annihilation or alteration of the Possibilities while absent, than of
the sensations themselves when present. The log which I saw on the fire
an hour ago, has been consumed and has disappeared when I look again;
the Possibilities of Sensation which I called by that name, are
possibilities no longer. The ice which I placed in front of the fire at
the same time, is now water; such Possibilities of Sensation as form
part of the groups called ice and not of the groups called water, have
ceased and given place to others. All this is intelligible without
supposing the wood, the ice, or the water, to be anything underneath or
beyond Permanent Possibilities of Sensation. Why, then, when I ascribe
the disappearance of the wood, and the conversion of the ice into water,
to the presence of the fire, must I suppose the fire to be something
underneath a Possibility of Sensation? My experience informs me that
those other Possibilities of Sensation do not vanish or change in the
manner mentioned, unless another Possibility of Sensation known by the
name of fire, has existed immediately before, and continued to exist
simultaneously with the change. Changes in the Permanent Possibilities I
find to have always for their antecedent conditions, other Permanent
Possibilities, and to be connected with them by an order or law, as
uniform as that which connects the elements of each group with one
another; indeed by a still stricter order, for Edition: current; Page:
[203] the laws of succession, those of Cause and Effect, are laws of
more rigid precision than those of simultaneousness. But the facts,
between which the observed uniformities of succession exist, are facts
of sense; that is, either actual sensations, or possibilities of
sensation inferred from the actual. Thus the whole variety of the facts
of nature as we know it, is given in the mere existence of our
sensations, and in the laws or order of their occurrence.*

I have now given an exposition of the Psychological Theory, and of the
mode in which it accounts for what is supposed to be our natural
conviction of the existence of Matter, from the objective point of view,
as I had previously done from the subjective; and I think it will be
found that the exposition does not presuppose anything which I have not
expressly postulated, and that I have not postulated any of the facts or
notions which I undertake to explain. It may be said that I postulate an
Ego—the sentient Subject of the sensations. I have stated what
subjective, as well as what objective data I postulate. Expectation
being one of these, in so far as reference to an Ego is implied in
Expectation I do postulate an Ego. But I am entitled to do so, for up to
this stage it is not Self, but Body, that I have been endeavouring to
trace to its origin as an acquired notion.†

Edition: current; Page: [204]
I now pass to this very subject, the Ego, and to the objections which
have been made against the manner in which it is treated in the
preceding chapter.

Having shown that in order to account for the belief in Matter, or, in
other words, in a non-ego supposed to be presented in or along with
sensation, it is not necessary to suppose anything but sensations and
possibilities of sensation connected in groups; it was natural and
necessary to enquire whether the Ego, supposed to be presented in or
along with all consciousness whatever, is also an acquired notion,
explicable in the same manner. I therefore stated this phænomenal theory
of the Ego; freed it from the prejudice which attaches to it on the
score of consequences to which it does not lead, the non-existence,
first, of our fellow-creatures, and secondly, of God;* but showed that
it has intrinsic difficulties, which no Edition: current; Page: [205]
one has been able to remove; since certain of the attributes comprised
in our notion of the Ego, and which are at the very foundation of it,
namely Memory and Expectation, have no equivalent in Matter, and cannot
be reduced to any elements similar to those into which Matter is
resolved by the Psychological theory. Having stated these facts, as
inexplicable by the Psychological theory, I left them to stand as facts,
without any theory whatever: not adopting the Permanent Possibility
hypothesis as a sufficient theory of Self in spite of the objections to
it, as some of my critics have Edition: current; Page: [206] imagined,
and have wasted no small amount of argument and sarcasm in exposing the
untenability of such a position: neither, on the other hand, did I, as
others have supposed, accept the common theory of Mind, as a so-called
Substance. Since the state in which I profess to leave the question has
been so ill understood, it is incumbent on me to explain myself more
fully.

Since the fact which alone necessitates the belief in an Ego, the one
fact which the Psychological theory cannot explain, is the fact of
Memory (for Edition: current; Page: [207] Expectation I hold to be, both
psychologically and logically, a consequence of Memory), I see no reason
to think that there is any cognizance of an Ego until Memory commences.
There seems no ground for believing, with Sir W. Hamilton and Mr.
Mansel, that the Ego is an original presentation of consciousness; that
the mere impression on our senses involves, or carries with it, any
consciousness of a Self, any more than I believe it to do of a Not-self.
Our very notion of a Self takes its commencement i(there is every reason
to suppose)i from the representation of a sensation in memory, when
awakened by the only thing there is to awaken it before any associations
have been formed, namely, the occurrence of a subsequent sensation
similar to the former one. The fact of recognising a sensation, of being
reminded of it, and, as we say, remembering that it has been felt
before, is the simplest and most elementary fact of memory: and the
inexplicable tie, or law, the organic union (as Professor Masson calls
it)[*] which connects the present consciousness with the past one, of
which it reminds me, is as near as I think we can get to a positive
conception of Self. That there is something real in this tie, real as
the sensations themselves, and not a mere product of the laws of thought
without any fact corresponding to it, I hold to be indubitable. The
precise nature of the process by which we cognise it, is open to much
dispute. Whether we are directly conscious of it in the act of
remembrance, as we are of succession in the fact of having successive
sensations, or whether, according to the opinion of Kant, we are not
conscious of a Self at all, but are compelled to assume it as a
necessary condition of Memory,* I do not undertake to decide. But this
original Edition: current; Page: [208] element, which has no community
of nature with any of the things answering to our names, and to which we
cannot give any name but its own peculiar one without implying some
false or ungrounded theory, is the Ego, or Self. As such, I ascribe a
reality to the Ego—to my own Mind—different from that real existence as
a Permanent Possibility, which is the only reality I acknowledge in
Matter: and by fair experiential inference from that one Ego, I ascribe
the same reality to other Egoes, or Minds.

Having thus, as I hope, more clearly defined my position in regard to
the reality of the Ego, considered as a question of Ontology, I return
to my first starting point, the Relativity of human knowledge, and
affirm (being here in entire accordance with Sir W. Hamilton) that
whatever be the nature of the real existence we are compelled to
acknowledge in Mind, the Mind is only known to itself phænomenally, as
the series of its feelings of consciousnesses. We are forced to
apprehend every part of the series as linked with the other parts by
something in common, which is not the feelings themselves, any more than
the succession of the feelings is the feelings themselves: and as that
which is the same in the first as in the second, in the second as in the
third, in the third as in the fourth, and so on, must be the same in the
first and in the fiftieth, this common element is a permanent element.
But beyond this, we can affirm nothing of it except the states of
consciousness themselves. The feelings or consciousnesses which belong
or have belonged to it, and its possibilities of having more, are the
only facts there are to be asserted of Self—the only positive
attributes, except permanence, which we can ascribe to it. In
consequence of this, I occasionally use the words “mind” and “thread of
consciousness” interchangeably, and treat Mind as existing, and Mind as
known to itself, as convertible: but this is only for brevity, and the
explanations which I have now given must always be taken as implied.h*

Edition: current; Page: [209] Edition: current; Page: [210]


CHAPTER XIII: The Psychological Theory of the Primary Qualities of Matter

for the reasons which have been set forth, I conceive Sir W. Hamilton to
be wrong in his statement that a Self and a Not-self are immediately
apprehended in our primitive consciousness. We have, in all probability,
no notion of Not-self, until after considerable experience of the
recurrence of sensations according to fixed laws, and in groups.* aNor
is ita credible that the first sensation which we experience awakens in
us any notion of an Ego or Self. To refer it to an Ego is to consider it
as part of a series of states of consciousness, some portion of which is
already past. The identification of a present state with a remembered
state cognised as past, is what, to my thinking, constitutes the
cognition that it is I who feel it. “I” means he who saw, touched, or
felt something yesterday or the day before. No single sensation can
suggest personal identity: this requires a series of sensations, thought
of as forming a line of succession, and summed up in thought into a
Unity.

But (however this may be) throughout the whole of our sensitive life
except its first beginnings, we unquestionably refer our sensations to a
me and a not-me. As soon as I have formed, on the one hand, the notion
of Permanent Possibilities of Sensation, and on the other, of that
continued series of feelings which I call my life, both these notions
are, by an irresistible association, recalled by every sensation I have.
They represent two things, with both of which the sensation of the
moment, be it what it may, stands in relation, and I cannot be conscious
of the sensation without being conscious of it as related to these two
things. They have accordingly Edition: current; Page: [211] received
relative names, expressive of the double relation in question. The
thread of consciousness which I apprehend the sensation as a part of, is
the subject of the sensation. The group of Permanent Possibilities of
Sensation to which I refer it, and which is partially realized and
actualized in it, is the object of the sensation. The sensation itself
ought to have a correlative name; or rather, ought to have two such
names, one denoting the sensation as opposed to its Subject, the other
denoting it as opposed to its Object. But it is a remarkable fact, that
this necessity has not been felt, and that the need of a correlative
name to every relative one has been considered to be satisfied by the
terms Object and Subject themselves; the object and the subject not
being attended to in the relation which they respectively bear to the
sensation, but being regarded as directly correlated with one another.
It is true that they are related to one another, but only through the
sensation: their relation to each other consists in the peculiar and
different relation in which they severally stand to the sensation. We
have no conception of either Subject or Object, either Mind or Matter,
except as something to which we refer our sensations, and whatever other
feelings we are conscious of. The very existence of them both, so far as
cognisable by us, consists only in the relation they respectively bear
to our states of feeling. Their relation to each other is only the
relation between those two relations. The immediate correlatives are not
the pair, Object, Subject, but the two pairs, Object, Sensation
objectively considered; Subject, Sensation subjectively considered. The
reason why this is overlooked, might easily be shown, and would furnish
a good illustration of that important part of the Laws of Association
which may be termed the Laws of Obliviscence.

I have next to speak of a psychological fact, also a consequence of the
Laws of Association, and without a full appreciation of which, the idea
of Matter can only be understood in its original groundwork, but not in
the superstructure which the laws of our actual experience have raised
upon it. There are certain of our sensations which we are accustomed
principally to consider subjectively, and others which we are
principally accustomed to consider objectively. In the case of the
first, the relation in which we most frequently, most habitually, and
therefore most easily consider them, is their relation to the series of
feelings of which they form a part, and which, consolidated by thought
into a single conception, is termed the Subject. In the case of the
second, the relation in which we by preference contemplate them is their
relation to some group, or some kind of group, of Permanent
Possibilities of Sensation, the present existence of which is certified
to us by the sensation we are at the moment feeling—and which is termed
the Object. The difference between these two classes of our sensations,
answers to the distinction made by the majority of philosophers between
the Primary and the Secondary Qualities of Matter.

Edition: current; Page: [212]
We can, of course, think of all or any of our sensations in relation to
their Objects, that is, to the permanent groups of possibilities of
sensation to which we mentally refer them. This is the main distinction
between our sensations, and what we regard as our purely mental
feelings. These we do not refer to any groups of Permanent
Possibilities; and in regard to them the distinction of Subject and
Object is merely nominal. These feelings have no Objects, except by
metaphor. There is nothing but the feeling and its Subject.
Metaphysicians are obliged to call the feeling itself the object. Our
sensations, on the contrary, have all of them objects; they all are
capable of being classed under some group of Permanent Possibilities,
and being referred to the presence of that particular set of
possibilities as the antecedent condition or cause of their own
existence. There are, however, some of our sensations, in our
consciousness of which the reference to their Object does not play so
conspicuous and predominant a part as in others. This is particularly
the case with sensations which are highly interesting to us on their own
account, and on which we willingly dwell, or which by their intensity
compel us to concentrate our attention on them. These are, of course,
our pleasures and pains. In the case of these, our attention is
naturally given in a greater degree to the sensations themselves, and
only in a less degree to that whose existence they are marks of. And of
the two conceptions to which they stand in relation, the one to which we
have most tendency to refer them is the Subject; because our pleasures
and pains are of no more importance as marks than any of our other
sensations, but are of very much more importance than any others as
parts of the thread of consciousness which constitutes our sentient
life. Many indeed of our internal bodily pains we should hardly refer to
an Object at all, were it not for the knowledge, late and slowly
acquired, that they are always connected with a local organic
disturbance, of which we have no present consciousness, and which is
therefore a mere Possibility of Sensation. Those of our sensations, on
the contrary, which are almost indifferent in themselves, our attention
does not dwell on; our consciousness of them is too momentary to be
distinct, and we pass on from them to the Permanent Possibilities of
Sensation which they are the signs of, and which alone are important to
us. We hardly notice the relation between these sensations and the
subjective chain of consciousness of which they form so extremely
insignificant a part: the sensation is hardly anything to us but the
link which draws into our consciousness a group of Permanent
Possibilities; this group is the only thing distinctly present to our
thoughts. The unimpressive organic sensation merges in the mere mental
suggestion, and we seem to cognise directly that which we think of only
by association, and know only by inference. Sensation is in a manner
blotted out, and Perception seems to be installed in its place. This
truth is expressed, though not with sufficient Edition: current; Page:
[213] distinctness, in a favourite doctrine of Sir W. Hamilton, that in
the operations of our senses Sensation is greatest when Perception is
least, and least when it is greatest; or, as he, by a very inaccurate
use of mathematical language, expresses it, Sensation and Perception are
in the inverse ratio of one another.

With regard to those sensations which, without being absolutely
indifferent, are not, in any absorbing degree, painful or pleasurable,
we habitually think of them only as connected with, or proceeding from,
Objects. And I am disposed to believe, contrary to the opinion of many
philosophers, that any of our senses, or at all events any combination
of more than one sense, would have been sufficient to give us some idea
of Matter. If we had only the senses of smell, taste, and hearing, but
had the sensations according to fixed laws of coexistence so that
whenever we had any one of them it marked to us a present possibility of
having all the others, I am inclined to think that we should have formed
the notion of groups of possibilities of sensation, and should have
referred every particular sensation to one of these groups, which, in
relation to all the sensations so referred to it, would have become an
Object, and would have been invested in our thoughts with the permanency
and externality which belong to Matter. But though we might, in this
supposed case, have had an idea of Matter, that idea would necessarily
have been of a very different complexion from what we now have. For, as
we are actually constituted, our sensations of smell, taste, and
hearing, and bas I believe (with the great majority ofb philosophers)
those of sight also, are not grouped together directly, but through the
connexion which they all have, by laws of coexistence or of causation,
with the sensations which are referable to the sense of touch and to the
muscles; those which answer to the terms Resistance, Extension, and
Figure. These, therefore, become the leading and conspicuous elements in
all the groups: where these are, the group is: every other member of the
group presents itself to our thoughts, less as what it is in itself,
than as a mark of these. As the entire group stands in the relation of
Object to any one of the component sensations which is realized at a
given moment, so do these special parts of the group become, in a
manner, Object, in relation not only to actual sensations, but to all
the remaining Possibilities of Sensation which the group includes. The
Permanent Possibilities of sensations of touch and of the muscles, form
a group within the group—a sort of inner nucleus, conceived as more
fundamental than the rest, on which all the other possibilities of
sensation included in the group seem to depend; these being regarded, in
one point of view, as effects, of which that nucleus is the cause, in
another as attributes, of which it is the substratum or substance.
Edition: current; Page: [214] In this manner our conception of Matter
comes ultimately to consist of Resistance, Extension, and Figure,
together with miscellaneous powers of exciting other sensations. These
three attributes become its essential constituents, and where these are
not found, we hesitate to apply the name.

Of these properties, which are consequently termed the Primary Qualities
of Matter, the most fundamental is Resistance: as is proved by numberous
scientific controversies. When the question arises whether something
which affects our senses in a peculiar way, as for instance whether
Heat, or Light, or Electricity, is or is not Matter, what seems always
to be meant is, does it offer any, however trifling, resistance to
motion? If it were shown that it did, this would at once terminate all
doubt. That Resistance is only another name for a sensation of our
muscular frame, combined with one of touch, has been pointed out by many
philosophers, and can scarcely any longer be questioned. When we
contract the muscles of our arm, either by an exertion of will, or by an
involuntary discharge of our spontaneous nervous activity, the
contraction is accompanied by a state of sensation, which is different
according as the locomotion consequent on the muscular contraction
continues freely, or meets with an impediment. In the former case, the
sensation is that of motion through empty space. After having had (let
us suppose) this experience several times repeated, we suddenly have a
different experience: the series of sensations accompanying the motion
of our arm is brought, without intention or expectation on our part, to
an abrupt close. This interruption would not, of itself, necessarily
suggest the belief in an external obstacle. The hindrance might be in
our organs; it might arise from paralysis, or simple loss of power
through fatigue. But in either of these cases, the muscles would not
have been contracted, and we should not have had the sensation which
accompanies their contraction. We may have had the will to exert our
muscular force, but the exertion has not taken place.* If it does take
place, and is accompanied by the usual muscular sensation, but the
cdistinctive feeling which I have called the Edition: current; Page:
[215] sensation of motion in empty spacec does not follow, we have what
is called the feeling of Resistance, or in other words, of muscular
dactiond impeded; and that feeling is the fundamental element in the
notion of Matter which results from our common experience. But
simultaneously with this feeling of Resistance, we have also feelings of
touch; sensations of which the organs are not the nerves diffused
through our muscles, but those which form a network under the skin; the
sensations which are produced by passive contact with bodies, without
muscular action. As these skin sensations of simple contact invariably
accompany the muscular sensation of resistance—for we must touch the
object before we can feel it resisting our pressure—there is early
formed an inseparable association between them. Whenever we feel
resistance we have first felt contacte. Whenevere we feel contact, we
know that were we to exercise muscular action, we should feel more or
less resistance. In this manner is formed the first fundamental group of
Permanent Possibilities of Sensation; and as we in time recognise that
all our other sensations are connected in point of fact with Permanent
Possibilities of resistance—that in coexistence with them we should
always, by sufficient search, encounter something which would give us
the feeling of contact combined with the muscular sensation of
resistance; our idea of Matter, as a Resisting Cause of miscellaneous
sensations, is now constituted.

Let us observe, in passing, the elementary example here afforded of the
Law of Inseparable Association, and the efficacy of that law to
construct what, after it has been constructed, is undistinguishable, by
any direct interrogation of consciousness, from an intuition. The
sensation produced by the simple contact of an object with the skin,
without any pressure—or even with pressure, but without any muscular
reaction against it—is no more likely than a sensation of warmth or cold
would be, to be spontaneously referred to any cause external to
ourselves. But when the constant coexistence, in experience, of this
sensation of contact with that of Resistance to our muscular effort
whenever such effort is made, has erected the former sensation into a
mark or sign of a Permanent Possibility of the latter; from that time
forward, no sooner do we have the skin sensation which we call a
sensation of contact, than we cognise, or, as we call it, perceive,
something external, corresponding to the idea we now form of Matter as a
resisting object. Our sensations of touch have become representative of
the sensations of resistance with which they habitually coexist: just as
philosophers have shown that the sensations of different shades of
colour given by our sense of sight, and the muscular sensations
accompanying the Edition: current; Page: [216] various movements of the
eye, become representative of those sensations of touch and of the
muscles of locomotion, which are the only real meaning of what we term
the distance of a body from us.*

The next of the primary qualities of Body is Extension; which has long
been considered as one of the principal stumbling blocks of the
Psychological Theory. Reid and Stewart were willing to let the whole
question of the intuitive character of our knowledge of Matter, depend
on the inability of psychologists to assign any origin to the idea of
Extension, or analyse it into any combination of sensations and
reminiscences of sensation. Sir W. Hamilton follows their example in
laying great stress on this point.

The answer of the opposite school I will present in its latest and most
improved form, as given by Professor Bain,f in the First Part of his
great work on the Mind.†

Edition: current; Page: [217]
Mr. Bain recognises two principal kinds or modes of discriminative
sensibility in the muscular sense: the one corresponding to the degree
of intensity of the muscular effort—the amount of energy put forth; the
other corresponding to the duration—the longer or shorter continuance of
the same effort. The first makes us acquainted with degrees of
resistance: which we estimate by the intensity of the muscular energy
required to overcome it. To the second we owe, in Mr. Bain’s opinion,
our idea of Extension.

When a muscle begins to contract, or a limb to bend, we have a distinct
sense of how far the contraction and the bending are carried; there is
something in the special sensibility that makes one mode of feeling for
half-contraction, another mode for three-fourths, and another for total
contraction. Our feeling of moving organs, or of contracting muscles,
has been already affirmed to be different from our feeling of dead
tension—something more intense, keen, and exciting; and I am now led to
assert, from my best observations and by inference from acknowledged
facts, that the extent of range of a movement, the degree of shortening
of a muscle, is a matter of discriminative sensibility. I believe it to
be much less pronounced, less exact, than the sense of resistance above
described, but to be not the less real and demonstrable.

If we suppose a weight raised, by the flexing of the arm, first four
inches, and then eight inches, it is obvious that the mere amount of
exertion or expended power will be greater, and the sensibility
increased in proportion. In this view, the sense of range would simply
be the sense of a greater or less continuance of the same effort, that
effort being expended in movement. We can have no difficulty in
believing that there should be a discriminating sensibility in this
case; it seems very natural that we should be differently affected by an
action continued four or five times longer than another. If this be
admitted, as true to observation, and as inevitably arising from the
existence of any discrimination whatsoever of degrees of expended power,
everything is granted that is contended for at present. It is not meant
to affirm that at each degree of shortening of a muscle, or each
intermediate attitude of a limb, there is an impression made on the
centres that can be distinguished from the impression Edition: current;
Page: [218] of every other position or degree of shortening; it is
enough to require that the range or amount of movement gone over should
be a matter of distinct perception, through the sensibility to the
amount of force expended in time, the degree of effort being the same.
The sensibility now in question differs from the former (from
sensibility to the intensity of effort) chiefly in making the degree
turn upon duration, and not upon the amount expended each instant; and
it seems to me impossible to deny that force increased or diminished
simply as regards continuance, is as much a subject of discriminative
sensibility as force increased or diminished in the intensity of the
sustained effort. . . .

If the sense of degrees of range be thus admitted as a genuine muscular
determination, its functions in outward perception are very important.
The attributes of extension and space fall under its scope. In the first
place, it gives the feeling of linear extension, inasmuch as this is
measured by the sweep of a limb, or other organ moved by muscles. The
difference between six inches and eighteen inches is expressed to us by
the different degrees of contraction of some one group of muscles;
those, for example, that flex the arm, or, in walking, those that flex
or extend the lower limb. The inward impression corresponding to the
outward fact of six inches in length, is an impression arising from the
continued shortening of a muscle, a true muscular sensibility. It is the
impression of a muscular effort having a certain continuance; a greater
length produces a greater continuance (or a more rapid movement) and in
consequence an increased feeling of expended power.

The discrimination of length in any one direction includes extension in
any direction. Whether it be length, breadth, or height, the perception
has precisely the same character. Hence superficial and solid
dimensions, the size or magnitude of a solid object, come to be felt in
a similar manner. . . .

It will be obvious that what is called situation or Locality must come
under the same head, as these are measured by distance taken along with
direction; direction being itself estimated by distance, both in common
observation and in mathematical theory. In like manner, form or shape is
ascertained through the same primitive sensibility to extension or
range.

By the muscular sensibility thus associated with prolonged contraction
we can therefore compare different degrees of the attribute of space, in
other words, difference of length, surface, situation, and form. When
comparing two different lengths we can feel which is the greater, just
as in comparing two different weights or resistances. We can also, as in
the case of weight, acquire some absolute standard of comparison,
through the permanency of impressions sufficiently often repeated. We
can engrain the feeling of contraction of the muscles of the lower limb
due to a pace of thirty inches, and can say that some one given pace is
less or more than this amount. According to the delicacy of the muscular
tissue we can, by shorter or longer practice, acquire distinct
impressions for every standard dimension, and can decide at once whether
a given length is four inches or four and a half, nine or ten, twenty or
twenty-one. This sensibility to size, enabling us to dispense with the
use of measures of length, is an acquirement suited to many mechanical
operations. In drawing, painting, and engraving, and in the plastic
arts, the engrained discrimination of the most delicate differences is
an indispensable qualification.

The third attribute of muscular discrimination is the velocity or speed
of the movement. It is difficult to separate this from the foregoing. In
the feeling of range, velocity answers the same purpose as continuance;
both imply an enhancement of Edition: current; Page: [219] effort, or of
expended power, different in its nature from the increase of dead effort
in one fixed situation. We must learn to feel that a slow motion for a
long time is the same as a quicker motion with less duration; which we
can easily do by seeing that they both produce the same effect in
exhausting the full range of a limb. If we experiment upon the different
ways of accomplishing a total sweep of the arm, we shall find that the
slow movements long continued are equal to quick motions of short
continuance, and we are thus able by either course to acquire to
ourselves a measure of range and lineal extension. . . .

We would thus trace the perception of the mathematical and mechanical
properties of matter to the muscular sensibility alone. We admit that
this perception is by no means very accurate if we exclude the special
senses, but we are bound to show at the outset that these senses are not
essential to the perception, as we shall afterwards show that it is to
the muscular apparatus associated with the senses that their more
exalted sensibility must be also ascribed. The space moved through by
the foot in pacing may be appreciated solely through the muscles of the
limb, as well as by the movements of the touching hand or the seeing
eye. Whence we may accede to the assertion sometimes made, that the
properties of space might be conceived, or felt, in the absence of an
external world, or of any other matter than that composing the body of
the percipient being; for the body’s own movements in empty space would
suffice to make the very same impressions on the mind as the movements
excited by outward objects. A perception of length, or height, or speed,
is the mental impression, or state of consciousness, accompanying some
mode of muscular movement, and this movement may be generated from
within as well as from without; in both cases the state of consciousness
is exactly the same.

A theory of Extension somewhat similar, though less clearly unfolded,
was advanced by Brown,[*] and as it stands in his statement, fell under
the criticism of Sir W. Hamilton; who gives it, as he thinks, a short
and crushing refutation, as follows:

As far as I can find his meaning in his cloud of words, he argues
thus:—The notion of Time or succession being supposed, that of
longitudinal extension is given in the succession of feelings which
accompanies the gradual contraction of a muscle; the notion of this
succession constitutes, ipso facto, the notion of a certain length; and
the notion of this length (he quietly takes for granted) is the notion
of longitudinal extension sought. The paralogism here is transparent.
Length is an ambiguous term; and it is length in space, extensive
length, and not length in time, protensive length, whose notion it is
the problem to evolve. To convert, therefore, the notion of a certain
kind of length (and that certain kind being also confessedly only length
in time) into the notion of a length in space, is at best an idle
begging of the question—Is it not? Then I would ask, whether the series
of feelings of which we are aware in the gradual contraction of a
muscle, involves the consciousness of being a succession in length, (1)
in time alone? or (2) in space alone? or (3) in time and space together?
These three cases will be allowed to be exhaustive. If the first be
affirmed; if the succession appear in consciousness a succession in time
exclusively, then nothing has been accomplished; for the notion of
extension or space is in no way contained in the notion of duration or
time. Again, if the second or third is affirmed; Edition: current; Page:
[220] if the series appear to consciousness a succession in length,
either in space alone, or in space and time together, then is the notion
it behoved to generate employed to generate itself.*

The dilemma looks formidable, but one of its horns is blunt; for the
very assertion of Brown, and of all who hold the Psychological theory,
is that the notion of length in space, not being in our consciousness
originally, is constructed by the mind’s laws out of the notion of
length in time. Their argument is not, as Sir W. Hamilton fancied, a
fallacious confusion between two different meanings of the word lengthi;
they maintain the one to be a product of the otheri. Sir W. Hamilton did
not fully understand the argument. He saw that a succession of feelings,
such as that which Brown spoke of, could not possibly give us the idea
of simultaneous existence. But he was mistaken in supposing that Brown’s
argument implied this absurdity. The notion of simultaneity must be
supposed to have been already acquired; as it necessarily would be at
the very earliest period, from the familiar fact that we often have
sensations simultaneously. What Brown had to show was, that the idea of
the particular mode of simultaneous existence called Extension, might
arise, not certainly out of a mere succession of muscular sensations,
but out of that added to the knowledge already possessed that sensations
of touch may be simultaneous. Suppose two small bodies, A and B,
sufficiently near together to admit of their being touched
simultaneously, one with the right hand, the other with the left. Here
are two tactual sensations which are simultaneous, just as a sensation
of colour and one of odour might be; and this makes us cognise the two
objects of touch as both existing at once. The question then is, what
have we in our minds, when we represent to ourselves the relation
between these two objects already known to be simultaneous, in the form
of Extension, or intervening Space—a relation which we do not suppose to
exist between the colour and the odour. Now those who agree with Brown,
say that whatever the notion of Extension may be, we acquire it by
passing our hand or some other organ of touch, in a longitudinal
direction from A to B: that this process, as far as we are conscious of
it, consists of a series of varied muscular sensations, differing
according to the amount of muscular effort, and, the effort being given,
differing in length of time. When we say that there is a space between A
and B, we mean that some amount of these muscular sensations must
intervene; and when we say that the space is greater or less, we mean
that the series of sensations (amount of muscular effort being given) is
longer or shorter. If another object, C, is farther off in the same
line, we judge its distance to be greater, because to reach it, the
Edition: current; Page: [221] series of muscular sensations must be
further prolonged, or else there must be the increase of effort which
corresponds to augmented velocity. Now this, which is jnot denied to bej
the mode in which we become kawarek of extension, lby any other sense
than sight,l is considered by the psychologists in question to be
extension. The idea of Extended Body they consider to be that of a
variety of resisting points, existing simultaneously, but which can be
perceived by the same tactile organ only successively, at the end of a
series of muscular sensations which constitutes their mdistancem; and
are said to be at different distances from one another because the
series of intervening muscular sensations is longer in some cases than
in others.*

The theory may be recapitulated as follows. The sensation of muscular
motion unimpeded constitutes our notion of empty space, and the
sensation of muscular motion impeded constitutes that of filled space.
Space is Room—room for movement; which its German name, Raum, distinctly
confirms. We have a sensation which accompanies the free movement of our
organs, say for instance of our arm. This sensation is variously
modified by the direction, and by the amount of the movement. We have
different states of muscular sensation corresponding to the movements of
the arm upward, downward, to right, to left, or in any radius whatever
of a sphere of which the joint, that the arm revolves round, forms the
centre. Edition: current; Page: [222] We have also different states of
muscular sensation according as the arm is moved more; whether this
consists in its being moved with greater velocity, or with the same
velocity during a longer time: and the equivalence of these two is
speedily learnt, by nfinding that a greater effort conducts the hand in
a shorter time from the same point to the same point; from the tactual
impression A to the tactual impression Bn. These different kinds and
qualities of muscular sensation, experienced in getting from one point
to another (that is, obtaining in succession two sensations of touch and
resistance, the objects of which are regarded as simultaneous) are all
we mean by saying that the points are separated by spaces, that they are
at different distances, and in different directions. An intervening
series of muscular sensations before the one object can be reached from
the other, is the only peculiarity which (according to this theory)
distinguishes simultaneity in space, from the simultaneity which may
exist between a taste and a colour, or a taste and a smell: and we have
no reason for believing that Space or Extension in itself, is anything
different from that which we recognise it by. It appears to me that this
doctrine is sound, and that the muscular sensations in question are the
sources of all the notion of Extension which we should ever obtain from
the tactual and muscular senses without the assistance of the eye.

But the participation of the eye in generating our actual notion of
Extension, very much alters its character, and is, I think, the main
cause of the difficulty felt in believing that Extension derives its
meaning to us from a phænomenon which is not synchronous but successive.
The fact is, that the conception we now have of Extension or Space is an
eye picture, and comprehends a great number of parts of Extension at
once, or in a succession so rapid that our consciousness confounds it
with simultaneity. How, then (it is naturally asked) can this vast
collection of consciousnesses which are sensibly simultaneous, be
generated by the mind out of its consciousness of a succession—the
succession of muscular feelings? An experiment may be conceived, which
would throw great light on this subject, but which unfortunately is more
easily imagined than obtained. There have been persons born blind who
were mathematicians, and I believe even naturalists; and it is not
impossible that one day a person born blind may be a metaphysician. The
first who is so, will be able to enlighten us on this point. For he will
be an experimentum crucis[*] on the mode in which extension is conceived
and known, independently of the eye. Not having the assistance of that
organ, a person blind from birth must necessarily Edition: current;
Page: [223] perceive the parts of extension—the parts of a line, of a
surface, or of a solid—in conscious succession. He perceives them by
passing his hand along them, if small, or by walking over them if great.
The parts of extension which it is possible for him to perceive
simultaneously, are only very small parts, almost the minima of
extension. Hence, if the Psychological theory of the idea of extension
is true, the blind metaphysician would feel very little of the
difficulty which seeing metaphysicians feel, in admitting that the idea
of Space is, at bottom, one of time—and that the notion of extension or
distance, is that of a motion of the muscles continued for a longer or a
shorter duration. If this analysis of extension appeared as paradoxical
to the metaphysician born blind, as it does to Sir W. Hamilton, this
would be a strong argument against the Psychological theory. But if, on
the contrary, it did not at all startle him, that theory would be very
strikingly corroborated.

We have no experiment directly in point. But we have one which is the
very next thing to it. We have not the perceptions and feelings of a
metaphysician blind from birth, told and interpreted by himself. But we
have those of an ordinary person blind from birth, told and interpreted
for him by a metaphysician. And the English reader is indebted for them
to Sir W. Hamilton. Platner, “a man no less celebrated as an acute
philosopher than as a learned physician and an elegant scholar,”[*]
endeavoured to ascertain by observation what notion of extension was
possessed by a person born blind, and made known the result in words
which Sir W. Hamilton has rendered into his clear English.

In regard to the visionless representation of space or extension, the
attentive observation of a person born blind, which I formerly
instituted in the year 1785, and again, in relation to the point in
question, have continued for three whole weeks—this observation, I say,
has convinced me, that the sense of touch, by itself, is altogether
incompetent to afford us the representation of extension and space, and
is not even cognisant of local exteriority; in a word, that a man
deprived of sight has absolutely no perception of an outer world, beyond
the existence of something effective, different from his own feeling of
passivity, and in general only of the numerical diversity—shall I say of
impressions, or of things? In fact, to those born blind, time serves
instead of space. Vicinity and distance means in their mouths nothing
more than the shorter or longer time, the smaller or greater number of
feelings, which they find necessary to attain from some one feeling to
another. That a person blind from birth employs the language of
vision—that may occasion considerable error; and did, indeed, at the
commencement of my observations, lead me wrong; but, in point of fact,
he knows nothing of things as existing out of each other; and (this in
particular I have very clearly remarked) if objects, and the parts of
his body touched by them, did not make different kinds of impression on
his nerves of sensation, he would take everything external for one and
the same. In his own body, he absolutely did not discriminate head and
foot at all by their distance, Edition: current; Page: [224] but merely
by the difference of the feelings (and his perception of such
differences was incredibly fine) which he experienced from the one and
from the other, and moreover through time. In like manner, in external
bodies, he distinguished their figure, merely by the varieties of
impressed feelings; inasmuch, for example, as the cube, by its angles,
affected his feeling differently from the sphere.*

The highly instructive representation here given by Platner, of this
person’s state of mind, is exactly that which we have just read in Mr.
Bain, and which that philosopher holds to be the primitive conception of
extension by all of us, before the wonderful power of sight and its
associations, in abridging the mental processes, has come into play. The
conclusion which, as we have seen, Platner draws from the case, is that
we obtain the idea of extension solely from sight; and even Sir W.
Hamilton is staggered in his belief of the contrary. But Platner, though
unintentionally, puts a false colour on the matter when he says that his
patient had no perception of extension. He used the terms expressive of
it with such propriety and discrimination, that Platner, by his own
account, did not at first suspect him of not meaning by those terms all
that is meant by persons who can see. He therefore meant something; he
had impressions which the words expressed to his mind; he had
conceptions of extension, after his own manner. But his idea of degrees
of extension was but the idea of a greater or smaller number of
sensations experienced in succession “to attain from some one feeling to
another;” that is, it was exactly what, according to Brown’s and Mr.
Bain’s theory, it ought to have been. And, the sense of touch and of the
muscles not being aided by sight, the sensations continued to be
conceived by him only as successive: his mental representation of them
remained a conception of a series, not of a coexistent group. Though he
must have had experience of simultaneity, for no being who has a
plurality of senses can be without it, he does not seem to have
thoroughly realized the conception of the parts of space as
simultaneous. Since what was thus wanting to him, is the principal
feature of the conception as it is in us, he seemed to Platner to have
no notion of extension. But Platner, fortunately, being a man who could
both observe, and express his observations precisely, has been able to
convey to our minds the conception which his patient really had of
extension; and we find that it was the same as our own, with the
exception of the element which, if the Psychological theory be true, was
certain to be added to it by the sense of sight. For, when this sense is
awakened, and its sensations of colour have become representative of the
tactual and muscular sensations with which they are coexistent, the fact
that we can receive a vast number of sensations of colour at the same
instant (or what appears such to our consciousness) puts us in the same
position as if we had been Edition: current; Page: [225] able to receive
that number of tactual and muscular sensations in a single instant. The
ideas of all the successive tactual and muscular feelings which
accompany the passage of the hand over the whole of the coloured
surface, are made to flash on the mind at once: and impressions which
were successive in sensation become coexistent in thought. From that
time we do with perfect facility, and are even compelled to do, what
Platner’s patient never completely succeeded in doing, namely, to think
all the parts of extension as coexisting, and to believe that we
perceive them as such. And if the laws of inseparable association, which
are already admitted as the basis of other acquired perceptions of
sight, are considered in their application to this case, it is certain
that this apparent perception of successive elements as simultaneous
owouldo be generated and would supply all that there is in our idea of
extension, more than there was in that of Platner’s patient.*

Edition: current; Page: [226]
I shall quote, in continuation, part of the exposition by Mr. Bain, of
the machinery by which our consciousness of Extension becomes an
appendage of our sensations of Sight. It is a striking example of the
commanding influence of that sense; which, though it has no greater
variety of original impressions than our other special senses, yet owing
to the two properties, of being able to receive a great number of its
impressions at once, and to receive them from all distances, takes the
lead altogether from the sense of touch: and is not only the organ by
which we read countless possibilities of tactual and muscular sensations
which can never, to us, become realities, but substitutes itself for our
touch and our muscles even where we can use them—causes their actual use
as avenues to knowledge, to become, in many cases, obsolete,—the
sensations themselves to be little heeded and very indistinctly
remembered,—and communicates its own prerogative of simultaneousness to
impressions and conceptions originating in other senses, which it could
never have given, but only suggests, through visible marks associated
with them by experience.

“The distinctive impressibility of the eye,” says Mr. Bain,

is for Colour. This is the effect specific to it as a sense. But the
feeling of Colour by itself, implies no knowledge of any outward object,
as a cause or a thing wherein the colour inheres. It is simply a mental
effect or influence, a feeling or conscious state, which we should be
able to distinguish from other conscious states, as for example, a smell
or a sound. We should also be able to mark the difference between it and
others of the same kind, more or less vivid, more or less enduring, more
or less voluminous. So we should distinguish the qualitative differences
between one colour and another. Pleasure or pain, with discrimination of
intensity and of duration, would attach to the mere sensation of colour.
Knowledge or belief in an external or material coloured body, there
would be none.

But when we add the active or muscular sensibility of the eye, we obtain
new products. The sweep of the eye over the coloured field gives a
feeling of a definite amount of action, an exercise of internal power,
which is something totally different from the passive feeling of light.
This action has many various modes, all of the same quality, but all
distinctively felt and recognised by us. Thus the movements may be in
any direction—horizontal, vertical, or slanting; and every one of these
movements is felt as different from every other. In addition to these,
we have the movements of adjustment of the eye, brought on by
differences in the remoteness of objects. We have distinctive feelings
belonging to these different adjustments, just as we have towards the
different movements across the field of view. If the eyes are adjusted,
first to clear vision for an object six inches from the eye, and
afterwards change their adjustment to suit an object six feet distant,
we are distinctly conscious of the change, and of the degree or amount
of it; we know that the change is greater than in extending the
adjustment to a three-feet object, while it is less than we should have
to go through for a twenty-feet object. Thus in the alterations of the
eyes for near and far, we have a distinctive consciousness of amount or
degree, no less than in the movements for right and left, up and down.
Feelings with the character of activity are thus incorporated with the
sensibility to colour; the luminous impression is associated with
exertion on our part, and is no longer a Edition: current; Page: [227]
purely passive state. We find that the light changes as our activity
changes, we recognise in it a certain connexion with our movements; and
association springs up between the passive feeling and the active energy
of the visible [“visual”] organ, or rather of the body generally; for
the changes of view are owing to movements of the head and trunk, as
well as to the sweep of the eye within its own orbit. . . .

When, along with a forward movement, we behold a steadily varying change
of appearance in the objects before us, we associate the change with the
locomotive effort, and after many repetitions, we firmly connect the one
with the other. We then know what is implied in a certain feeling in the
eye, a certain adjustment of the lenses and a certain inclination of the
axes, of all of which we are conscious; we know that these things are
connected with the further experience of a definite locomotive energy
needing to be expended, in order to alter this consciousness to some
other consciousness. Apart from this association, the eye-feeling might
be recognised as differing from other eye-feelings, but there could be
no other perception in the case. Experience connects these differences
of ocular adjustment with the various exertions of the body at large,
and the one can then imply and reveal the others. The feeling that we
have when the eyes are parallel and vision distinct, is associated with
a great and prolonged effort of walking, in other words, with a long
distance. An inclination of the eyes of two degrees, is associated with
two paces to bring us up to the nearest limit of vision, or with a
stretch of some other kind, measured in the last resort by pacing, or by
passing the hand along the object. The change from an inclination of 30°
to an inclination of 10°, is associated with a given sweep of the arm,
carrying the hand forward over eight inches and a half.*

These slight changes in the action of the muscles that move the eye,
habitually effected in a time too short for computation, are the means
by which our visual impressions from the whole of that portion of the
universe which is visible from the position where we stand, may be
concentrated within an interval of time so small that we are scarcely
conscious of any interval; and they are, in my apprehension, the
generating cause of all that we have in our notion of extension over and
above what Platner’s patient had in his. He had to conceive two or any
number of bodies (or resisting objects) with a long train of sensations
of muscular contraction filling up the interval between them: while we,
on the contrary, think of them as rushing upon our sight, many of them
at the same instant, all of them at what is scarcely distinguishable
from the same instant; and this visual imagery effaces from our minds
any distinct consciousness of the series of muscular sensations of which
it has become representative. The simultaneous visual sensations are to
us symbols of tactual and muscular ones which were slowly successive.

This symbolic relation being far briefer, is habitually thought of in
place of that it symbolizes: and by the continued use of such symbols,
and the union of them into more complex ones, are generated our ideas of
visible extension—ideas which, like Edition: current; Page: [228] those
of the algebraist working out an equation, are wholly unlike the ideas
symbolized; and which yet, like his, occupy the mind to the entire
exclusion of the ideas symbolized.

This last extract is from Mr. Herbert Spencer,* whose Principles of
Psychology, in spite of some doctrines which he holds in common with the
intuitive school, are on the whole one of the finest examples we possess
of the Psychological Method in its full power. His treatment of this
subject, and Mr. Bain’s, are at once corroborative and supplementary of
one another: and to them I must refer the reader who desires an ampler
elucidation of the general question. The remainder of this chapter will
be devoted to the examination of some peculiarities in Sir W. Hamilton’s
treatment of it.

Sir W. Hamilton relies mainly upon one argument to prove that Vision,
without the aid of Touch, gives an immediate knowledge of Extension:
which argument had been anticipated in a passage which he quotes from
D’Alembert.† The following is his own statement of it.

It can easily be shown that the perception of colour involves the
perception of extension. It is admitted that we have by sight a
perception of colours, consequently a perception of the difference of
colours. But a perception of the distinction of colours necessarily
involves the perception of a discriminating line; for if one colour be
laid beside or upon another, we only distinguish them as different by
perceiving that they limit each other, which limitation necessarily
affords a breadthless line,—a line of demarcation. One colour laid upon
another, in fact, gives a line returning upon itself, that is, a figure.
But a line and a figure are modifications of extension. The perception
of extension, therefore, is necessarily given in the perception of
colours.‡

And farther on:

All parties are, of course, at one in regard to the fact that we see
colour. Those who hold that we see extension, admit that we see it only
as coloured; and those who deny us any vision of extension, make colour
the exclusive object of sight. In regard to this first position, all
are, therefore, agreed. Nor are they less harmonious in reference to the
second;—that the power of perceiving colour involves the power of
perceiving the differences of colours. By sight we, therefore, perceive
colour, and discriminate one colour, that is, one coloured body,—one
sensation of colour, from another. This is admitted. A third position
will also be denied by none, that the colours discriminated in vision,
are, or may be, placed side by side in immediate juxtaposition; or, one
may limit another by being superinduced partially over it. A fourth
position is equally indisputable; that the contrasted colours, thus
bounding Edition: current; Page: [229] each other, will form by their
meeting a visible line, and that, if the superinduced colour be
surrounded by the other, this line will return upon itself, and thus
constitute the outline of a visible figure. These four positions command
a peremptory assent; they are all self-evident. But their admission at
once explodes the paradox under discussion [—that extension cannot be
cognised by sight alone]. And thus: A line is extension in one
dimension,—length; a figure is extension in two,—length and breadth.
Therefore, the vision of a line is a vision of extension in length; the
vision of a figure, the vision of extension in length and breadth.*

I must acknowledge that I cannot make the answer to this argument as
thorough and conclusive as I could wish; for we have not the power of
making an experiment, the completing converse of Platner’s. There is no
example of a person born with the sense of sight, but without those of
touch and the muscles: and nothing less than this would enable us to
define precisely the extent and limits of the conceptions which sight is
capable of giving, qindependentlyq of association with impressions of
another sense. There are, however, considerations well adapted to
moderate the extreme confidence which Sir W. Hamilton places in this
argument. First, it must be observed that when the eye, at present,
takes cognizance of rar visible figure, it does not cognise it by means
of colour alone, but by all those motions and modifications of the
muscles connected with the eye, which have so great a share in giving us
our acquired perceptions of sight. To determine what can be cognised by
sight alone, we must suppose an eye incapable of these changes; which
can neither have the curvature of its lenses modified nor the direction
of its axis changed by any mode of muscular action; which cannot,
therefore, travel along the boundary line that separates two colours,
but must remain fixed with a steady gaze on a definite spot. If we once
allow the eye to follow the direction of a line or the periphery of a
figure, we have no longer merely sight, but important muscular
sensations superadded. Now there is nothing more certain than that an
eye with its axis immovably fixed in one direction, gives a full and
clear vision of but a small portion of space, that to which the axis
directly points, and only a faint and indistinct one of the other points
surrounding it. When we are able to see any considerable portion of a
surface so as to form a distinct idea of it, we do so by passing the eye
over and about it, changing slightly the direction of the axis many
times in a second. When the eye is pointed directly to one spot, the
faint perceptions we have of others are barely sufficient to serve as
indications for directing the axis of the eye to each of them in turn,
when withdrawn from the first. Physiologists have explained this by the
fact, that the centre of the retina is furnished with a Edition:
current; Page: [230] prodigiously greater number of nervous papillæ,
much finer and more delicate individually, and crowded closer together,
than any other part. Whatever be its explanation, the fact itself is
indubitable; and seems to warrant the conclusion that if the axis of the
eye were immovable, and we were without the muscular sensations which
accompany and guide its movement, the impression we should have of a
boundary between two colours would be so vague and indistinct as to be
merely rudimentary.

A rudimentary conception must be allowed, for it is evident that even
without moving the eye we are capable of having two sensations of colour
at once, and that the boundary which separates the colours must give
some specific affection of sight, otherwise we should have no
discriminative impressions capable of afterwards becoming, by
association, representative of the cognitions of lines and figures which
we owe to the tactual and the muscular sense. But to confer on these
discriminative impressions the name which denotes our matured and
perfected cognition of Extension, or even to assume that they have in
their nature anything in common with it, seems to be going beyond the
evidence. sBerkeley acknowledged a very considerable amount of
perception by the eye alone, of something which it was possible to call
by the name of extension; and that which is so perceived has, since his
time, been known to philosophers as Visible Extension, in
contradistinction to Tangible.[*] But Berkeley maintained that Visible
Extension not only is not the same thing as Tangible Extension, but has
not the smallest likeness to it, and that a person born with only one of
the two senses, and afterwards acquiring the other, would, until there
had been time to learn their mutual relation by experience, never
suspect that there was any connexion between them.[†] In point of fact,
those who are born blind and afterwards acquire sight, know by the
information of others that the eye pictures and the tactual sensations
come from the same objects: yet even with that help it is always a work
of time and difficulty to connect the one with the other.s Sir W.
Hamilton appears to think that extension as revealed by the eye, is
identical with the extension which we know by touch, except that it is
only in two dimensions. “It is not,” he says, “all kind of extension and
form that is attributed to sight. It is not figured extension in all the
three dimensions, but only extension as involved in plane figures; that
is, only length and breadth.”* But to have the notion of extension even
in length and breadth as we have it, is to have it in such a manner that
we might know certain muscular facts without having tried: as, Edition:
current; Page: [231] for instance, that if we placed our finger on the
spot corresponding to one end of a line, or boundary of a surface, we
should have to go through a muscular motion before we could place it on
the other. Is there the smallest reason to suppose that on the evidence
of sight alone, we could arrive at this conclusion in anticipation of
the sense of touch? I cannot admit that we could have what is meant by a
perception of superficial space, unless we conceived it as something
which the hand could be moved across; and, whatever may be the retinal
impression conveyed by the line which bounds two colours, I see no
ground for thinking that by the eye alone we could acquire the
conception of what we now mean when we say that one of the colours is
outside the other.* On this point I may again quote Mr. Bain.

I do not see how one sensation can be felt as out of another, without
already supposing that we have a feeling of space. If I see two distinct
objects before me, as Edition: current; Page: [232] two candle flames, I
apprehend them as different objects, and as distant from one another by
an interval of space; but this apprehension presupposes an independent
experience and knowledge of lineal extension. There is no evidence to
show that, at the first sight of these objects, and before any
association is formed between visible appearances and other movements, I
should be able to apprehend in the double appearance a difference of
place. I feel a distinctness of impression, undoubtedly, partly optical
and partly muscular, but in order that this distinctness may mean to
Edition: current; Page: [233] me a difference of position in space, it
must reveal the additional fact, that a certain movement of my arm would
carry my hand from the one flame to the other; or that some other
movement of mine would change by a definite amount the appearance I now
see. If no information is conveyed respecting the possibility of
movements of the body generally, no idea of space is given, for we never
consider that we have a notion of space, unless we distinctly recognise
this possibility. But how a vision to Edition: current; Page: [234] the
eye can reveal beforehand what would be the experience of the hand or
the other moving members, I am unable to understand.*

Sir W. Hamilton does not limit the perception of Extension to sight and
touch, either separately or combined with one another. “The opinions,”
he says,

so generally prevalent, that through touch, or touch and muscular
feeling, or touch Edition: current; Page: [235] and sight, or touch,
muscular feeling, and sight,—that through these senses, exclusively, we
are percipient of extension, &c., I do not admit. On the contrary, I
hold that all sensations whatsoever of which we are conscious as one out
of another, eo ipso afford us the condition of immediately and
necessarily apprehending extension; for in the consciousness itself of
such reciprocal outness is actually involved a perception of difference
of place in space, and, consequently, of the extended.*

It may safely be admitted that whenever we are conscious of two
sensations as “one out of another,” in the sense of locality, we have a
perception of space; for the two expressions are equivalent. But to have
a consciousness of difference between two sensations which are felt
simultaneously, is not to feel them as “one out of another” in this
sense; and the very question to be decided is, whether any of our
senses, apart from feelings of muscular motion, gives us the notion of
“one out of another” in the sense necessary to support the idea of
Extension.

Sir W. Hamilton thinks that whenever two different nervous filaments are
simultaneously affected at their extremities, the sensations received
through them are felt as one out of the other. It is extremely probable
that the affection of two distinct nervous filaments is the condition of
the discriminative sensibility which furnishes us with sensations
capable of becoming representative of objects one out of the other. But
that is a different thing from giving us the perception directly.
Undoubtedly we recognise difference of place in the objects which affect
our senses, whenever we are aware that those objects affect different
parts of our organism. But when we are aware of this, we already have
the notion of Place. We must be aware of the different parts of our body
as one out of another, before we can use this knowledge as a means of
cognising a similar fact in regard to other material objects. This Sir
W. Hamilton admits; and what, therefore, he is bound to prove is, that
the very first time we received an impression of touch, or of any other
sense, affecting more than one nervous filament, we were conscious of
being affected in a plurality of places. This he does not even attempt
to do; and direct proof is palpably unattainable. As a matter of
indirect evidence, we may oppose to this theory Mr. Bain’s, according to
which, apart from association, we should not have any impression of
xthisx kind, and should in general be conscious only of a greater mass
or “volume”[*] of sensation when we were affected in two places, than
when only in one; like the more massive sensation of heat which we feel
when our bodies are immersed in a warm bath, compared with that which we
feel when heat of the same, or even of greater intensity, is applied
only to our hands or feet. Mr. Bain’s doctrine, being as consistent
Edition: current; Page: [236] with the admitted facts of the case as Sir
W. Hamilton’s, has a good claim, on his own law of Parcimony, to be
preferred to it. But, besides, there are recorded facts which agree with
Mr. Bain’s theory, and are quite irreconcilable with Sir W. Hamilton’s;
and to find such we need not travel beyond Sir W. Hamilton’s own pages.

One of them is the very case we have already had before us, that
recorded by Platner. The facts of this case are quite inconsistent with
the opinion, that we have a direct perception of extension when an
object touches us in more than one place, including the extremities of
more than one nervous filament. Platner expressly says that his patient,
when an object touched a considerable part of the surface of his body,
but without exciting more than one kind of sensation, was conscious of
no local difference—no “outness” of one part of the sensation in
relation to another part—but only (we may presume) of a greater quantity
of sensation; as Mr. Bain would call it, a greater yvolumey. As Platner
expresses it, “if objects and the parts of his body touched by them, did
not make different kinds of impression on his nerves of sensation, he
would take everything external for one and the same. In his own body, he
absolutely did not discriminate head and foot at all by their distance,
but merely by the difference of the feelings.”[*] Such an experiment,
reported by a competent observer, is of itself almost enough to
overthrow Sir W. Hamilton’s theory.

In like manner, the patient in Cheselden’s celebrated case, after his
second eye was couched, described himself as seeing objects twice as
large with both eyes as with one only;[†] that is, he had a double
quantity, or double volume of sensation, which suggested to his mind the
idea of a double size.*

Edition: current; Page: [237]
Another case, for the knowledge of which I am also indebted to Sir W.
Hamilton—who knew it through an abstract given by M. Maine de Biran[*]
of the original report “by M. Rey Régis, a medical observer, in his
Histoire naturelle de l’âme”[†]—is as incompatible with Sir W.
Hamilton’s theory as Platner’s case. It is the case of a patient who
lost the power of movement in one-half of his body, apparently from
temporary paralysis of the motory nerves, while the functions of the
sensory nerves seemed unimpaired. This patient, it was found, had lost
the power of localizing his sensations.

Experiments, various and repeated, were made to ascertain with accuracy,
whether the loss of motive faculty had occasioned any alteration in the
capacity of feeling; and it was found that the patient, though as
acutely alive as ever to the sense of pain, felt, when this was secretly
inflicted, as by compression of his hand under the bedclothes, a
sensation of suffering or uneasiness, by which, when the pressure became
strong, he was compelled lustily to cry out; but a sensation merely
general, he being altogether unable to localize the feeling, or to say
whence the pain proceeded. . . . The patient, as he gradually recovered
the use of his limbs, gradually also recovered the power of localizing
his sensations.*

It would be premature to establish a scientific inference upon a single
experiment: but if confirmed by repetition, this is an experimentum
crucis.[‡] So far as one experiment can avail, ita proves, that
sensation without motion does not give the perception of difference of
place in our bodily organs (not to speak of outward objects), and that
this perception is even now entirely an inference, dependent on the
muscular feelings.†

Edition: current; Page: [238]
It gives a very favourable idea of Sir W. Hamilton’s sincerity and
devotion to truth, that he should have drawn from their obscurity, and
made generally known, two cases which make such havoc with his own
opinions as this and Platner’s; for though he did not believe the cases
to be really inconsistent with his theory, he can hardly have been
entirely unaware that they could be used against it.

The only other point in Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrines respecting the
Primary Qualities which it is of importance to notice, is one, I
believe, peculiar to himself, and certainly not common to him with any
of his eminent predecessors in the same school of thought. It is the
doctrine, that those qualities are not perceived—are not directly and
immediately cognized—in things external to our bodies, but only in our
bodies themselves. “A Perception,” he says,

of the Primary Qualities does not, originally, and in itself, reveal to
us the existence, and qualitative existence, of aught beyond the
organism, apprehended by us as extended, figured, divided, &c. The
primary qualities of things external to our organism we do not perceive,
i.e. immediately know. For these we only learn to infer, from the
affections which we come to find that they determine in our
organs;—affections which, yielding us a perception of organic extension,
we at length discover, by observation and induction, to imply a
corresponding extension in the extra-organic agents.

Neither, according to him, do we perceive, or immediately know,
“extension in its true and absolute magnitude;” our perceptions giving
different impressions of magnitude from the same object, when placed in
contact with different parts of our body.

As perceived extension is only the recognition of one organic affection
in its outness from another; as a minimum of extension is thus, to
perception, the smallest extent of organism in which sensations can be
discriminated as plural; and as in one part of the organism this
smallest extent is perhaps some million, certainly some myriad, times
smaller than in others; it follows that, to perception, the same real
extension will appear, in this place of the body, some million or myriad
times greater than in that. Nor does this difference subsist only as
between sense and sense; for in the same sense, and even in that sense
which has very commonly been held exclusively to afford a knowledge of
absolute extension, I mean Touch proper, the minimum, at one part of the
body, is some fifty times greater than it is at another.*

Thus, according to Sir W. Hamilton, all our cognitions of extension and
figure in anything except our own body, and of the real amount of
extension even in that, are not perceptions, or states of direct
consciousness, but Edition: current; Page: [239] “inferences,” and even
inferences “by observation and induction” from our experience. Now, we
know how contemptuous he is of Brown, and other “Cosmothetic Idealists,”
for maintaining that the existence of extension or extended objects
otherwise than as an affection of our own minds, is not a direct
perception but an inference. We know how he reproaches this opinion with
being subversive of our Natural Beliefs; how often he repeats that the
testimony of consciousness must be accepted entire, or not accepted at
all; how earnestly and in how many places he maintains

that we have not merely a notion, a conception, an imagination, a
subjective representation of Extension, for example, called up or
suggested in some incomprehensible manner to the mind, on the occasion
of an extended object being presented to the sense; but that in the
perception of such an object we have, as by nature we believe we have,
an immediate knowledge or consciousness of that external object as
extended. In a word, that in sensitive perception, the extension as
known, and the extension as existing, are convertible; known because
existing, and existing, since known.*

All this, it appears, is only true of the extension of our own bodies.
The extension of any other body is not known immediately or by
perception, but as an inference from the former. I ask any one, whether
this opinion does not contradict our “natural beliefs” as much as any
opinion of the Cosmothetic Idealists can do; whether to the natural, or
non-metaphysical man, it is not as great a paradox to affirm that we do
not perceive extension in anything external to our bodies, as that we do
not perceive extension in anything external to our minds; and whether,
if the natural man can be brought to assent to the former, he will find
any additional strangeness or apparent absurdity in the latter. This is
only one of the many instances in which the philosopher who so
vehemently accuses other thinkers of affirming the absolute authority of
Consciousness when it is on their own side, and rejecting it when it is
not, lays himself open to a similar charge. The truth is, it is a charge
from which no psychologist, not Reid himself, is exempt. No person of
competent understanding has ever applied himself to the study of the
human mind, and not discovered that some of the common opinions of
mankind respecting their mental consciousness are false, and that some
notions, apparently intuitive, are really acquired. Every psychologist
draws the line where he thinks it can be drawn most truly. Of course it
is possible that Sir W. Hamilton has drawn it in the right place, and
Brown in the wrong. Sir W. Hamilton would say that the common opinions
which he contests are not Natural Beliefs, though mistaken for such. And
Brown thinks exactly the same of those which are repugnant to his own
doctrine. Neither of bthemb can justify himself but by pointing out a
mode Edition: current; Page: [240] in which the apparent perceptions,
supposed to be original, may have been acquired; and neither can charge
the other with anything worse than having made a mistake in this
extremely delicate process of psychological analysis. Neither of them
has a right to give to a mistake in such a matter, the name of a
rejection of the testimony of consciousness, and attempt to bring down
the other by an argument which is of no possible value except ad
invidiam, and which in its invidious sense is applicable to them both,
and to all psychologists deserving the name.


cNOTE TO THE PRECEDING CHAPTER

A host of critics, headed by Dr. M‘Cosh, Mr. Mahaffy, and the writer in
Blackwood [W. H. Smith], have directed their shafts against this
chapter; but Professor Fraser, himself a host, is on my side. [See
“Berkeley’s Theory of Vision,” pp. 202, 218n.] The essential point in
the controversy being the analysis of Extension, I shall confine my
notice to the arguments bearing upon that point.

The principal objection is the same which was made to the two preceding
chapters: that the explanation given of Extension presupposes Extension:
that the notion itself is surreptitiously introduced, to account for its
own origin. The case of the objectors is most compactly stated by Mr.
Mahaffy, in the following extract:

The briefest way of criticizing the long passage [quoted from Mr. Bain]
will be to enumerate its fallacies in general heads. (α) A knowledge of
our organism as extended must not be begged, when we are going to
explain extension; hence, such expressions as the “range of a limb” or
“sweep of a limb,” must either be carefully confined to the mere
succession of feelings in moving it, or they beg the question: and
indeed, as suggesting extension in the very statement, they should be
avoided when we are describing the phenomena from which extension is to
be derived. (β) Any mention or postulating of direction cannot be for a
moment allowed; for what possible meaning can direction have except in
space? In particular, lineal (by which I suppose Mr. Bain principally
means rectilinear) direction would be only given with great difficulty
by the moving of limbs, and we should be brought back to the old Greek
notion of circular motion being the most natural. This difficulty, as
well as a host of others, are urged with great acuteness by Mr. Abbott.
([Thomas Kingsmill Abbott,] Sight and Touch [(London: Longman, Green,
Longman, Roberts, and Green, 1864)], Chap. v [pp. 60ff.].) More
especially he states, from E. H. Weber, that touch cannot give us the
idea of a right line at all, and consequently not the slightest idea of
direction. [Abbott, p. 70, referring to Ernst Heinrich Weber, “Der
Tastsinn und das Gemeingefühl,” in Rudolph Wagner, Handwörterbuch der
Physiologie, 4 vols. (Braunschweig: Bieweg, 1842-53), Vol. III, pp.
481-588.] (γ) No such notion as velocity or rapidity can be admitted,
far less such a notion as the comparison of quicker and slower motions.
In fact, the idea of motion requires Edition: current; Page: [241] as
its logical antecedent both space and time, and is not identical with
pure succession. Suppose we had nothing but the series of our thoughts
to analyse, we could never get beyond the idea of a series, nor could we
ever by any chance get the notion of acceleration or retardation in it.
For what is quicker or slower? Nothing but more space traversed in less
time, and vice versâ. Motion cannot be apprehended without something
fixed, which is only given us by relations of space, as Kant has well
shown. The motion of our thoughts, then, is in the first place, only an
analogical expression; and secondly, could never have been felt without
something in space whereby not only to measure the increased or
diminished velocity of our thinking, but even to learn that there is any
velocity at all in the matter. The evidence of dreaming seems to
corroborate this view. Why is it, that, the intuitions of velocity
afforded us by space being removed, the current of thoughts is found by
itself completely incompetent to suggest or estimate speed at all? (δ)
What we necessarily use to measure extension must not for that reason
have originally suggested it. And yet all that the association school
ever attempt to prove is only this: that all the measures of extension
can be traced to series of muscular feelings in time. The knowledge of
extension is one thing, and primitive; the measure of extension is
another, and empirical; and we should not accept Mr. Bain’s confusion of
them together (perhaps identification of them), without some further
proof than his bare statement.

Upon all these assumptions, however, the theory of Mr. Bain is based,
and the intelligent reader will find them scattered over the very
surface of the argument. I would call particular attention to the
passage . . . “We must learn to feel that a slow motion for a long time
is the same as a quicker motion with less duration, which we can easily
do by seeing that they both produce the same effect in exhausting the
full range of the limb.” Surely it is clear that without space we could
never get the idea of motion, which involves space as much as time—in
fact, a series in time only changes, it does not move; and even granting
we had the idea, we could never discriminate whether that motion was
quicker or slower, except the notion of something permanent in space,
and motion in space, were given. The same petitio principii is made by
Mr. Mill.*

This orderly and succinct mode of setting forth the objection is a great
convenience for answering it. I shall take Mr. Mahaffy’s points in his
own order.

(α) The phraseology employed to express the data common to both parties
must, at least in the commencement, be that which common language
affords; since no other would enable the reader to understand, without a
laborious process, on a subject already so difficult, what are the facts
meant. But the phraseology, of course, must not be so used as to assume
anything which either the theory itself, or the theory opposed to it,
does not admit. As Mr. Mahaffy observes, “such expressions as the range
of a limb, or the sweep of a limb,” must “be carefully confined to the
mere succession of feelings in moving it.” And if the reader turns back
to the first Edition: current; Page: [242] of the quoted passages, he
will find that Mr. Bain has been most industrious in directing attention
to the feelings involved in the motion of a limb, as the point to be
attended to, in contradistinction to the motion itself, and in showing
that his expressions are to be understood of the former, and not of the
latter.

(β) Direction, Mr. Mahaffy maintains, must not be mentioned or referred
to in the analysis of extension, because direction means space, and
space must not be called in to account for itself. It would have been
nearer the truth if, instead of saying that direction means space, he
had said that space means direction. Space is the aggregate of
directions, as Time is of successions. To postulate direction,
therefore, is to postulate, not space, but the element which the notion
of space is made of. Mr. Bain, however, does not postulate direction. He
postulates the distinctive sensations which, from the first, accompany
the motions of a limb in what we, with our acquired perceptions, call
variety of directions. There are such distinctive sensations, otherwise
we should not even now know, when our eyes are shut, in what direction
our arm is moving. According to Mr. Bain, the difference in the
sensations depends on the difference in the muscles exerted. “All
directions that call forth the play of the same muscles, are similar
directions as respects the body: different muscles mean different
directions.”* These sensations, shading, as they do, gradually into one
another, without abruptness or break, are well fitted to give rise to
the feeling of continuity, which unites all our different notions of
different directions into one notion of space.†

Edition: current; Page: [243]
(γ) Velocity or rapidity, comparison of quicker and slower motions, must
not, Mr. Mahaffy says, be postulated, because quicker or slower have no
meaning but with reference to the greater or smaller space traversed in
a given time. It is true that the two motions derive their name from
space; but are the motions themselves therefore undistinguishable? A saw
and a hatchet are so called on account of the different kind of work
they do; but can we not also distinguish the two objects when we see
them? Again I say, what is postulated is not the space traversed, but
the greater or less energy of the muscular sensation. It only remains to
be explained how we learn that a more energetic sensation lasting a
shorter time, is equivalent to a less energy continued for a longer
time. Mr. Bain thinks we learn this by their both producing the same
effect in “exhausting the full range of the limb;” by which he means,
attaining the extreme limit of the sensation which accompanies
protension—the point beyond which no further addition to it can be made.
Where is the petitio principii here? I think that the solution is an
admissible one—that we may fairly be supposed to take the entire series
of the sensations which accompany the stretching out of the limb, as a
unit of measurement, divisible into an ascending scale of degrees, which
may be passed through in a shorter or a longer time, but the sum of
which is always equal to itself. I have myself pointed out another road
by which we might arrive at the same equivalence. We have two
simultaneous sensations of touch with our two hands. We then move the
right hand until it joins the left, and touches the same object. It need
not be supposed that we yet know them as our hands, or the object as a
body, or know of our right hand as moving through space. But the two
simultaneous sensations of touch, either of which we may prolong or
repeat at pleasure, have given us the notion of a permanent element in
touch, and of two such permanent elements as coexisting. We have now had
the two sensations of touch with a single hand, but separated by a
series of the sensations accompanying muscular movement: and we find
that to get from one of the tactual sensations to the other requires a
shorter time, in proportion to the energy of the intervening muscular
sensations. In this mental process time is postulated, but not space:
and it is contended that the shorter time, or its equivalent, the
greater energy, required to get from one object of touch to another
already recognised as simultaneous, is the measure, in the last resort,
of their distance in space. The eye then comes in, and with its greater
powers of simultaneous sensation, it gathers up, by its acquired
perceptions, a host of such measurements in one apparent intuition.

Edition: current; Page: [244]
(δ) “What we necessarily use to measure extension” need not, as Mr.
Mahaffy justly observes, have originally suggested it: but if all the
facts of consciousness involved in what we call extension can be
accounted for on the supposition that the measure is the thing itself,
no other evidence needs be required.* The apparent testimony of
consciousness to a difference between them, is perfectly explicable by
the totally altered aspect which, as I have shown in the text, our
cognizance of Extension puts on when the sense of sight has assumed the
lead of it. When a larger collection of carefully observed facts
respecting persons blind from birth, shall have been subjected to an
acuter and more discriminating analysis, the additional insight which we
may hope to obtain into the psychology of such persons, will probably
dissipate the remains of obscurity which still hang over some of the
details of the subject.

Dr. M‘Cosh [Examination, pp. 101-72,] and the writer in Blackwood are
constructive thinkers as well as critics, and endeavour to prove, in a
direct manner, that the notion of extension is not acquired through our
muscular sensations. The evidence on which they chiefly insist is that,
antecedently to experience, we localize our sensations at different
points of our body: according to Dr. M‘Cosh, at the extremities of the
nerve-fibres; every sensation being, by nature, felt at the point where
the nerve terminates. The writer in Blackwood says, “We do not commence
our sentient life with sensations felt nowhere—we certainly have no
memory of pains that were not felt somewhere—in that arena, in fact,
which we come to call our body.” The absence of remembrance of what took
place soon after birth being, as I have so often observed, no proof that
it did not happen, the proof offered is,

that no ingenuity whatever will get our pains into our bodies, or give
us knowledge of these bodies, unless we commence with the admission that
certain pains and pleasures of a physical order are, as soon as they
attain to any distinctness, felt in different parts of a certain arena,
thus localizing each other. . . . Many writers describe this
localization as an acquired perception. Now, no one doubts for a moment
that the accurate localization of our sensations is acquired by
experience; but that experience, we maintain, would not be possible were
there not some vague localization given us at once, by simultaneous
sensations felt in different parts of our system. How else do we get our
first idea of space or position?†

Edition: current; Page: [245]
To this last question I have already endeavoured to give an answer.*
With regard to the localization, so far as it regards our external
sensations, I see no difficulty in believing that it takes place
altogether by the process to which, as the writer admits, we are
indebted for our power of “accurate localization.” I am bit by an
animal, or my skin is irritated at some point, and I am at first unable,
as occasionally happens even now, to fix the exact place of the
sensation. I move my hand along the surface until I find the place where
the friction of the hand relieves the irritation, or where its contact
increases the smart. I am now expressing these facts in the ordinary
language of mankind, but I have sufficiently explained the sense which
that language bears in my own doctrine. The view I have taken of the
manner in which we obtain our cognition of place, does not rest on any
previous localization, even vague, of our sensations. Nor does the
localizing of a sensation, say in one of our limbs, amount to anything
but attributing to the sensation an uniform and close conjunction,
either synchronous or by immediate succession, with the group of
sensations of various kinds which constitute my perception of the limb.
In general we probably first discover that the sensation is connected
with the limb, by perceiving that the exciting cause of the sensation is
connected with it. Mr. Bain states the matter as follows:

I can associate one pain with the sight of my finger, another pain with
the sight of my toe, and a third with the position of my arm that
determines the crown of my head. An infant at the outset knows not where
to look for the cause of an irritation when anything touches it; by and
by the child observes a coincidence between a feeling and a pressure
operating on some one part; whence a feeling in the hand is associated
with the sight of the hand, and so for other members.—When the feeling
is more internal, as in the interior of the trunk, we have greater
difficulty in tracing the precise seat, often we are quite at a loss on
the point. In this case we have to trust to some indications that come
to the surface, or to the effect of superficial pressure on the deep
parts. By getting a blow on the ribs we come to connect feelings in the
chest with the place in our map of the body: we can thus make
experiments on the deep-seated organs and learn the meaning of their
indications. But the more inaccessible the parts, the more uncertainty
is there in assigning the locality of their sensations.†

Edition: current; Page: [246]
There are some difficulties, not yet completely resolved, respecting the
localization of our internal pains, for the solution of which we need
more careful and intelligent observation of infants. But I think enough
is known to show that the localization of our sensations is not the
starting point of our knowledge of place and position, but follows it.
It is true that (as Dr. M‘Cosh observes) “if a child is wounded in the
arm, it will not hold out its foot.”* But, before it has given evidence
of having “any acquired perceptions,” will it hold out its arm either?
On the theory that the localization is an acquired perception, it should
do neither the one nor the other.†

Dr. M‘Cosh has another argument to prove that we have an original power
of localizing our sensations, and, strange to say, it is the very one
which is usually thought to be the strongest proof that the power is
acquired: viz., the persistence of the association which makes us refer
sensations to a limb, after the limb has been cut off. “Müller,” says
Dr. M‘Cosh, “has collected a number of such cases,” of which one will be
a sufficient sample: “a student named Schmidts, from Aix, had his arm
amputated above the elbow thirteen years ago; he has never ceased to
have sensations as if in the fingers.”‡ It is a singular oversight in
Dr. M‘Cosh to adduce these facts as proof that we localize the sensation
at the extremities of the nerves. He forgets that after the arm was cut
off, the extremity of the nerve was in the stump, and that it is there,
and not in the fingers, that, if his theory were true, the sensation
ought to have been felt. The reference of it to the limb which was gone
could only be a case of irresistible association. It does not directly
negative the existence of an instinctive localization; but it proves
that, if there be any such, an acquired association can overpower it. So
in respect to the following fact, also quoted from Müller: “When, in the
restoration of a nose, a flap of skin is turned down from the forehead
and made to unite with the stump of the nose, the new nose thus formed
has, as long as the isthmus of skin by which it maintains its original
connexions remains undivided, the same sensations as if it were still on
the forehead; in other words, when the nose is touched, the patient
feels the impression in Edition: current; Page: [247] the forehead.”*
But the nerve that conveys the impression no longer terminates in the
forehead; it terminates in the new nose; and according to Dr. M‘Cosh’s
theory the sensation should be felt there, exactly as it is after the
“isthmus of skin” has been divided, the old nervous connexion cut off,
and a new one gradually formed. Dr. M‘Cosh’s facts well nigh destroy his
own theory; but they are such as, on the association theory, would
certainly happen. The last, especially, is of great value to that
theory, because it is one of the strongest instances which show that
there is a distinctive “Quale” (as one of Dr. M‘Cosh’s German
authorities calls it)[*] belonging to the sensation conveyed by each one
of the nerves, which hinders it from being confounded with the sensation
conveyed by any other nerve, and enables it to form associations special
to itself with the part of the body it serves, which, as we see, persist
even after it has been taken away to serve another part.

dDr. M‘Cosh, in his reply, denies that his facts conflict with his
theory, for his theory is, that we intuitively localize our sensations,
not where the nerves really terminate, but where they “normally”
terminate; that is, not where the termination is, but where it ought to
be. [“Mill’s Reply,” p. 350.] In other words, we, naturally and
intuitively, feel our sensations in a place which, in the case of an
amputated limb, is not only outside our body, but may be at a distance
of one or two feet from it: and this seat of sensation in the space
outside our bodies follows us wherever we go. This is what Dr. M‘Cosh
would rather believe, than that the reference of the feeling to such a
place is an illusion produced by association. In support of his opinion
he refers to a case mentioned by Professor Valentin (along with three
others of a similar character) in which a girl whose left hand was
congenitally imperfect, said she had the internal sensation of a palm of
the hand and five fingers (which she did not possess) as perfectly in
her left hand as in her right.[†] But what does this prove, except that
she had the same sensations in the nerves of her left hand as in those
of her right, which of course, therefore, carried the same association.
Dr. M‘Cosh should show a case in which sensations were referred to
non-existent fingers when there were no real fingers to suggest the
notion.

Edition: current; Page: [248]
According to Dr. M‘Cosh, the reference of sensations to a lost limb
contradicts not his but the association theory; since the lapse of years
after the loss of the limb would be sufficient to destroy the old
association. [Ibid., p. 351.] And this, in the great majority of cases,
it probably does. But it is a frequent experience that a sensation
exactly like one we have formerly felt, and like nothing else, revives
even after many years a long forgotten remembrance. Again, Dr. M‘Cosh
says that in the case of the new nose, the affection, according to the
association theory, “should have been felt in the forehead, not till the
isthmus was cut, but till the old association was gone; and this,”
according to me, “might not have been for twenty years.” [Ibid.] This
overlooks an important feature in the case. When not only the old
nervous connexion has been cut off, but a new one formed, between the
new nose and the nervous trunk which connected the old nose with the
brain, the sensations become identical with those which were referred to
the old nose when it existed; and the reference of them to the nose is
thus supported by as old and strong an association as the previous
reference of them to the forehead: with the difference that while every
day helps to dissolve the one association, every day strengthens and
rivets the other.

The only further case referred to by Dr. M‘Cosh, is one mentioned by
Schopenhauer on the authority of Frorieps; that of “Eva Lauk, an
Esthonian girl, fourteen years old, born without arms or legs, but who,
according to her mother, had developed herself intellectually quite as
rapidly as her brothers and sisters, and without the use of limbs had
reached a correct judgment concerning the magnitude and distance of
visible objects, quite as quickly as they.”* This, unfortunately, is all
the information which Schopenhauer gives on this interesting case. In
Dr. M‘Cosh’s judgment, it entirely disproves the opinion “that a sweep
of the arm or leg, considered merely as a group of sensations without
extension,” could give the idea of extension. [Ibid., p. 352.] He means,
probably, that it proves that the idea can be acquired without any use
of arms or legs. But we do not know of what nature the girl’s idea of
extension was. What we are told is, that she had notions of magnitude
and distance, which she applied to objects with the same correctness as
other people. But her notion of distance may have been only such as
could be formed by the time expended in being carried to the spot; and
her notion of magnitude may have been acquired when objects were in
contact with her body—perhaps still by means of muscular Edition:
current; Page: [249] feelings of pressure and motion. Above all, it must
be remembered that the girl was surrounded by people possessing legs and
arms, and had their aid in associating the discriminating sensations of
sight with the facts, of touch and of the muscles, to which they
correspond. Such assistance is a great help even to children who have
the ordinary complement of legs and arms; they all must acquire the
association much more quickly through the help given them by the acts
and words of other people. It may be confidently assumed that Eva Lauk
had this help, probably in more than usual measure, and did not find out
wholly by herself that a greater mass of visual sensation indicated a
greater mass of tactual sensation answering to it.d

I believe I have noticed every plausible objection to Mr. Bain’s and my
own analysis of Extension, which has a sufficiently individual character
to require an answer by itself. The subject is in need of further study
before all its obscure corners will be completely lighted up; but this
it can hardly fail to receive, now that highly competent thinkers are
engaged in extending our knowledge of the Mind by the application of the
Psychological Method, grounded on the Laws of Association.c

Edition: current; Page: [250]


CHAPTER XIV: How Sir William Hamilton and Mr. Mansel Dispose of the Law of Inseparable Association

it has been obvious in the preceding discussions, and is known to all
who have studied the best masters of what I have called the
Psychological, in opposition to the merely Introspective method of
metaphysical enquiry, that the principal instrument employed by them for
unlocking the deeper mysteries of mental science, is the Law of
Inseparable Association. This law, which it would seem specially
incumbent on the Intuitive school of metaphysicians to take into serious
consideration, because it is the basis of the rival theory which they
have to encounter at every point, and which it is necessary for them to
refute first, as the condition of establishing their own, is not so much
rejected as ignored by them. Reid and Stewart, who had met with it only
in Hartley, thought it needless to take the trouble of understanding it.
The best informed German and French philosophers are barely aware, if
even aware, of its existence.* And in this country and age, in which it
has been employed by thinkers of the highest order as the most potent of
all instruments of psychological analysis, the opposite school usually
dismiss it with a few sentences, so smoothly gliding over the surface of
the subject, as to prove that they have never, even for an instant,
brought the powers of their minds into real and effective contact with
it.

Sir W. Hamilton has written a rather elaborate Dissertation on the Laws
Edition: current; Page: [251] of Association; and the more elementary of
them had engaged a considerable share of his attention.* But he nowhere
shows that he had the smallest suspicion of this, the least familiar and
most imperfectly understood of these laws. I find in all his writings
only two or three passages in which he touches, even cursorily, on this
mode of explaining mental phænomena. The first and longest of these
occurs in the treatment, not of any of the greater problems of mental
philosophy, but of a very minor question; whether, in the perception of
outward objects, our cognition of wholes precedes that of their
component parts, or the bcontrary.b More fully; Edition: current; Page:
[252] “whether, in Perception, do we first obtain a general knowledge of
the complex wholes presented to us by sense, and then, by analysis and
limited attention, obtain a special knowledge of their several parts; or
do we not first obtain a particular knowledge of the smallest parts to
which sense is competent, and then, by synthesis, collect them into
greater and greater wholes?”* Sir W. Hamilton declares for the first
theory, and quotes as supporters of the second, Stewart and James Mill;
to the latter of whom, more than to any other thinker, mankind are
indebted for recalling the attention of philosophers to the law of
Inseparable Association, and pointing out the important applications of
which it is susceptible. Through the conflict with Mr. Mill on the very
subordinate question which he is discussing, Sir W. Hamilton is led to
quote a part of that philosopher’s exposition of Inseparable
Association; and it is a sign how little he was aware of the importance
of the subject, that a theory of so wide a scope and such large
consequences should receive the only recognition he ever gives it in a
bye corner of his work, incidentally to one of the smallest questions
therein discussed. I shall extract the very passages which he quotes
from Mr. Mill, because, in a small space, they state and illustrate very
happily the two most characteristic properties of our closest
associations: that the suggestions they produce are, for the time,
irresistible; and that the suggested ideas (at least when the
association is of the synchronous kind as distinguished from the
successive) become so blended together, that the compound result
appears, to our consciousness, simple.

“Where two or more ideas,” says Mr. Mill,

have been often repeated together, and the association has become very
strong, they sometimes spring up in such close combination as not to be
distinguishable. Some cases of sensation are analogous. For example,
when a wheel, on the seven parts of which the seven prismatic colours
are respectively painted, is made to revolve rapidly, it appears not of
seven colours, but of one uniform colour, white. By the rapidity of the
succession, the several sensations cease to be distinguishable; they
run, as it were, together, and a new sensation, compounded of all the
seven, but apparently a single one, is the result. Ideas, also, which
have been so often conjoined, that whenever one exists in the mind, the
others immediately exist along with it, seem to run into one another, to
coalesce, as it were, and out of many to form one idea; which idea,
however in reality complex, appears to be no less simple than any one of
those of which it is compounded. . . .

It is to this great law of association that we trace the formation of
our ideas of what we call external objects; that is, the ideas of a
certain number of sensations received together so frequently that they
coalesce, as it were, and are spoken of under the idea of unity. Hence
what we call the idea of a tree, the idea of a stone, the idea of a
horse, the idea of a man.

In using the names, tree, horse, man, the names of what I call objects,
I am referring, and can be referring, only to my own sensations; in
fact, therefore, only Edition: current; Page: [253] naming a certain
number of sensations, regarded as in a particular state of combination;
that is, of concomitance. Particular sensations of sight, of touch, of
the muscles, are the sensations, to the ideas of which, colour,
extension, roughness, hardness, smoothness, taste, smell, so coalescing
as to appear one idea, I give the name idea of a tree.

To this case of high association, this blending together of many ideas,
in so close a combination that they appear not many ideas, but one idea,
we owe, as I shall afterwards more fully explain, the power of
classification, and all the advantages of language. It is obviously,
therefore, of the greatest moment, that this important phænomenon should
be well understood.

Some ideas are by frequency and strength of association so closely
combined that they cannot be separated. If one exists, the other exists
along with it, in spite of whatever effort we may make to disjoin them.

For example; it is not in our power to think of colour, without thinking
of extension; or of solidity, without figure. We have seen colour
constantly in combination with extension, spread, as it were, upon a
surface. We have never seen it except in this connexion. Colour and
extension have been invariably conjoined. The idea of colour, therefore,
uniformly comes into the mind, bringing that of extension along with it;
and so close is the association, that it is not in our power to dissolve
it. We cannot, if we will, think of colour, but in combination with
extension. The one idea calls up the other, and retains it, so long as
the other is retained.

This great law of our nature is illustrated in a manner equally striking
by the connexion between the ideas of solidity and figure. We never have
the sensations from which the idea of solidity is derived, but in
conjunction with the sensations whence the idea of figure is derived. If
we handle anything solid it is always either round, square, or of some
other form. The ideas correspond with the sensations. If the idea of
solidity rises, that of figure rises along with it. The idea of figure
which rises is, of course, more obscure than that of extension; because,
figures being innumerable, the general idea is exceedingly complex, and
hence, of necessity, obscure. But such as it is, the idea of figure is
always present when that of solidity is present; nor can we, by any
effort, think of the one without thinking of the other at the same
time.*

Other illustrations follow, concluding with these words: “The following
of one idea after another idea, or after a sensation, so certainly that
we cannot prevent the combination, nor avoid having the consequent
feeling as often as we have the antecedent, is a law of association, the
operation of which we shall afterwards find to be extensive, and bearing
a principal part in some of the most important phænomena of the human
mind.”† And the promise of this sentence is amply redeemed in the sequel
cofc the treatise.

The only remark which this highly philosophical exposition suggests to
Sir W. Hamilton, is a disparaging reflection on Mr. Mill’s philosophy in
general. He says that Mr. Mill, in his “ingenious” treatise, “has pushed
the Edition: current; Page: [254] principle of Association to an extreme
which refutes its own exaggeration,—analysing not only our belief in the
relation of effect and cause into that principle, but even the primary
logical laws,” so that it is no wonder he should “account for our
knowledge of complex wholes in perception, by the same universal
principle.”[*] Having, on the strength of this previous verdict of
exaggeration, dispensed with enquiring how much the law of Inseparable
Association can really accomplish, he makes no use of its most obvious
applications, even while transcribing them into his own pages. One of
the psychological facts stated in the passage quoted, the impossibility,
to us, of separating the idea of extension and that of colour, is a
truth strongly insisted on by Sir W. Hamilton himself. In the very next
Lecture but one to that from which I have been quoting, he strenuously
maintains, that we can neither conceive colour without extension, nor
extension without colour. Even the born blind, he thinks, have the
sensation of darkness, that is, of black colour, and mentally clothe all
extended objects with it.* Except the last position, which has no
evidence and no probability,† the doctrine is undoubtedly true, and the
fact is so obviously a case of the law of association, that even
Stewart, little partial as he was to that mode of explaining mental
phænomena, does not dream of attributing it to anything else. “In
consequence,” says Stewart, “of our always perceiving extension at the
same time at which the sensation of colour is excited in the mind, we
find it impossible to think of that sensation without conceiving
extension along with it.” He gives this as one of the instances “of very
intimate associations formed between two ideas which have no necessary
connexion with one another.”[†] A mental analysis by way of association
which was sufficiently obvious to recommend itself to Stewart, will
scarcely be charged with “pushing the principle to an extreme.” In fact,
if an association can ever Edition: current; Page: [255] become
inseparable by dint of repetition, how could the association between
colour and extension fail of being so? The two facts never exist but in
immediate conjunction, and the experience of that conjunction is
repeated at every moment of life which is not spent in darkness. Yet
after transcribing this explanation both from Stewart and from Mill, Sir
W. Hamilton remains as insensible to it as if it had never been given;
and without a word of refutation, composedly registers the
inseparableness of the two ideas as an ultimate mental fact proving them
both to be original perceptions of the same organ, the eye. Sir W.
Hamilton’s authority can have little weight against the doctrine which
accounts for the more complex parts of our mental constitution by the
laws of association, when it is so evident that he rejected that
doctrine not because he had examined it and found it wanting, but
without examining it; having taken for granted that it did not deserve
examination.*

Edition: current; Page: [256]
How imperfect was his acquaintance with the secondary laws, the axiomata
media[*] of association, is plainly seen in his argument against Stewart
and Mill on the comparatively insignificant question with which he
started. The thesis he is asserting is, that “in place of ascending
upwards, from the minimum of perception to its maxima, we descend from
masses to details.”

“If the opposite doctrine” (says Sir W. Hamilton)

were correct, what would it involve? It would involve as a primary
inference, that, as we know the whole through the parts, we should know
the parts better than the whole. Thus, for example, it is supposed that
we know the face of a friend, through the multitude of perceptions which
we have of the different points of which it is made up; in other words,
that we should know the whole countenance less vividly than we know the
forehead and eyes, the nose and mouth, &c., and that we should know each
of these more feebly than we know the various ultimate points, in fact,
unconscious minima of perception, which go to constitute them. According
to the doctrine in question, we perceive only one of these ultimate
points at the same instant, the others by memory incessantly renewed.
Now let us take the face out of perception into memory altogether. Let
us close our eyes, and let us represent in imagination the countenance
of our friend. This we can do with the utmost vivacity; or, if we see a
picture of it, we can determine with a consciousness of the most perfect
accuracy, that the portrait is like or unlike. It cannot, therefore, be
denied that we have the fullest knowledge of the face as a whole, that
we are familiar with its expression, with the general result of its
parts. On the hypothesis, then, of Stewart and Mill, how accurate should
be our knowledge of these parts themselves. But make the experiment. You
will find, that unless you have analysed,—unless you have descended from
a conspectus of the whole face to a detailed examination of its
parts,—with the most vivid impression of the constituted whole, you are
almost totally ignorant of the constituent parts. You may probably be
unable to say what is the colour of the eyes, and if you attempt to
delineate the mouth or nose, you will inevitably fail. Or look at the
portrait. You may find it unlike, but unless, as I said, you have
analysed the countenance, unless you have looked at it with the analytic
scrutiny of a painter’s eye, you will assuredly be unable to say in what
respect the artist has failed,—you will be unable to specify what
constituent he has altered, though you are fully conscious of the fact
and effect of the alteration. What we have shown from this example may
equally be done from any other—a house, a tree, a landscape, a concert
of music, &c.*

Edition: current; Page: [257]
I have already made mention of a very important part of the Laws of
Association, which may be termed the Laws of Obliviscence.[*] If Sir W.
Hamilton had sufficiently attended to those laws, he never could have
maintained, that if we knew the parts before the whole, we must continue
to know the parts better than the whole. It is one of the principal Laws
of Obliviscence, that when a number of ideas suggest one another by
association with such certainty and rapidity as to coalesce together in
a group, all those members of the group which remain long without being
specially attended to, have a tendency to drop out of consciousness. Our
consciousness of them becomes more and more faint and evanescent, until
no effort of attention can recall it into distinctness, or at last
recall it at all. Any one who observes his own mental operations will
find this fact exemplified in every day of his life. Now the law of
attention is admitted to be, that we attend only to that which, either
on its own or on some other account, interests us. In consequence, what
interests us only momentarily we only attend to momentarily; and do not
go on attending to it, when that, for the sake of which alone it
interested us, has been attained. Sir W. Hamilton would have found these
several laws clearly set forth, and abundantly exemplified, in the work
of Mr. Mill which he had before him. It is there shown how large a
proportion of all our states of feeling pass off without having been
attended to, and in many cases so habitually that we become finally
incapable of attending to them. This subject was also extremely well
understood by Reid, who, little as he had reflected on the principle of
Association, was much better acquainted with the laws of Obliviscence
than his more recent followers, and has excellently illustrated and
exemplified some of them.* Among those which he has illustrated the most
successfully, one is, that the very great number of our states of
feeling which, being themselves neither painful nor pleasurable, are
important to us only as signs of something else, and which by repetition
have come to do their work as signs with a rapidity which to our
feelings is instantaneous, cease altogether to be attended to; and
through that inattention our consciousness of them either ceases
altogether, or becomes so fleeting and indistinct as to leave no
revivable trace in the memory. This happens, even when the impressions
which serve the purpose of signs are not mere ideas, or reminiscences,
of sensation, but actual sensations. After reading a chapter of a book,
when we lay down the volume do we remember to have been individually
conscious of the printed letters and syllables which have passed before
us? Could we recall, by any effort of mind, the visible aspect presented
by them, unless some unusual circumstance has fixed our attention
Edition: current; Page: [258] upon it during the perusal? Yet each of
these letters and syllables must have been present to us as a sensation
for at least a passing moment, or the sense could not have been conveyed
to us. But the sense being the only thing in which we are interested—or,
in exceptional cases, the sense and a few of the words or sentences—we
retain no impression of the separate letters and syllables. This
instance is the more instructive, inasmuch as, the whole process taking
place within our means of observation, we know that our knowledge began
with the parts, and not with the whole. We know that we perceived and
distinguished letters and syllables before we learnt to understand words
and sentences; and the perceptions could not, at that time, have passed
unattended to; on the contrary, the effort of attention of which those
letters and syllables must have been the object, was probably, while it
lasted, equal in intensity to any which we have been called upon to
exercise in after life. Were Sir W. Hamilton’s argument valid, one of
two things would follow. Either we have even now, when we read in a
book, a more vivid consciousness of the letters and syllables than of
the words and sentences, d(and by parity of reason a more vivid
consciousness of the words and sentences than of the general purport of
the discourse):d or else, we could read sentences off hand at first, and
only by subsequent analysis discovered the letters and syllables. If
ever there was a reductio ad absurdum, this is one.

The facts on which Sir W. Hamilton’s argument rests, are obviously
accounted for by the laws which he ignores. In our perceptions of
objects, it is generally the wholes, and the wholes alone, that interest
us. In his example, that of a friend’s countenance, it is (special
motives apart) only the friend himself that we are interested about; we
care about the features only as signs that it is our friend whom we see,
and not another person. Unless therefore the face commands our attention
by its beauty or strangeness, or unless we stamp the features on our
memory by acts of attention directed upon them separately, they pass
before us, and do their work as signs, with so little consciousness that
no distinct trace may be left in the memory. We forget the details even
of objects which we see every day, if we have no motive for attending to
the parts as distinguished from the wholes, and have cultivated no habit
of doing so. That this is consistent with having known the parts earlier
than the wholes, is proved not only by the case of reading, but by that
of playing on a musical instrument, and a hundred other familiar
instances; by everything, in fact, which we learn to do. When the wholes
alone are interesting to us, we soon forget our knowledge of the
component parts, unless we purposely keep it alive by conscious
comparison and analysis.

Edition: current; Page: [259]
This is not the only fallacy in Sir W. Hamilton’s argument. Considered
as a reply to Mr. Mill’s explanation of the origin of our ideas of
objects, it entirely misses the mark. If the argument and examples had
proved their point, which it has been seen that they do not, they would
have proved that we perceive and know, to some extent or other, the
object as a whole, before knowing its integrant parts. But it is not of
integrant parts that Mr. Mill was speaking; and he might have admitted
all that Sir W. Hamilton contends for, without surrendering his own
opinion. The question does not relate to parts in extension. It does not
concern Mr. Mill’s theory whether we know, or do not know, a man as
such, before we distinguish, in thought or in perception, his head from
his feet. What Mr. Mill said was, that our idea of an object, whether it
be of the man, or of his head, or of his feet, is compounded by
association from our ideas of the colour, the shape, the resistance,
&c., which belong to those objects.[*] These are what philosophers have
called the metaphysical parts, not the integrant parts, of the total
impression. Now I have never heard of any philosopher who maintained
that these parts were not known until after the objects which they
characterize; that we perceive the body first, and its colour, shape,
form, &c., only afterwards. Our senses, which on all theories are at
least the avenues through which our knowledge of bodies comes to us, are
not adapted by nature to let in the perception of the whole object at
once. They only open to let pass single attributes at a time. And this
is as much Sir W. Hamilton’s opinion as any one’s else, except where he
is sustaining an argument which makes him blind to it.

As is often the case with our author, the conclusion he is maintaining
is worth more than his argument to prove it, and though not the whole
truth, has truth in it. That we perceive the whole before the parts will
not stand examination as a general law, but is very often true as a
particular fact: our first impression is often that of a confused mass,
of which all the parts seem blended, and our subsequent progress
consists in elaborating this into distinctness. It was well to point out
this fact: but if our author had paid more attention to its limits, he
might have been able to give us a complete theory of it, instead of
leaving it, as he has done, an empirical observation, which waits for
some one to raise it into a scientific law.

The same want of comprehension of the power of an inseparable
association, which was shown by Sir W. Hamilton in the case of Colour
and Extension, is exhibited in the only other case in which he adduces
any argument to prove that an idea was not produced by association. The
case is that of causality, and the argument is the ordinary one of
metaphysicians of his school. “The necessity of so thinking cannot be
derived from a Edition: current; Page: [260] custom of so thinking. The
force of custom, influential as it may be, is still always limited to
the customary; and the customary never reaches, never even approaches to
the necessary.”* eIf this were so, not only could an inseparable
association generate no necessity of belief, but there could be no such
thing as inseparable association; no entirely irresistible conjunction
between two mental states.e The paviourf, however,f who cannot use his
rammer without the accustomed cry, the orator who had so often while
speaking twirled a string in his hand that he became unable to speak
when he accidentally dropped it, are, it seems to me, examples of a
“customary” which did approach to, and even reach, the “necessary.”
“Association may explain a strong and special, but it can never explain
a universal and absolutely irresistible belief.”[*] Not when the
conjunction of facts which engenders the association, is itself
universal and irresistible? “What I cannot but think, must be à priori,
or original to thought: it cannot be engendered by experience upon
custom.”† As if experience, that is to say, association, were not
perpetually engendering both inabilities to think, and inabilities not
to think. “We can think away each and every part of the knowledge we
have derived from experience.”‡ Associations derived from experience are
doubtless separable by a sufficient amount of contrary experience; but,
in the cases we are considering, no contrary experience is to be had. On
the theory that the belief in causality results from association, “when
association is recent, the causal judgment should be weak, and rise only
gradually to full force, as custom becomes inveterate.”§ And how do we
know that it does not? The whole process of acquiring our belief in
causation takes place at an age of which we have no remembrance, and
which precludes the possibility of testing the matter by experiment: and
all theories agree that our first type of causation is our own power of
moving our limbs; which is as complete as it can be, and has formed as
strong associations as it is capable of forming, long before the child
can observe or communicate its mental operations.

It is strange that almost all the opponents of the Association
psychology should found their main or sole argument in refutation of it
upon the feeling of necessity; for if there be any one feeling in our
nature which the laws of association are obviously equal to producing,
one would say it is that. Necessary, according to Kant’s definition,[†]
and there is none better, is Edition: current; Page: [261] that of which
the negation is impossible. If we find it impossible, by any trial, to
separate two ideas, we have all the feeling of necessity which the mind
is capable of. Those, therefore, who deny that association can generate
a necessity of thought, must be willing to affirm that two ideas are
never so knit together by association as to be practically inseparable.
But to affirm this is to contradict the most familiar experience of
life. Many persons who have been frightened in childhood can never be
alone in the dark without irrepressible terrors. Many a person is unable
to revisit a particular place, or to think of a particular event,
without recalling acute feelings of grief or reminiscences of suffering.
If the facts which created these strong associations in individual
minds, had been common to all mankind from their earliest infancy, and
had, when the associations were fully formed, been forgotten, we should
have had a Necessity of Thought—one of the necessities which are
supposed to prove an objective law, and an à priori mental connexion
between ideas.* Now, in all the supposed natural beliefs and necessary
conceptions which the principle of Inseparable Association is employed
to explain, the generating causes of the association did begin nearly at
the beginning of life, and are common either to all, or to a very large
portion of mankind.†

Edition: current; Page: [262]
The beggarly account now exhibited, is, I believe, all that Sir W.
Hamilton has anywhere written against the Association psychology. But it
is not all that has been said against that psychology from Sir W.
Hamilton’s point of view. In this as in various other cases, to supply
what Sir W. Hamilton has omitted, recourse may advantageously be had to
Mr. Mansel.

Mr. Mansel, though in some sense a pupil of Sir W. Hamilton, is a pupil
who may be usefully consulted even after his master. Besides that he now
and then sees things which his master did not see, he very often fights
a better battle against adversaries. Moreover, as I before remarked,[*]
he has a decided taste for clear statements and definite issues; and
this is no small advantage when the object is, not victory, but to
understand the subject.

Mr. Mansel joins a distinct issue with the Association psychology, and
brings the question to the proper test. “It has been already observed,”
he says, in his Prolegomena Logica,

that whatever truths we are compelled to admit as everywhere and at all
times necessary, must have their origin, not without, in the laws of the
sensible world, but within, in the constitution of the mind itself.
Sundry attempts have, indeed, been made to derive them from sensible
experience and constant association of ideas; but this explanation is
refuted by a criterion decisive of the fate of all hypotheses: it does
not account for the phænomena. It does not account for the fact that
other associations, as frequent and as uniform, are incapable of
producing a higher conviction than that of a relative and physical
necessity only.*

This is coming to the point, and evinces a correct apprehension of the
conditions of scientific proof. If other associations, as close and as
habitual as those existing in the cases in question, do not produce a
similar feeling of necessity of thought, the sufficiency of the alleged
cause is disproved, and the theory must fall. Mr. Mansel is within the
true conditions of the Psychological Method.

Edition: current; Page: [263]
But hwhat areh these cases of uniform and intimate association, which do
not give rise to a feeling of mental necessity? The following is Mr.
Mansel’s first example of them:

I may imagine the sun rising and setting as now for a hundred years, and
afterwards remaining continually fixed in the meridian. Yet my
experiences of the alternations of day and night have been at least as
invariable as of the geometrical properties of bodies. I can imagine the
same stone sinking ninety-nine times in the water, and floating the
hundredth, but my experience invariably repeats the former phænomenon
only.*

The alternation of day and night is invariable in our experience; but is
the phænomenon day so closely linked in our experience with the
phænomenon night, that we never perceive the one, without, at the same
or the immediately succeeding moment, perceiving the other? That is a
condition present in the inseparable associations which generate
necessities of thought. Uniformities of sequence in which the phænomena
succeed one another only at a certain interval, do not give rise to
inseparable associations.† There are also mental conditions, as well as
physical, which are required to create such an association. Let us take
Mr. Mansel’s other instance, a stone sinking in the water.[*] We have
never seen it float, yet we have no difficulty in conceiving it
floating. But, in the first place, we have not been seeing stones
sinking in water from the first dawn of consciousness, and in nearly
every subsequent moment of our lives, as we have been seeing two and two
making four, intersecting straight lines diverging instead of enclosing
a space, causes followed by effects and effects preceded by causes. But
there is a still more radical distinction than this. No frequency of
conjunction between two phænomena will create an inseparable
association, if counter-associations are being created all the while. If
we sometimes saw stones floating as well as sinking, however often we
might have seen them sink, nobody supposes that we should have formed an
inseparable association between them and sinking. We have not seen a
stone float, but we are in the constant habit of seeing either stones or
other Edition: current; Page: [264] things which have the same tendency
to sink, remaining in a position which they would otherwise quit, being
maintained in it by an unseen force. The sinking of a stone is but a
case of gravitation, and we are abundantly accustomed to see the force
of gravity counteracted. Every fact of that nature which we ever saw or
heard of, is pro tanto an obstacle to the formation of the inseparable
association which would make a violation of the law of gravity
inconceivable to us. Resemblance is a principle of association, as well
as contiguity: and however contradictory a supposition may be to our
experience in hâc materiâ, if our experience in aliâ materiâ furnishes
us with types even distantly resembling what the supposed phænomenon
would be if realized, the associations thus formed will generally
prevent the specific association from becoming so intense and
irresistible, as to disable our imaginative faculty from embodying the
supposition in a form moulded on one or other of those types.*

Edition: current; Page: [265]
Again, says Mr. Mansel, “experience has uniformly presented to me a
horse’s body in conjunction with a horse’s head, and a man’s head with a
man’s body; just as experience has uniformly presented to me space
inclosed within a pair of curved lines and not within a pair of straight
lines:” yet I have no difficulty in imagining a centaur, but cannot
imagine a space inclosed by two straight lines.

Why do I, in the former case, consider the results of my experience as
contingent only and transgressible, confined to the actual phænomena of
a limited field, and possessing no value beyond it; while in the latter
I am compelled to regard them as necessary and universal? Why can I give
in imagination to a quadruped body what experience assures me is
possessed by bipeds only? And why can I not, in like manner, invest
straight lines with an attribute which experience has uniformly
presented in curves?*

I answer:—Because our experience furnishes us with a thousand models on
which to frame the conception of a centaur, and with none on which to
frame that of two straight lines inclosing a space. Nature, as known in
our experience, is uniform in its laws, but extremely varied in its
combinations. The combination of a horse’s body with a human head has
nothing, primâ facie, to make any wide distinction between it and any of
the numberless varieties which we find in animated nature. To a common,
even if not to a scientific mind, it is within the limits of the
variations in our experience. Every similar variation which we have seen
or heard of, is a help towards conceiving this particular one; and tends
to form an association, not of fixity but of variability, which
frustrates the formation of an inseparable association between a human
head and a human body exclusively. We know of so many different heads,
united to so many different bodies, that we have little difficulty in
imagining any head in combination with any body. Nay, the mere mobility
of objects in space is a fact so universal in our experience, that we
easily conceive any object whatever occupying the place of any other; we
imagine without difficulty a horse with his head removed, and a human
head put in its place. But what model does our experience afford on
which to frame, or what elements from which to construct, the conception
of two straight lines inclosing a space? There are no
counter-associations in that case, and consequently the primary
association, being founded on an experience beginning from birth, and
never for many minutes intermitted in our waking hours, easily becomes
inseparable. Edition: current; Page: [266] Had but experience afforded a
case of ipersistenti illusion, in which two straight lines after
intersecting had appeared again to approach, the counter-association
formed might have been sufficient to render such a supposition
imaginable, and defeat the supposed necessity of thought. In the case of
parallel lines, the laws of perspective do present such an illusion:
they do, to the eye, appear to meet in both directions, and consequently
to inclose a space: and by supposing that we had no access to the
evidence which proves that they do not really meet, an ingenious
thinker, whom I formerly quoted, was able to give the idea of a
constitution of nature in which all mankind might have believed that two
straight lines could inclose a space.[*] That we are unable to believe
or imagine it in our present circumstances, needs no other explanation
than the laws of association afford: for the case unites all the
elements of the closest, intensest, and most inseparable association,
with the greatest freedom from conflicting counter-associations which
can be found within the conditions of human life.*

In all the instances of phænomena invariably conjoined which fail to
create necessities of thought, I am satisfied it would be found that the
case is wanting in some of the conditions required by the Association
psychology, as essential to the formation of an association really
inseparable. It is the more to be wondered at that Mr. Mansel should not
have perceived the easy answer which could be given to his argument,
since he himself comes very near to giving the same explanation of many
impossibilities of thought, which is given by the Association theory.
“We can only,” he says, “conceive in thought what we have experienced in
presentation;”† and no other Edition: current; Page: [267] reason is
necessary for our being unable to conceive a thing, than that we have
never experienced it. He even holds that the stock example of a
necessity of thought, the belief in the uniformity of the course of
nature, can be accounted for by experience, without any objective
necessity at all. “We cannot conceive,” he says, “a course of nature
without uniform succession, as we cannot conceive a being who sees
without eyes or hears without ears; because we cannot, under existing
circumstances, experience the necessary intuition. But such things may
nevertheless exist; and under other circumstances, they might become
objects of possible conception, the laws of the process of conception
remaining unaltered.”* I am aware that when Mr. Mansel uses the words
Presentation and Intuition, he does not mean exclusively presentation by
the senses. Nevertheless, if he had only written the preceding passage,
no one would have suspected that he could have required any other cause
for our inability to conceive a bilineal figure, than the impossibility
of our perceiving one. It is sufficient, in his opinion, to constitute
any propositions necessary, that “while our constitution and
circumstances remain as they are, we cannot but think them.”† It is
superabundantly manifest that many propositions which all admit to be
grounded only on experience, are necessary under this definition. Mr.
Mansel even asserts a more complete dependence of our possibilities of
thought upon our opportunities of experience than there appears to me to
be ground for: since he affirms that “we can only conceive in thought
what we have experienced in presentation,” while in reality it is
sufficient that we should have experienced in presentation things
bearing some similarity to it.


jNOTE TO THE PRECEDING CHAPTER

Dr. Ward, one of the ablest living defenders of the intuitional
metaphysics, has, in the Dublin Review for October 1871, made a vigorous
attack upon the doctrines of this chapter. His arguments in part
coincide (though with a difference in the illustrations) with those
already noticed, of Mr. Mansel: several of them, however, are distinct:
and as I believe that in answering them, I am answering the best that is
likely to be said by any future champion, I will take up Dr. Ward’s
points one by one.

Dr. Ward thus expresses the test of necessary truth:

If in any case I know by my very conception of some ens, that a certain
attribute, not included in that conception, is truly predicable of that
ens, such predication is a Edition: current; Page: [268] self-evidently
necessary proposition. Take, for instance, the axiom that all trilateral
figures are triangular. If, by my very conception of a trilateral
figure, I know its triangularity . . . then I know infallibly that a
trilateral non-triangular figure is an intrinsically repugnant chimera;
that in no possible region of existence could such a figure be found;
that not even an Omnipotent Being could form one.

Consequently “the triangularity of all trilateral figures is cognizable
as a self-evidently necessary truth;” not grounded on, nor deriving its
evidence from, experience.[*]

It is not denied, nor deniable, that there are properties of things
which we know to be true (as Dr. Ward expresses it) by our “very
conception” of the thing. But this is no argument against our knowing
them solely by experience, for (as is truly and aptly said by Professor
Bain in his Logic) these are cases in which in the very process of
forming the conception, we have experience of the fact.[†] It is not
likely that Dr. Ward has returned to the notion (so long abandoned and
even forgotten by intuitionists) of ideas literally innate, and thinks
that we bring with us into the world the conception of a trilateral
figure ready made. He doubtless believes that it is at least suggested
by observation of objects. Now, the fact of three sides and that of
three angles are so intimately linked together in external nature, that
it is impossible for the conception of a three-sided figure to get into
the mind without carrying into the mind with it the conception of three
angles. Therefore, when we have once got the conception of a trilateral,
we have no need of further experience to prove triangularity. The
conception itself, which represents all our previous experience,
suffices. And if the Association theory be true, it must follow from it,
that whenever any property of external things is in the relation to the
things which is required for the formation of an inseparable
association, that property will get into the conception, and be believed
without further proof. Dr. Ward will say that triangularity is not
included in the conception of a trilateral. But this is only true in the
sense that triangularity is not in the connotation of the name. Many
attributes not included in the definition are included in the
conception. Dr. Ward cannot but see that on the experience hypothesis,
this not only may, but must be the case.*

Edition: current; Page: [269]
Dr. Ward goes on to deny that uniformity of experience can produce the
belief that the truth thus uniformly experienced is necessary. If it
could, he says, the fact itself of the uniformity of nature—the fact
that phænomena succeed each other according to uniform laws—resting on a
broader basis of experience than any particular law of nature, has all
the conditions for being regarded as a necessary truth, and must produce
“a practical necessity of fancying that in every possible region of
existence phænomena succeed each other by uniform laws;”* now, we are
under no such necessity, as I myself have strenuously maintained.[*] But
my answer to Mr. Mansel’s instances is applicable to this of Dr. Ward’s.
Is it seriously that he compares our experience of the uniformity of
nature, in point of obviousness and familiarity, with our experience of
the straightness of straight lines? The uniformity is, in the first
stages of our experience, an actual paradox; first appearances are
against it; they seem to show that some events do indeed succeed each
other with an approach, though only an approach, to uniformity, but that
a far greater number have no fixed order whatever. How can it be
maintained that we have, at that early period of our observations, such
experience of this universal truth, as to incorporate it in our
conception of every object in nature, and create an irresistible
association of uniformity of sequence with all possible events? As we
gradually learn the correct interpretation of our experience, and become
aware that uniformity of sequence is an universal truth, a powerful,
though even then, not an irresistible association, does grow up;
accordingly the law that whatever begins to exist has a cause, is
classed by most of the intuitional philosophers as a necessary truth,
though (strange to say) a necessary truth with an exception.

But Dr. Ward contends (Dr. M‘Cosh had already said the same thing)† that
there is a fallacy of ambiguity in the phrase “necessity of thought.” He
charges me with using the phrase “in two senses fundamentally different.
A necessity of thought may, no doubt, be most intelligibly understood to
mean a law of nature whereby under certain circumstances I necessarily
think this, that, and the other judgment. But it may also be understood
to mean a law of nature whereby I think as necessary this, that, and the
other judgment.” He agrees with me

that from a necessity of thought in the former sense, no legitimate
argument whatever can be deduced for a necessity of objective truth.
Supposing I felt Edition: current; Page: [270] unusually cold a few
moments ago, it is a necessity of thought that I should now remember the
circumstance. Yet that past experience was no necessary truth. It is a
necessity of thought again that I expect the sun to rise to-morrow: and
many similar instances could be adduced. The only necessity of thought
which proves the self-evident necessity of objective truth, is the
necessity of thinking that such truth is self-evidently necessary.*

Not denying the validity of this distinction, I maintain that it does
not affect the argument; because the one necessity is always proved by
the other. The evidence always given, and the only evidence which I
believe can be given, that we must think anything as necessary, is that
we necessarily think it. This, under various names, a Fundamental Law of
Belief, the Inconceivability of the Opposite, and so on, is the staple
of the Intuitionist argument. Surely, if I disprove the necessity of
thinking the thing at all, I disprove that it must be thought as
necessary. What other proof can be given of the necessity of a truth, I
confess myself ignorant. The consensus of mankind will not do, since
that is disproved by being disputed; and Dr. Ward’s argument, that a
truth must be independent of experience if it can be deduced from the
conception, has been met by showing that it is deduced from the
conception only after experience has put it there.

Dr. Ward says that “mere constant and uniform experience cannot possibly
account for the mind’s conviction of self-evident necessity.” Nor do I
pretend that it does. The experience must not only be constant and
uniform, but the juxtaposition of the facts in experience must be
immediate and close, as well as early, familiar, and so free from even
the semblance of an exception that no counter association can possibly
arise. Dr. Ward gives two contrasted examples: “I have never even once
experienced the equality of 2 + 9 to 3 + 8, and yet am convinced that
not even Omnipotence could overthrow that equality. I have most
habitually experienced the warmth-giving property of fire, and yet see
no reason for doubting that Omnipotence can at any time suspend or
remove that property. That which I have never experienced I regard as
necessary; that which I have habitually and unexceptionably experienced
I regard as contingent.”†

To the first example I answer, that if the equality of 2 + 9 and 3 + 8
does not come to us in the first instance by direct experience (though
fully ratified by it), neither does it come by direct intuition. It is
gained by a succession of steps, each resting on actual trial. True, it
may be but a mental trial; as by merely fancying myself “holding two
pebbles in one hand and nine in the other, and then transferring one
pebble from the larger to the smaller group.”[*] But the mere
imagination of this transfer would not, and Edition: current; Page:
[271] ought not to carry conviction to me, if I had not previously
observed that change of place makes no difference in the number of
objects. All reasoning from conceptions is open to, and finally rests
upon, an appeal to the sensations. With respect to the warmth-giving
property of fire, the instance is not happily chosen; for warmth is so
much the differentia of fire, the principal connotation of the word,
that what was believed not to warm would certainly not be called fire.
But (disregarding this) Dr. Ward’s illustration may be met in the same
manner in which I have met the similar illustrations of Mr. Mansel.
Fire, it is true, will always, under certain needful conditions, give
warmth; but the sight of fire is very often unattended with any
sensation of warmth. It is not concomitance of the outward facts that
creates the association, but concomitance of the sensible impressions.
The visible presence of fire and the sensation of warmth are not in that
invariable conjunction and immediate juxtaposition, which might disable
us from conceiving the one without the other, and might therefore lead
us to suppose their conjunction to be a necessary truth.

Dr. Ward’s criticisms on the view I take of the Law of Causation belong
not to the present work, but to my System of Logic. One more of his
objections, however, may be noticed here. He says, that while I account
for the “power of ascertaining axioms by mere mental experience” from
“one of the characteristic properties of geometrical forms,” viz., that
they can be painted in the imagination with a distinctness equal to
reality, I entirely leave out of account arithmetical and algebraic
axioms, though these, equally with geometrical, can be arrived at by
merely mental experimentation.* I do not leave them out of account, but
have assigned, in my Logic, another and equally conclusive reason why
they can be studied in our conceptions alone, namely, that arithmetical
and algebraic truths being true not of any particular kind of things,
but of all things whatever, any mental conceptions whatever will
adequately represent them.j[*]

Edition: current; Page: [272]


CHAPTER XV: Sir William Hamilton’s Doctrine of Unconscious Mental Modifications

the laws of obliviscence noticed in the preceding chapter, are closely
connected with a question raised by Sir W. Hamilton, and discussed at
some length in his Lectures: Whether there are unconscious states of
mind: or, as he expresses it in the eighteenth Lecture, “Whether the
mind exerts energies, and is the subject of modifications, of neither of
which it is conscious.” Our author pronounces decidedly for the
affirmative, in opposition to most English philosophers, by whom, he
says, “the supposition of an unconscious action or passion of the mind,
has been treated as something either unintelligible or absurd;”* and in
opposition, no less, to aat least one expressiona of opinion by our
author himself.†b This is one of the numerous inconsistencies in Sir W.
Hamilton’s professed opinions, which a close examination and comparison
of his speculations brings to light, and which show how far he was in
reality from being the systematic thinker which, on a first impression
of his writings, he seems to be. In one point of view, these
self-contradictions are fully as much an honour as a discredit to him;
since they frequently arise from his having acutely seized some
important psychological truth, greatly in advance of his general mode of
thought, and not having brought the remainder of his philosophy up to
it. Instead of having reasoned out a consistent scheme of thought, of
which every part fits in with the other parts, he seems to have explored
the deeper regions of the mind only at the points which had some direct
connexion with the conclusions he had adopted on a few special questions
of Edition: current; Page: [273] philosophy: and from his different
explorations he occasionally, as in the present case, brought back
different results. But, in the place where he treats directly of this
particular question, he decides unequivocally for the existence of
latent mental modifications. The subject is in itself not unimportant,
and his treatment of it will serve as an example by which to estimate
his powers of thought in the province of pure psychology.

Sir W. Hamilton recognises three different kinds, or, as he calls them,
degrees, of mental latency. Two of these will be seen, on examination,
to be entirely irrelevant.

The first kind of latency, is that which belongs to all the parts of our
knowledge which we are not thinking of at the very moment. “I know a
science, or language, not merely while I make a temporary use of it, but
inasmuch as I can apply it when and how I will. Thus the infinitely
greater part of our spiritual treasures lies always beyond the sphere of
consciousness, hid in the obscure recesses of the mind.”* But this
stored-up knowledge, I submit, is not an “unconscious action or passion
of the mind.” It is not a mental state, but a capability of being put
into a mental state. When I am not thinking of a thing, it is not
present to my mind at all. It may become present when something happens
to recall it; but it is not latently present now; no more than any
physical thing which I may have hoarded up. I may have a stock of food
with which to nourish myself hereafter; but my body is not in a state of
latent nourishment by the food which is in store. I have the power to
walk across the room, though I am sitting in my chair; but we should
hardly call this power a latent act of walking. What required to be
shown was, not that I may possess knowledge without recalling it, but
that it can be recalled to my mind, I remaining unconscious of it all
the time.†

Edition: current; Page: [274]
The second degree of latency exists when the mind contains systems of
knowledge, or certain habits of action, which it is wholly unconscious
of possessing in its ordinary state, but which are revealed to
consciousness in certain extraordinary exaltations of its powers. The
evidence on this point shows that the mind frequently contains whole
systems of knowledge, which, though in our normal state they have faded
into absolute oblivion, may, in certain abnormal states, as madness,
febrile delirium, somnambulism, catalepsy, &c., flash out into luminous
consciousness, and even throw into the shade of unconsciousness those
other systems by which they had, for a long period, been eclipsed and
even extinguished.

He then cites from various authors some of the curious recorded cases
“in which the extinct memory of whole languages was suddenly restored,
and, what is even still more remarkable, in which the faculty was
exhibited of actually repeating, in known or unknown tongues, passages
which were never within the grasp of conscious memory in the normal
state.”* These, however, are not cases of latent states of mind, but of
a very different thing—of latent memory. It is not the mental
impressions that are latent, but the power of reproducing them. Every
one admits, without any apparatus of proof, that we may have powers and
susceptibilities of which we are not conscious; but these are
capabilities of being affected, not actual affections. I have the
susceptibility of being poisoned by prussic acid, but this
susceptibility is not a present phænomenon, constantly taking place in
my body without my perceiving it. The capability of being poisoned is
not a present modification of my body; nor is the capability I perhaps
have of recollecting, should I become delirious, something which I have
forgotten while sane, a present modification of my mind. These are
future contingent Edition: current; Page: [275] states, not present
actual ones. The real question is, can I undergo a present actual mental
modification without being aware of it?

We come, therefore, to the third case, which is the only one really in
point, and enquire, whether there are, in our ordinary mental life,
“mental modifications, i.e. mental activities and passivities, of which
we are unconscious, but which manifest their existence by effects of
which we are conscious?” Sir W. Hamilton decides that there are: and
even “that what we are conscious of is constructed out of what we are
not conscious of;” that “the sphere of our conscious modifications is
only a small circle in the centre of a far wider sphere of action and
passion, of which we are only conscious through its effects.”*

His first example is taken from the perception of external objects. The
facts which he adduces are these. 1st. Every minimum visibile is
composed of still smaller parts, which are not separately capable of
being objects of vision; “they are, severally and apart, to
consciousness as zero.” Yet every one of these parts “must by itself
have produced in us a certain modification, real though unperceived,”†
since the effect of the whole can only be the sum of the separate
effects of the parts. 2nd. “When we look at a distant forest, we
perceive a certain expanse of green. Of this, as an affection of our
organism, we are clearly and distinctly conscious. Now, the expanse of
which we are conscious is evidently made up of parts of which we are not
conscious. No leaf, perhaps no tree, may be separately visible. But the
greenness of the forest is made up of the greenness of the leaves; that
is, the total impression of which we are conscious, is made up of an
infinitude of small impressions of which we are not conscious.” 3rd. Our
sense of hearing tells the same tale. There is a minimum audibile; the
faintest sound capable of being heard. This sound, however, must be made
up of parts, each of which must affect us in some manner, otherwise the
whole which they compose could not affect us. When we hear the distant
murmur of the sea,

this murmur is a sum made up of parts, and the sum would be as zero if
the parts did not count as something. . . . If the noise of each wave
made no impression on our sense, the noise of the sea, as the result of
these impressions, could not be realized. But the noise of each several
wave, at the distance we suppose, is inaudible; we must, however, admit
that they produce a certain modification beyond consciousness, on the
percipient subject; for this is necessarily involved in the reality of
their result.‡

It is a curious question how Sir W. Hamilton failed to perceive that an
unauthorized assumption has slipped into his argument. Because the
Edition: current; Page: [276] minimum visibile consists of parts (as we
know through the microscope), and because the minimum visibile produces
an impression on our sense of sight, he jumps to the conclusion that
each one of the parts does so too. But it is a supposition consistent
with what we know of nature, that a certain quantity of the cause may be
a necessary condition to the production of any of the effect. The
minimum visibile would on that supposition be this certain quantity; and
the two halves into which we can conceive it divided, though each
contributing its half to the formation of that which produces vision,
would not each separately produce half of the vision, the concurrence of
both being necessary to produce any vision whatever. And so of the
distant murmur of the sea: the agency which produces it is made up of
the rolling of many different waves, each of which, if sufficiently
near, would affect us with a perceptible sound; but at the distance at
which they are, it may require the rolling of many waves to excite an
amount of vibration in the air sufficient, when enfeebled by extension,
to produce any effect whatever on our auditory nerves, and, through
them, on our mind. The supposition that each wave affects the mind
separately because their aggregate affects it, is therefore, to say the
least, an unproved hypothesis.

The counter-hypothesis, that in order to the production of any quantity
whatever of the effect, there is needed a certain minimum quantity of
the cause, it is the more extraordinary that Sir W. Hamilton should have
overlooked, since he has not only himself adopted a similar supposition
in some other cases,* but it is a necessary part of his theory in this
very case. He will not admit as possible, that less than a certain
quantity of the external agent, produces no mental modification; but he
himself supposes that less than a certain quantity of mental
modification produces no consciousness. Yet if his à priori argument is
valid for the one sequence, it is valid for the other. If the effect of
a whole must be the sum of similar effects produced by all its parts,
and if every state of consciousness is the effect of a modification of
mind which is made up of an infinitude of small parts, the state of
consciousness also must be made up of an infinitude of small states of
consciousness, produced by these infinitely small mental modifications
respectively. We are not at liberty to adopt the one theory for the
first link in the double succession, and the other theory for the other
link. Having shown no reason why either theory should be preferred, our
author would have acted more philosophically in not deciding between
them. But to Edition: current; Page: [277] accommodate half the fact to
one theory and half to the other, without assigning any reason for the
difference, is to exceed all rational license of scientific hypothesis.

After these examples from Perception, our author passes to cases of
Association: and as he here states some important mental phænomena well
and clearly, I shall quote him at some length.

It sometimes happens, that we find one thought rising immediately after
another in consciousness, but whose consecution we can reduce to no law
of association. Now in these cases we can generally discover by an
attentive observation, that these two thoughts, though not themselves
associated, are each associated with certain other thoughts; so that the
whole consecution would have been regular, had these intermediate
thoughts come into consciousness, between the two which are not
immediately associated. Suppose, for instance, that A, B, C, are three
thoughts,—that A and C cannot immediately suggest each other, but that
each is associated with B, so that A will naturally suggest B, and B
naturally suggest C. Now it may happen, that we are conscious of A, and
immediately thereafter of C. How is the anomaly to be explained? It can
only be explained on the principle of latent modifications. A suggests
C, not immediately, but through B; but as B, like the half of the
minimum visibile or minimum audibile, does not rise into consciousness,
we are apt to consider it as non-existent. You are probably aware of the
following fact in mechanics. If a number of billiard balls be placed in
a straight row and touching each other, and if a ball be made to strike,
in the line of the row, the ball at one end of the series, what will
happen? The motion of the impinging ball is not divided among the whole
row; this, which we might à priori have expected, does not happen, but
the impetus is transmitted through the intermediate balls which remain
each in its place, to the ball at the opposite end of the series, and
this ball alone is impelled on. Something like this seems often to occur
in the train of thought. One idea mediately suggests another into
consciousness,—the suggestion passing through one or more ideas which do
not themselves rise into consciousness. The awakening and awakened ideas
here correspond to the ball striking and the ball struck off; while the
intermediate ideas of which we are unconscious, but which carry on the
suggestion, resemble the intermediate balls which remain moveless, but
communicate the impulse. An instance of this occurs to me with which I
was recently struck. Thinking of Ben Lomond, this thought was
immediately followed by the thought of the Prussian system of education.
Now conceivable connexion between these two ideas in themselves, there
was none. A little reflection, however, explained the anomaly. On my
last visit to the mountain, I had met upon its summit a German
gentleman, and though I had no consciousness of the intermediate and
unawakened links between Ben Lomond and the Prussian schools, they were
undoubtedly these,—the German,—Germany,—Prussia,—and, these media being
admitted, the connexion between the extremes was manifest.*

Though our author says that the facts here described can only be
explained on the supposition that the intervening ideas never came into
consciousness at all, he is aware that another explanation is
conceivable, namely that they were momentarily in consciousness, but
were forgotten, Edition: current; Page: [278] agreeably to the law of
Obliviscence already spoken of: which, in fact, is the explanation given
by Stewart. The same two explanations may be given of his final example,
drawn from a class of phænomena also governed by laws of association,
“our acquired dexterities and habits.”* When we learn any manual
operation, suppose that of playing on the pianoforte, the operation is
at first a series of conscious volitions, followed by movements of the
fingers: but when, by sufficient repetition, a certain facility has been
acquired, the motions take place without our being able to recognise
afterwards that we have been conscious of the volitions which preceded
them. In this case, we may either hold with Sir W. Hamilton, that the
volitions (to which cmustc be added the feelings of muscular
contraction, and of the contact of our fingers with the keys) are not,
in the practised performer, present to consciousness at all; or, with
Stewart, that he is conscious of them, but for so brief an interval,
that he has no remembrance of them afterwards.[*] The motions, in this
case, are said by Hartley to have become secondarily automatic,[†] which
our author supposes to be a third opinion, but dthe difference, if
difference it was, between this and Stewart’s theory, is not material to
the present enquiryd.

Let us now consider the reasons given by Sir W. Hamilton for preferring
his explanation to Stewart’s. The first and principal of them is, that
to suppose a state of consciousness which is not remembered, “violates
the whole analogy of consciousness.” “Consciousness supposes memory; and
we are only conscious as we are able to connect and contrast one
instance of our intellectual existence with another.”† “Of
consciousness, however faint, there must be some memory, however short.
But this is at variance with the phænomenon, for the ideas A and C may
precede and follow each other without any perceptible interval, and
without any the feeblest memory of B.”‡

Here again I am obliged, not without wonder, to point out the
inconclusive character of the argument. When Sir W. Hamilton says that
consciousness implies memory, he means, as his words show, that we are
only conscious by means of change; by discriminating the present state
from a Edition: current; Page: [279] state immediately preceding.
Granting this, as with proper explanations I do, all it proves is, that
any conscious state of mind must be remembered long enough to be
compared with the mental state immediately following it. The state of
mind, therefore, which he supposes to have been latent, must, if it
passed into consciousness, have been remembered until one other mental
modification had supervened; which there is assuredly not a particle of
evidence that it was not: for our having totally forgotten it a minute
after, is no evidence, but a common consequence of the laws of
Obliviscence. It is perhaps true that all consciousness must be followed
by a memory, but I see no reason why an evanescent state of
consciousness must be followed, if by any, by a more than evanescent
memory. “It is a law of mind,” our author says further on, “that the
intensity of the present consciousness determines the vivacity of the
future memory. Vivid consciousness, long memory; faint consciousness,
short memory.”* Well, then: in the case supposed, the intensity of
consciousness is at eae minimum, therefore on his own showing the
duration of memory should be so too. If the consciousness itself is too
fleeting to fix the attention, so, à fortiori, must the remembrance of
it. In reality, the remembrance is often evanescent when the
consciousness is by no means so, but is so distinct and prolonged as to
be in no danger whatever of being supposed latent. Take the case of a
player on the pianoforte while still a learner, and before the
succession of volitions has attained the rapidity which practice
ultimately gives it. In this stage of progress there is, beyond all
doubt, a conscious volition, anterior to the playing of each particular
note. Yet has the player, when the piece is finished, the smallest
remembrance of each of these volitions, as a separate fact? In like
manner, have we, when we have finished reading a volume, the smallest
memory of our successive volitions to turn the pages? On the contrary,
we only know that we must have turned them, because, without doing so,
we could not have read to the end. Yet these volitions were not latent:
every time we turned over a leaf, we must have formed a conscious
purpose of turning; but, the purpose having been instantly fulfilled,
the attention was arrested in the process for too short a time to leave
a more than momentary remembrance of it. The sensations of sight, touch,
and the muscles, felt in turning the leaves, were as vivid at the moment
as any of our ordinary sensible impressions which are only important to
us as means to an end. But because they had no pleasurable or painful
interest in themselves; because the interest they had as means passed
away in the same instant by the attainment of the end; and because there
was nothing to associate the act of reading with these particular
sensations, rather Edition: current; Page: [280] than with other similar
sensations formerly experienced; their trace in the memory was only
momentary, unless something unusual and remarkable connected with the
particular leaves turned over, detained them in remembrance.

If sensations which are evidently in consciousness may leave so brief a
memory that they are not felt to leave any memory fwhateverf, what
wonder that the same should happen when the sensations are of so
fugitive a character, that it can be debated whether they were in
consciousness at all? However true it may be that there must be some
memory wherever there is consciousness, what argument is this against a
theory which supposes a low degree of consciousness, attended by just
the degree of memory which properly belongs to it?

Imagine an argument in physics, corresponding to this in metaphysics.
Some of my readers are probably acquainted with the important
experiments of M. Pasteur, which gappear tog have finally exploded the
ancient hypothesis of Equivocal Generation, by showing that even the
smallest microscopic animalcules are not produced in a medium from which
their still more microscopic germs have been effectually excluded. What
should we think of any one who deemed it a refutation of M. Pasteur,
that the germs are not discernible by the naked eye? who maintained that
invisible animalcules must proceed, if from germs at all, from visible
germs? This reasoning would be an exact parallel to that of Sir W.
Hamilton.

The only other argument of our author against Stewart’s doctrine, is
confined to the phænomenon of acquired habits, in which case, he says,
the supposition of real but forgotten consciousness “would constrain our
assent to the most monstrous conclusions:” since, in reading aloud, if
the matter be uninteresting, we may be carrying on a train of thought
(even of “serious meditation”) on a totally different subject, and this,
too, “without distraction or fatigue:” which, he says, would be
impossible, if we were separately conscious of, or (as he rather
gratuitously alters the idea), separately attentive to, “each least
movement in either process.”* Sir W. Hamilton here loses sight of a part
of his own philosophy, which deserves his forgetfulness the less as it
is a very valuable part. In one of the most important psychological
discussions in his Lectures,† he forcibly maintains that we are capable
of carrying on several distinct series of states of consciousness at
once; and goes so far as to contend not only that our consciousness, but
what is more than consciousness, our “concentrated consciousness, or
attention,”[*] is capable of being divided among as many Edition:
current; Page: [281] as six simultaneous impressions.* Returning to the
same subject in another place, he quotes from a modern French
philosopher, Cardaillac (in a work entitled Etudes Elémentaires de
Philosophie),[*] an excellent and conclusive passage, showing the great
multitude of states more or less conscious, which often coexist in the
mind, and help to determine the subsequent trains of thought or feeling;
and illustrating the causes that determine which of these shall in any
particular case predominate over the rest.† Our consciousness,
therefore, according to Sir W. Hamilton, ought not to have much
difficulty in finding room for the two simultaneous series of states
which he quarrels with Stewart’s hypothesis for requiring: and we are
not bound, under the penalty of “monstrous conclusions,” to consider one
of these series as latent. Sir W. Hamilton indeed says truly, that “the
greater the number of objects to which our consciousness is
simultaneously extended, the smaller is the intensity with which it is
able to consider each;”‡ but the intensity of consciousness necessary
for reading aloud with correctness in a language familiar to us, not
being very considerable, a great part of our power of attention is
disposable for “the train of serious meditation”[†] which is supposed to
be passing through our minds at the same time. For all this, I would not
advise any person (unless one with the peculiar gift ascribed to Julius
Cæsar)[‡] to stake anything on the substantial value of a train of
thought carried on by him while reading aloud a book on another subject.
Such thoughts, I imagine, are always the better for being revised when
the mind has nothing else to do than to consider them.

It is strange, but characteristic, that Sir W. Hamilton cannot be
depended on for remembering, in one part of his speculations, the best
things which he has said in another; not even the truths into which he
has thrown so Edition: current; Page: [282] much of the powers of his
mind, as to have made them, in an especial manner, his own.

Notwithstanding the failure of Sir W. Hamilton to adduce a single valid
reason for preferring his hypothesis to that of Stewart, it does not
follow that he is not, at least in certain cases, in the right. The
difference between the two opinions being beyond the reach of
experiment, and both being equally consistent with the facts which
present themselves spontaneously, it is not easy to obtain sure grounds
for deciding between them. The essential part of the phænomenon is, that
we have, or once had, many sensations, and that many ideas do, or once
did, enter into our trains of thought, which sensations and ideas we
afterwards, in the words of James Mill, are “under an acquired
incapacity of attending to:”* and that when our incapacity of attending
to them has become complete, it is, to our subsequent consciousness,
exactly as if we did not have them at all: we are incapable, by any
self-examination, of being aware of them. We know that these lost
sensations and ideas, for lost they appear to be, leave traces of having
existed; they continue to be operative in introducing other ideas by
association. Either, therefore, they have been consciously present long
enough to call up associations, but not long enough to be remembered a
few moments later; or they have been, as Sir W. Hamilton supposes,
unconsciously present; or they have not been present at all, but
something instead of them, capable of producing the same effects. I am
myself inclined to agree with Sir W. Hamilton, and to admit his
unconscious mental modifications, in the only shape in which I can
attach any very distinct meaning to them, namely, unconscious
modifications of the nerves. There are much stronger facts in support of
this hypothesis than those to which Sir W. Hamilton appeals—facts which
it is far more difficult to reconcile with the doctrine that the
sensations are felt, but felt too momentarily to leave a recognisable
impression in memory. In the case, for instance, of a soldier who
receives a wound in battle, but in the excitement of the moment is not
aware of the fact, it is difficult not to believe that if the wound had
been accompanied by the usual sensation, so vivid a feeling would have
forced itself to be attended to and remembered. The supposition which
seems most probable is, that the nerves of the particular part were
affected as they would have been by the same cause in any other
circumstances, but that, the nervous centres being intensely occupied
with other impressions, the affection of the local nerves did not reach
them, and no sensation was excited. In like manner, if we admit (what
physiology is rendering more and more probable) that our mental
feelings, as well as our sensations, have for their physical antecedents
particular states of the nerves; it may well be Edition: current; Page:
[283] believed that the apparently suppressed links in a chain of
association, those which Sir W. Hamilton considers as latent, really are
so; that they are not, even momentarily, felt; the chain of causation
being continued only physically, by one organic state of the nerves
succeeding another so rapidly that the state of mental consciousness
appropriate to each is not produced. We have only to suppose, either
that a nervous modification of too short duration does not produce any
sensation or mental feeling at all, or that the rapid succession of
different nervous modifications makes the feelings produced by them
interfere with each other, and become confounded in one mass. The former
of these suppositions is extremely probable, while of the truth of the
latter we have positive proof. An example of it is the experiment which
Sir W. Hamilton quoted from Mr. Mill, and which had been noticed before
either of them by Hartley.[*] It is known that the seven prismatic
colours, combined in certain proportions, produce the white light of the
solar ray. Now, if the seven colours are painted on spaces bearing the
same proportion to one another as in the solar spectrum, and the
coloured surface so produced is passed rapidly before the eyes, as by
the turning of a wheel, the whole is seen as white. The physiological
explanation of this phænomenon may be deduced from another common
experiment. If a lighted torch, or a bar heated to luminousness, is
waved rapidly before the eye, the appearance produced is that of a
ribbon of light; which is universally understood to prove that the
visual sensation persists for a certain short time after its cause has
ceased. Now, if this happens with a single colour, it will happen with a
series of colours: and if the wheel on which the prismatic colours have
been painted, is turned with the same rapidity with which the torch was
waved, each of the seven sensations of colour will last long enough to
be contemporaneous with all the others, and they will naturally produce
by their combination the same colour as if they had, from the beginning,
been excited simultaneously. If anything similar to this obtains in our
consciousness generally (and that it obtains in many cases of
consciousness there can be no doubt) it will follow that whenever the
organic modifications of our nervous fibres succeed one another at an
interval shorter than the duration of the sensations or other feelings
corresponding to them, those sensations or feelings will, so to speak,
overlap one another, and becoming simultaneous instead of successive,
will blend into a state of feeling, probably as unlike the elements out
of which it is engendered, as the colour white is unlike the prismatic
colours. And this may be the source of many of those states of internal
or mental feeling which we cannot distinctly refer to a prototype in
experience, our experience Edition: current; Page: [284] only supplying
the elements from which, by this kind of mental chemistry, they are
composed. The elementary feelings may then be said to be latently
present, or to be present but not in consciousness. The truth, however,
is that the feelings themselves are not present, consciously or
latently, but that the nervous modifications which are their usual
antecedents have been present, while the consequents have been
frustrated, and another consequent has been produced instead.*

Edition: current; Page: [285] Edition: current; Page: [286]


CHAPTER XVI: Sir William Hamilton’s Theory of Causation

sir w. hamilton commences his treatment of the question of Causation, by
warning the reader against “some philosophers who, instead of
accommodating their solutions to the problem, have accommodated the
problem to their solutions.”[*] It might almost have been supposed that
this expression had been invented to be applied to Sir W. Hamilton
himself. He has defined the problem in a manner in which it ahada been
defined by no one else, for no visible reason but to adapt it to a
solution which no one else had thought of.*

“When we are aware,” he says,

of something which begins to exist, we are, by the necessity of our
intelligence, constrained to believe that it has a Cause. But what does
this expression, that it has a cause, signify? If we analyse our
thought, we shall find that it simply means, that as we cannot conceive
any new existence to commence, therefore, all that now is seen to arise
under a new appearance, had previously an existence under a prior form.
We are utterly unable to realize in thought, the possibility of the
complement of existence being either increased or diminished. We are
unable, on the one hand, to conceive nothing becoming something, or, on
the other, something becoming nothing. When God is said to create out of
nothing, we construe this to thought by supposing that he evolves
existence out of himself; we view the Creator as the cause of the
universe. “Ex nihilo nihil, in nihilum nil posse reverti,”[†] expresses,
in its purest form, the whole intellectual phænomenon of causality.

There is thus conceived an absolute tautology between the effect and its
causes. We think the causes to contain all that is contained in the
effect, the effect to contain nothing which was not contained in the
causes. Take as example: A neutral salt is an effect of the conjunction
of an acid and alkali. Here we do not, and here we cannot, conceive
that, in effect, any new existence has been added, nor can we conceive
Edition: current; Page: [287] that any has been taken away. Put another
example: Gunpowder is the effect of a mixture of sulphur, charcoal, and
nitre, and those three substances are again the effect,—result, of
simpler constituents, either known or conceived to exist. Now, in all
this series of compositions, we cannot conceive that aught begins to
exist. The gunpowder, the last compound, we are compelled to think,
contains precisely the same quantum of existence that its ultimate
elements contained prior to their combination. Well, we explode the
powder. Can we conceive that existence has been diminished by the
annihilation of a single element previously in being, or increased by
the addition of a single element which was not heretofore in nature?
“Omnia mutantur; nihil interit,”[*] is what we think—what we must think.
This then is the mental phænomenon of causality,—that we necessarily
deny in thought that the object which appears to begin to be, really so
begins; and that we necessarily identify its present with its past
existence.*

This being Sir W. Hamilton’s idea of what Causality means, he thinks it
unnecessary to suppose, with most of the philosophers of the intuitive
school, a special principle of our nature to account for our believing
that every phænomenon must have a cause. The belief is accounted for,
“not from a power, but from an impotence of mind,”† namely, from the Law
of the Conditioned; or in other words, from the incapacity of the human
mind to conceive the Absolute. We are unable to conceive and construe to
ourselves an absolute commencement. Whatever we think, we cannot help
thinking as existing; and whatever we think as existing, we are
compelled to think as having existed through all past, and as destined
to exist through all future, time. It does not at all follow that this
is really the fact, for there are many things inconceivable to us, which
not only may, but must, be true. Accordingly it may be true that there
is an absolute commencement; it may not be true that every phænomenon
has a cause. Human volitions in particular may come into existence
uncaused, and, in Sir W. Hamilton’s opinion, they do so. But to us a
beginning and an end of existence are both inconceivable.

We are unable to construe in thought, that there can be an atom
absolutely added to, or an atom absolutely taken away from, existence in
general. Make the experiment. Form to yourselves a notion of the
universe; now, can you conceive that the quantity of existence, of which
the universe is the sum, is either amplified or diminished? You can
conceive the creation of the world as lightly as you can conceive the
creation of an atom. But what is creation? It is not the springing of
nothing into something. Far from it: it is conceived, and is by us
conceivable, merely as the evolution of a new form of existence, by the
fiat of the Deity. Let us suppose the very crisis of creation. Can we
realize it to ourselves, in thought, that the moment after the universe
came into manifested being, there was a larger complement of existence
in the universe and its Author together, than there was the Edition:
current; Page: [288] moment before, in the Deity himself alone? This we
cannot imagine. What I have now said of our conceptions of creation,
holds true of our conceptions of annihilation. We can conceive no real
annihilation—no absolute sinking of something into nothing. But, as
creation is cogitable by us only as an exertion of divine power, so
annihilation is only to be conceived by us as a withdrawal of the divine
support. All that there is now actually of existence in the universe, we
conceive as having virtually existed, prior to creation, in the Creator;
and in imagining the universe to be annihilated by its Author, we can
only imagine this as the retractation of an outward energy into power.*

Had this extraordinary view of Causation proceeded from a thinker of
less ability and authority than Sir W. Hamilton, I think there are few
readers, who, on reaching the sentence which I have marked by italics,
would not have set down the entire speculation as a mauvaise
plaisanterie.

But since any opinion, however strange, of Sir W. Hamilton, must be
believed to be serious, and no serious opinion of such a man ought to be
dismissed unexamined, I shall proceed to enquire, whether the problem of
which he propounds this solution, is the problem of Causation, and
whether the solution is a true one. To take the last question first; is
it a fact that we cannot conceive a beginning of existence? Is it true
that whenever we conceive a thing as existing, we are incapable of
conceiving a time when it did not exist, or a time when it will exist no
longer?

If, by incapacity to conceive an absolute commencement, were only meant
that we cannot imagine a time when nothing existed; and if our
incapacity of conceiving annihilation, only means that we cannot
represent to ourselves an universe devoid of existence; I do not deny
it. Whatever else we may suppose removed, there always remains the
conception of empty space: and Sir W. Hamilton is probably right in his
opinion, that we cannot imagine even empty space without clothing it
mentally with some sort of colour or figure. Whoever admits the
possibility of Inseparable Association, can scarcely avoid thinking that
these are cases of it; and that we are unable to imagine any object but
as occupying space, or to imagine it removed without leaving that space
either vacant, or filled by something else. But we can conceive both a
beginning and an end to all physical existence. As a mere hypothesis,
the notion that matter cannot be annihilated arose early; but as a
settled belief, it is the tardy result of scientific enquiry. All that
is necessary for imagining matter annihilated is presented in our daily
experience. We see apparent annihilation whenever water dries up, or
fuel is consumed without a visible residuum. The fact could not offer
itself to our immediate perceptions in a more palpable shape, if the
annihilation were real. Having an exact type on which to frame the
conception of matter annihilated, the vulgar of all countries easily and
perfectly conceive Edition: current; Page: [289] it. Those to whom, if
to anybody, it is inconceivable, are philosophers and men of science,
who having formed their familiar conception of the universe on the
opposite theory, have acquired an inseparable association of their own,
which they cannot overcome. To them the vapour which has succeeded to
the water dried up by the sun, the gases which replace the fuel
transformed by combustion, have become irrevocably a part of their
conception of the entire phænomenon. But the ignorant, who never heard
of these things, are not in the least incommoded by the want of them;
and if they were not told the contrary, would live and die without
suspecting that the water, and the wood or bcoalb, were not destroyed.

All this is not denied by Sir W. Hamilton; but his answer to it is, that
if the universe were to perish it would still remain capable of
existing, which, it seems, amounts to the same thing. We conceive it as
having “virtually existed before it was created,” and as virtually
existing after it is destroyed. We cannot conceive that there was, at
the moment after creation, “a larger complement of existence in the
universe and its Author together, than there was the moment before in
the Deity himself alone.” Creation is to us merely the conversion of
power into outward existence; annihilation only “the retractation of an
outward energy into power.” So that potential existence is exactly the
same thing as actual existence; the difference is formal only. Not only
is power a real entity, but the power to create an universe is the
universe: all created things are but a part of its substance, and can be
reabsorbed into it. And this is presented to us, not as a recondite
ontological theory, forced upon philosophers as an escape from an
otherwise insuperable difficulty, but as a statement of what we all
think, and cannot but think, from the very constitution of our thinking
faculty. Is this the fact? Does any one, except Sir W. Hamilton, think
that in computing the sum total of existence, worlds which God might
have created but did not, count for exactly as much as they would if he
had really created them? There is a corollary from this doctrine which
also deserves attention. If the sum of potential and actual existence is
always the same, then with every increase of actual existence, there
must be a diminution of power: for if there was once the power without
the universe, and is now the same quantity of power and also the
universe, what our author nautically terms the “complement of
existence”[*] has been increased: which is contrary to the theory. By
every exercise, therefore, of creative power, God is less powerful: he
has less power now, by a whole universe, than before his power of
creating the universe had been transmuted into act; and were he to
“retract” the actual existence into potential, he would be more powerful
than he now Edition: current; Page: [290] is, by that exact amount. Is
this what all mankind think, and are under an original necessity of
thinking? Is this the mode in which, by the “law of the Conditioned,”[*]
every one of us is absolutely necessitated to construe the idea of
Creation? Sir W. Hamilton says it is.

By a desperate attempt to put an intelligible meaning into the theory,
somebody may interpret it to mean that before the universe existed in
fact, it existed as a thought in the Divine Mind; and that the idea of
an universe, complete in all its details, is equivalent in the
“complement of existence” to an actual universe. This is not, perhaps,
incapable of being maintained; but it affords no escape from the
difficulty. For, this idea in the Divine Mind—is the Divine Mind now
denuded of it? Has the Deity forgotten the universe, from the time when
the divine conception was reduced into act? If not, there are now both
the universe and the idea of the universe; that is, a double “complement
of existence” instead of a single.*

But were it ever so true that we are incapable of conceiving a
commencement of anything, and are necessitated to believe that whatever
now exists must have existed in the same or another shape through all
past time:—that Sir W. Hamilton should imagine this to be the law of
Cause and Effect, must be accounted one of the most singular
hallucinations to be found in the writings of any eminent thinker.
According to Sir W. Hamilton, when we say that everything must have a
cause, we mean that nothing begins to exist, but everything has always
existed. I ask any one, either philosopher or common man, whether he
does not mean the exact reverse; whether it is not because things do
begin to exist, that a cause must be supposed for their existence. The
very words in which the axiom of Causation is commonly stated, and which
our author, in the first words of his exposition, adopts, are, that
everything which begins to exist must have a cause. Is it possible that
this axiom can be grounded on the fact that we Edition: current; Page:
[291] never suppose anything to begin to exist? Does not he who takes
away a beginning of existence, take away all causation, and all need of
a cause? Sir W. Hamilton entirely mistakes what it is, which causation
is called in to explain. The Matter composing the universe, whatever
philosophical theory we hold concerning it, we know by experience to be
constant in quantity; never beginning or ending, only changing its
cformsc. But its forms have a beginning and ending: and it is its forms,
or rather its changes of form—the end of one form and beginning of
another—which alone we seek a cause for, and believe to have a cause. It
is events, that is to say, changes, not substances, that are subject to
the law of Causation. The question for the psychologist is not why we
believe that a substance, but why we believe that a change in the form
of a substance, must have a cause. Sir W. Hamilton, in a tardy defence
of his theory against objections,* is forced, in a sort of way, to admit
this, and virtually to acknowledge that all which we really consider as
caused, we consider as beginning to exist. Nothing is caused but events:
and it will hardly be said that we conceive an event as having never had
a beginning, but been in existence as an event just as much before it
happened as when it did happen. An event then being the only thing which
suggests the belief or the idea of having or requiring a cause, Sir W.
Hamilton may be charged with the scientific blunder which he imputes,
far less justly, to Brown: he “professes to explain the phænomenon of
causality, but previously to explanation, evacuates the phænomenon of
all that desiderates explanation.”†

Sir W. Hamilton was familiar with the teaching of the Aristotelian
schools concerning the four Causes—or rather the four meanings of the
word Cause, for synonymy and homonymy were, in their classifications,
very often confounded: 1, Materia. 2, Forma. 3, Efficiens. 4, Finis:
Efficiens being the only one of these which answers either to the
common, or to the modern philosophical notion of Cause. Sir W. Hamilton
confounds Materia with Efficiens; or rather ignores Efficiens
altogether, and imagines that when the rest of the world are speaking of
Efficiens, they mean Materia. It is the very thing which they
pre-eminently do not mean. Sir W. Hamilton may choose to call nothing
Existence except the permanent element in phænomena; but it is the
changeable element, and no other, which is referred to a cause, or which
could ever have given the notion of causation.

Sir W. Hamilton says that the total cause—that the “concurring or
co-efficient causes, in fact, constitute the effect.”‡ And again, “an
effect” is Edition: current; Page: [292] “nothing more than the sum or
complement of all the partial causes, the concurrence of which
constitutes its existence.”* “An effect is nothing but the actual union
of its constituent entities;” “causes always continue actually to exist
in their effects.”† Because the original matter continues to exist in
the matter transformed, the Efficiens which transformed it continues to
exist in the fact of the change! Of course he takes as his example a
case in which the material is the prominent thing, that of a salt,
compounded of an acid and an alkali.

Considering the salt as an effect, what are the concurrent causes,—the
co-efficients,—which constitute it what it is? There are, first, the
acid, with its affinity to the alkali; secondly, the alkali, with its
affinity to the acid; and thirdly, the translating force (perhaps the
human hand) which made their affinities available, by bringing the two
bodies within the sphere of mutual attraction. Each of these three
concurrents must be considered as a partial cause; for abstract any one,
and the effect is not produced.‡

Strange that even this first degree of analysis should not have opened
his eyes to the fact, that the moment he admits into causa efficiens
anything more than materia, his theory is at an end. For he will indeed
find in the salt, two of his three “co-efficients,” the acid and the
alkali, with their daffinityd; but where will he find in it “the
translating force, perhaps the human hand?” This essential “concause”
does not embarrass him at all; it costs him nothing to make away with it
altogether. “This last,” he says, “as a transitory condition and not
always the same, we shall throw out of account.”§ If we throw out of
account all that is transitory, we have no difficulty in proving that
all that is left is permanent. But the transitory conditions are as much
a part of the cause as the permanent conditions. Our author has just
before said that he takes the term causes “as synonymous for all without
which the effect would not be;” and if the effect is “the sum or
complement” of all the causes, the transitory as well as the permanent
elements must be found in it. To exclude all the transitory part of the
cause, is to exclude the whole cause, except the materials. Suppose the
effect to be St. Paul’s: in assigning its causes, the will of the
government, the mind of the architect, and the labour of the builders,
are all cast out, for they are all transitory, and only the stones and
mortar remain.¶

Edition: current; Page: [293]
It will have been remarked, that in propounding this theory of the
belief in Causation, Sir W. Hamilton gives up Causation as a necessary
law of the universe; maintaining that a fact is not to be supposed
impossible to Nature because we are impotent to conceive it, and indeed
regarding the free acts of an intelligent being as an exception to the
universality of the law of Cause and Effect. But while in one place he
pays this homage to his own principles, in another he entirely takes
leave of them, and glides back into the beaten path of the school of
thought which, erecting human capacities of conception into the measure
of the universe, maintains that causes must be, because we are incapable
of conceiving phænomena without them. After describing the process of
ascending from cause to cause, quite gratuitously, as a progress towards
unity, Sir W. Hamilton says,

Philosophy thus, as the knowledge of effects in their causes,
necessarily tends, not towards a plurality of ultimate or first causes,
but towards one alone. This first cause, the Creator, it can indeed
never reach, as an object of immediate knowledge; but, as the
convergence towards unity in the ascending series is manifest in so far
as that series is within our view [here he confounds convergence from
many to few with convergence towards one] and as it is even impossible
for the mind to suppose the convergence not continuous and complete, it
follows, unless all analogy be rejected—unless our intelligence be
declared a lie, that we must, philosophically, believe in that ultimate
or primary unity which, in our present existence, we are not destined in
itself to apprehend.*

A deliverance more radically at variance with the author’s own canons,
could scarcely have been made. For, first, one of the principal of them
is, that our inability to conceive a thing as possible, is no argument
whatever against its being true. In the second place, the alleged
impossibility of Edition: current; Page: [294] conceiving any of the
phænomena of the universe to be uncaused, applies equally, on his own
showing, to the First Cause itself. For, though he here talks only of
one inconceivability, we are, if his theory be correct, under the
pressure of two counter-inconceivabilities—being equally unable to
conceive an uncaused beginning, or an infinite regress from effect to
cause: it is equally inconceivable to us that there should, as that
there should not, be a First Cause. In this difficulty, by what right
does he (I mean merely as a philosopher, and on his own principles)
select one of the rival inconceivabilities as the real interpreter of
Nature, in preference to the other? And, having selected it, why apply
it up to a certain point, and there stop? Why must all the phænomena of
experience be referred to a single Cause, because we cannot conceive
anything uncaused, and that single Cause be proclaimed uncaused,
notwithstanding the same impossibility? An argument by Sir W. Hamilton
would not be complete unless it wound up with his tiresome final appeal,
“unless our intelligence be declared a lie.” It is time to understand,
once for all, what this means. Does it mean that if our intelligence
cannot conceive one thing apart from another, the one thing cannot exist
without the other? If yes, what becomes of the Philosophy of the
Conditioned? If no, what becomes of the present argument?*

Sir W. Hamilton makes a far better figure when arguing against other
theories of Causation, than when maintaining his own. He is usually
acute in finding the weak points in other people’s philosophies; and he
brings this talent into play, effectively enough, on the present
subject. He is not, indeed, at all successful in combating the doctrine
(substantially that of Hume and Brown) that it is experience which
proves the fact of causation, Edition: current; Page: [295] and
association which generates the idea: for against this he only has to
say, that experience and association cannot account for necessity. Now,
as to real necessity, we do not know that it exists in the case. Sir W.
Hamilton himself is of opinion that it does not, and that there are
phænomena (the volitions of rational intelligences) which do not depend
on causes. And as for the feeling of necessity, or what is termed a
necessity of thought, it is (as I have already observed),[*] of all
mental phænomena positively the one which an inseparable association is
the most evidently competent to generate. I cannot, therefore, attribute
any value to Sir W. Hamilton’s discussion of this point; but in his
refutation of some of the theories of causation which have originated in
his own hemisphere of the intellectual world, he is very felicitous.
Take, for example, the doctrine of Wolf and the Leibnitzians (though not
of Leibnitz), which “attempts to establish the principle of Causality
upon the principle of Contradiction.”[†] “Listen,” says our author,

to the pretended demonstration:—Whatever is produced without a cause, is
produced by nothing; in other words, has nothing for its cause. But
nothing can no more be a cause than it can be something. The same
intuition which makes us aware, that nothing is not something, shows us
that everything must have a real cause of its existence.—To this it is
sufficient to say, that the existence of causes being the point in
question, the existence of causes must not be taken for granted, in the
very reasoning which attempts to prove their reality. In excluding
causes, we exclude all causes; and consequently we exclude Nothing,
considered as a cause; it is not, therefore, allowable, contrary to that
exclusion, to suppose Nothing as a cause, and then from the absurdity of
that supposition to infer the absurdity of the exclusion itself. If
everything must have a cause, it follows that, upon the exclusion of
other causes, we must accept of Nothing as a cause. But it is the very
point at issue, whether everything must have a cause or not; and
therefore it violates the first principles of reasoning to take this
quæsitum itself as granted. This opinion, [adds our author,] is now
universally abandoned.*

But there is another theory of Causation which is not abandoned, but has
formed for some time past the stronghold of the Intuitive school. This
is, that we acquire both our notion of Causation, and our belief in it,
from an internal consciousness of power exerted by ourselves, in our
voluntary actions: that is, in the motions of our bodies, for our will
has no other direct action on the outward world. This relation of the
act of will to the bodily movement, it is maintained, is “not a simple
relation of succession. The will is not for us a pure act without
efficiency; it is a productive energy; so that in volition there is
given to us the notion of cause; and this notion we subsequently
transport,—project out from our internal activities, into the changes of
the external world.”

Edition: current; Page: [296]
To this doctrine Sir W. Hamilton gives the following conclusive answer.

This reasoning, in so far as regards the mere empirical fact of our
consciousness of causality, in the relation of our will as moving and of
our limbs as moved, is refuted by the consideration, that between the
overt fact of corporeal movement of which we are cognisant, and the
internal act of mental determination of which we are also cognisant,
there intervenes a numerous series of intermediate agencies of which we
have no knowledge; and consequently, that we can have no consciousness
of any causal connexion between the extreme links of this chain,—the
volition to move and the limb moving, as this hypothesis asserts. No one
is immediately conscious, for example, of moving his arm through his
volition. Previously to this ultimate movement, muscles, nerves, a
multitude of solid and fluid parts must be set in motion by the will,
but of this motion we know, from consciousness, actually nothing. A
person struck with paralysis is conscious of no inability in his limb,
to fulfil the determination of his will; and it is only after having
willed, and finding that his limbs do not obey his volition, that he
learns by this experience, that the external movement does not follow
the internal act. But as the paralytic learns after the volition that
his limbs do not obey his mind; so it is only after the volition that
the man in health learns that his limbs do obey the mandates of his
will.*

With this reasoning, borrowed as our author admits from Hume, I entirely
agree; and I wonder that it did not prove to Sir W. Hamilton how little
the objection to a doctrine, that it is opposed to our natural beliefs,
deserves the exaggerated value he sets upon it; for if there is a
natural belief belonging to us, I should suppose it to be, that we are
directly conscious of ability to move our limbs. It is, nevertheless,
our author’s opinion that the belief is groundless, and that we learn
even a fact so closely connected with us, in the way in which any
bystander learns it; by outward observation.†

Edition: current; Page: [297]
Mr. Mansel, who agrees with Sir W. Hamilton in so many of his opinions,
separates from him here, and adopts a modified form of the Volitional
Theory. He acknowledges the validity of Hume’s and Sir W. Hamilton’s
argument, and does not derive the idea of Power or Causation from mind
acting upon body—from my will producing my bodily motions—but from
myself producing my will. “In every act of volition, I am fully
conscious that it is in my power to form the resolution or to abstain;
and this constitutes the presentative consciousness of free will and of
power.”* And the sole notion we have of causation in the outward
universe, as anything more than invariable antecedence and consequence,
“is that of a relation between two objects, similar to that which exists
between ourselves and our volitions.”† Thus interpreted, continues Mr.
Mansel, it is

an interesting illustration of the universal tendency of men to
identify, as far as may be, other agents with themselves, even when the
identification tends to the destruction of all clear
thinking:—furnishing a psychological explanation of a form of speech
which has prevailed and will continue to prevail among all people in all
times, but not properly to be called a necessary truth, nor capable of
any scientific application; inasmuch as, in any such application, it may
be true or false, without our being able to determine which, as the
object of which it treats never comes within the reach of our faculties.
What is meant by power in a fire to melt wax? How and when is it
exerted, and in what manner does it come under our cognizance? Supposing
such power to be suspended by an act of Omnipotence, the Supreme Being
at the same time producing the succession of phænomena by the immediate
interposition of his own will,—could we in any way detect the change? Or
suppose the course of nature to be governed by a pre-established
harmony, which ordained that at a certain moment fire and wax should be
in the neighbourhood of each other, that, at the same moment, fire by
itself should burn, and wax by its own laws should melt, neither
affecting the other,—would not all the perceptible phænomena be
precisely the same as at present? These suppositions may be extravagant,
though they are supported by some of the most eminent names in
philosophy; but the mere possibility of making them shows that the rival
hypothesis is not a necessary truth; the various principles being
opposed, only like the vortices of Descartes and the gravitation of
Newton, as more or less plausible methods of accounting for the same
physical phænomena.‡

Mr. Mansel recognises the possibility that in some other portion of the
universe, phænomena may succeed one another at random, without laws of
causation, or by laws which are continually changing. We cannot, he
says, Edition: current; Page: [298] fconceivef this state of things, but
we can gsupposeg it; and this very inability to conceive a phænomenon as
taking place without a cause—in other words, this subjective necessity
of the law of cause and effect—results, in his opinion, merely from the
conditions of our experience. If we were asked, why a physical change
must have a cause.

we should probably reply—Because matter cannot change of itself. But why
cannot we think of matter as changing itself? Because power, and the
origination of change, or self-determination, have never been given to
us, save in one form, that of the actions of the conscious self. What I
am to conceive as taking place, I must conceive as taking place in the
only manner of taking place in which it has ever been presented to me.
[Here Mr. Mansel exaggerates one of the consequences of the law of
Inseparable Association, through his having reached the consequence only
empirically, and not analysed it by hmeans ofh the law.] This reduces
the law of Causality, in one sense indeed to an empirical principle, but
to an empirical principle of a very peculiar character; one namely, in
which it is psychologically impossible that experience should testify in
more than one way. Such principles, however empirical in their origin,
are co-extensive in their application with the whole domain of thought.*

And further on,

To call the Principle of Causality as thus explained a Law of Thought,
would be incorrect. We cannot think the contrary, not because the laws
of thought forbid us, but because the material for thought is wanting.
Thought is subject to two different modes of restriction: firstly, from
its own laws, by which it is restricted as to its form; and secondly,
from the laws of intuition, by which it is restricted as to its matter.
The restriction, in the present instance, is of the latter kind. We
cannot conceive a course of nature without uniform succession, as we
cannot conceive a being who sees without eyes or hears without ears;
because we cannot, under existing circumstances, experience the
necessary intuition. But such things may, notwithstanding, exist; and
under other circumstances, they might become objects of possible
conception, the laws of the process of conception remaining unaltered.†

In this exposition, which, I do not hesitate to say, contains more sound
philosophy than is to be found on the same subject in all Sir W.
Hamilton’s writings, I must, nevertheless, take exception to the main
doctrine—that the type on which we frame our notion of Power or
Causation in general, is the power, not of our volitions over matter,
but of our Self over our volitions. In common with one half of the
psychological world, I am wholly ignorant of my possessing any such
power. I can indeed influence my own volitions, but only as other people
can influence my volitions, by the employment of appropriate means.
Direct power over my volitions I am Edition: current; Page: [299]
conscious of none. However possible it may be that I possess this power
without knowing it, a fact of consciousness contestable and contested
cannot well be the source and prototype of an idea common to all
mankind. I agree, however, with Mr. Mansel[*] in the opinion which he
shares with Comte, James Mill, and many others who see nothing in
causation but invariable antecedence; that we naturally, and
unavoidably, form our first conception of all the agencies in the
universe from the analogy of human volitions. The obvious reason is,
that nearly everything which is interesting to us, comes, in our
earliest infancy, either from our own voluntary motions, or (a
consideration too much neglected) from the voluntary motions of others;
and, among the few sequences of phænomena which at that time fall within
the scope of our perceptions, scarcely any others afford us the
spectacle of an apparently absolute commencement; of one thing setting
others in motion without being in motion itself—or originating changes
in other things, while not itself undergoing any visible change. But as
I do not believe, any more than Sir W. Hamilton or Mr. Mansel, that the
state of mind called volition carries with it a prophetic anticipation,
which can inform us prior to experience that volition will be followed
by an effect; I conceive that, no more in this than in any other case of
causation, have we evidence of anything more than what experience
informs us of: and it informs us of nothing except immediate,
invariable, and unconditional sequence.

It is allowed on all hands that part, at least, of our idea of power, is
the expectation we feel, that when the cause exists, we shall perceive
the effect; but Hume himself admits that in the common notion of power
there is an additional element, an animal nisus, as he calls it,[†]
which would be more properly termed a conception of effort. That this
idea of effort enters into our notion of Power, is to my mind one of the
strongest proofs that this notion is not derived from the relation of
ourselves to our volitions, but from that of our volitions to our
actions. The idea of Effort is essentially a notion derived from the
action of our muscles, or from that combined with affections of our
brain and nerves. Every one of our muscular movements has to contend
against resistance, either that of an outward object, or the mere
friction and weight of the moving organ; every voluntary motion is
consequently attended by the muscular sensation of resistance, and if
sufficiently prolonged, by the additional muscular sensation of fatigue.
Effort, considered as an accompaniment of action upon the outward world,
means nothing, to us, but those muscular sensations. Since we experience
Edition: current; Page: [300] them whenever we voluntarily move an
object, we by a mere act of natural generalization, the unconscious
result of association, on beholding the same object moved by the wind or
by any other agent, conceive the wind as overcoming the same obstacle,
and figure it to ourselves as putting forth the same effort. Children
and savages sincerely mistake it for a conscious effort. We outgrow that
belief; but it is not conformable to the mode of action of the human
intellect that it should pass uno saltu, from a complete assimilation of
the two phænomena, to conceiving them as totally different. The “natural
tendency of men” so justly characterized by Mr. Mansel, “to identify, as
far as may be, other agents with themselves,”[*] does not admit itself
baffled and give up the attempt after the first failure. The consequents
being the same, when the mind is no longer able to suppose an exact
parity in the antecedents, it still thinks that there must be something
in common between them: and when obliged to admit that there is volition
in one case, and a mere unconscious object in the other, it interposes
between the antecedent and the consequent an abstract entity, to express
what is supposed common to the animate and the inanimate agency—through
which they both work, and in the absence of which nothing would be
effected. This purely subjective notion, the product of generalization
and abstraction acting on the real feeling of muscular or nervous
effort, is Power. And this, I conceive, is the psychological rationale
of Comte’s great historical generalization, that the metaphysical
conception (as he terms it) of the universe succeeds by a natural law to
the Fetish conception, and becomes the agent by which the Fetish theory
is transformed into Polytheism, this into Monotheism, and Monotheism
itself is frittered away into energies and attributes of Nature, and
other subordinate abstractions.[†]

Thus much respecting Causation as a conception of the mind. The law of
Cause and Effect in its objective aspect, as the fundamental principle
in the order of the universe, the basis of most of our knowledge, and
the guide of all our action, has been so fully treated in its numerous
bearings in my System of Logic, that it is needless for me to speak
further of it here.[‡]

Edition: current; Page: [301]


CHAPTER XVII: The Doctrine of Concepts, or General Notions

we now arrive at the questions which form the transition from Psychology
to Logic—from the analysis and laws of the mental operations, to the
theory of the ascertainment of objective truth: the natural link between
the two being the theory of the particular mental operations whereby
truth is ascertained or authenticated. According to the common
classification, from which Sir W. Hamilton does not deviate, these
operations are three: Conception, or the formation of General Notions;
Judgment; and Reasoning. We begin with the first.

On this subject two questions present themselves: first, whether there
are such things as General Notions, and secondly, what they are. If
there are General Notions, they must be the notions which are expressed
by general terms; and concerning general terms, all who have the most
elementary knowledge of the history of metaphysics are aware that there
are, or once were, three different opinions.

The first is that of the Realists, who maintained that General Names are
the names of General Things. Besides individual things, they recognised
another kind of Things, not individual, which they technically called
Second Substances, or Universals a parte rei. Over and above all
individual men and women, there was an entity called Man—Man in general,
which inhered in the individual men and women, and communicated to them
its essence. These Universal Substances they considered to be a much
more dignified kind of beings than individual substances, and the only
ones the cognizance of which deserved the names of Science and
Knowledge. Individual existences were fleeting and perishable, but the
beings called Genera and Species were immortal and unchangeable.

This, the most prevalent philosophical doctrine of the middle ages, is
now universally abandoned, but remains a fact of great significance in
the history of philosophy; being one of the most striking examples of
the tendency of the human mind to infer difference of things from
difference of names,—to suppose that every different class of names
implied a corresponding class of real entities to be denoted by them.
Having two such Edition: current; Page: [302] different names as “man”
and “Socrates,” these inquirers thought it quite out of the question
that man should only be a name for Socrates, and others like him,
regarded in a particular light. Man, being a name common to many, must
be the name of a substance common to many, and in mystic union with the
individual substances, Socrates and the rest.

In the later middle ages there grew up a rival school of metaphysicians,
termed Nominalists, who repudiating Universal Substances, held that
there is nothing general except names. A name, they said, is general, if
it is applied in the same acceptation to a plurality of things; but
every one of the things is individual. The dispute between these two
sects of philosophers was very bitter, and assumed the character of a
religious quarrel: authority, too, interfered in it, and as usual on the
wrong side. The Realist theory was represented as the orthodox doctrine,
and belief in it was imposed as a religious duty. It could not, however,
permanently resist philosophical criticism, and it perished. But it did
not leave Nominalism in possession of the field. A third doctrine arose,
which endeavoured to steer between the two. According to this, which is
known by the name of Conceptualism, generality is not an attribute
solely of names, but also of thoughts. External objects indeed are all
individual, but to every general name corresponds a General Notion, or
Conception, called by Locke[*] and others an Abstract Idea. General
Names are the names of these Abstract Ideas.

Realism being no longer extant, nor likely to be revived, the contest at
present is between Nominalism and Conceptualism; each of which counts
illustrious names among its modern adherents. Sir W. Hamilton professes
allegiance to both, affirming “that the opposing parties are really at
one.”* But his general mode of thought, and habitual phraseology, are
purely Conceptualist. This is already apparent in the passage I shall
first quote, which contains his statement of the fact to be explained.
It is preceded by a remark on Abstraction which is perfectly just, and
throws great light on the processes of human thought. Abstraction, he
says, is simply the concentration of our attention on a particular
object, or a particular quality of an object, and diversion of it from
everything else. There may be abstraction, therefore, without
generalization. “The notion of the figure of the desk before me is an
abstract idea,—an idea that makes part of the total notion of that body,
and on which I have concentrated my attention, in order to consider it
exclusively. This idea is abstract, but it is at the same time
individual; it represents the figure of this particular desk, and not
the figure of any other body.”†

Edition: current; Page: [303]
There are, therefore, “individual abstract notions;” but there are also
“Abstract General Notions.” These are formed

when, comparing a number of objects, we seize on their resemblances;
when we concentrate our attention on these points of similarity, thus
abstracting the mind from a consideration of their differences; and when
we give a name to our notion of that circumstance in which they all
agree. The general notion is thus one which makes us know a quality,
property, power, notion, relation; in short, any point of view under
which we recognise a plurality of objects as a unity. It makes us aware
of a quality, a point of view, common to many things. It is a notion of
resemblance; hence the reason why general names or terms, the signs of
general notions, have been called terms of resemblance (termini
similitudinis). In this process of generalization, we do not stop short
at a first generalization. By a first generalization we have obtained a
number of classes of resembling individuals. But these classes we can
compare together, observe their similarities, abstract from their
differences, and bestow on their common circumstance a common name. On
these second classes we can again perform the same operation, and thus
ascending the scale of general notions, throwing out of view always a
greater number of differences, and seizing always on fewer similarities
in the formation of our classes, we arrive at length at the limit of our
ascent in the notion of being or existence. Thus placed on the summit of
the scale of classes, we descend by a process the reverse of that by
which we have ascended; we divide and subdivide the classes, by
introducing always more and more characters, and laying always fewer
differences aside; the notions become more and more composite, until we
at length arrive at the individual.

I may here notice that there is a twofold quantity to be considered in
notions. It is evident that, in proportion as the class is high, it
will, in the first place, contain under it a greater number of classes,
and in the second, will include the smallest complement of attributes.
Thus being or existence contains under it every class; and yet when we
say that a thing exists, we say the very least of it that is possible.
On the other hand, an individual, though it contain nothing but itself,
involves the largest amount of predication. For example, when I say—this
is Richard, I not only affirm of the subject every class from existence
down to man, but likewise a number of circumstances proper to Richard as
an individual. Now, the former of these quantities, the external, is
called the Extension of a notion; the latter, the internal quantity, is
called its Comprehension or Intension. . . . The internal and external
quantities are in the inverse ratio of each other. The greater the
extension, the less the comprehension; the greater the comprehension,
the less the extension.*

As a popular account of Classification, for learners, to be followed by
a more scientific exposition, this fully answers its purpose; but it is
expressed in the common language of Conceptualists, and we should
naturally conclude from it that the author was a Conceptualist. He
however asserts the doctrine of the Nominalists, that there are no
general notions, and that the notion suggested by a general name is
always singular or individual, to be “not only true but self-evident.”
And he quotes as “irrefragable”† the Edition: current; Page: [304]
argument of Berkeley, directed against the very possibility of Abstract
Ideas. The passage from Berkeley is in the Introduction to his
Principles of Human Knowledge, and is as follows:

It is agreed, on all hands, that the qualities or modes of things, do
never really exist each of them apart by itself, and separated from all
others, but are mixed, as it were, and blended together, several in the
same object. But, we are told, the mind, being able to consider each
quality singly, or abstracted from those other qualities with which it
is united, does by that means frame to itself abstract ideas. For
example, there is perceived by sight an object extended, coloured, and
moved; this mixed or compound idea the mind resolving into its simple
constituent parts, and viewing each by itself, exclusive of the rest,
does frame the abstract ideas of extension, colour, and motion. Not that
it is possible for colour or motion to exist without extension; but only
that the mind can frame to itself by abstraction the idea of colour
exclusive of extension, and of motion exclusive of both colour and
extension.

Again, the mind having observed that in the particular extensions
perceived by sense, there is something common and alike in all, and some
other things peculiar, as this or that figure or magnitude, which
distinguish them one from another; it considers apart or singles out by
itself that which is common, making thereof a most abstract idea of
extension, which is neither line, surface, nor solid, nor has any figure
or magnitude, but is an idea entirely prescinded from all these. So,
likewise, the mind, by leaving out of the particular colours perceived
by sense, that which distinguishes them one from another, and retaining
that only which is common to all, makes an idea of colour in abstract,
which is neither red, nor blue, nor white, nor any other determinate
colour. And, in like manner, by considering motion abstractedly not only
from the body moved, but likewise from the figure it describes, and all
particular directions and velocities, the abstract idea of motion is
framed; which equally corresponds to all particular motions whatever
that may be perceived by sense.

Whether others have this wonderful faculty of abstracting their ideas,
they best can tell: for myself I find, indeed, I have a faculty of
imagining, or representing to myself the ideas of those particular
things I have perceived, and of variously compounding and dividing them.
I can imagine a man with two heads, or the upper part of a man joined to
the body of a horse. I can consider the hand, the eye, the nose, each by
itself abstracted or separated from the rest of the body. But then
whatever hand or eye I imagine, it must have some particular shape and
colour. Likewise the idea of man that I frame to myself, must be either
of a white, or a black, or a tawny, a straight, or a crooked, a tall, or
a low, or a middle-sized man. I cannot by any effort of thought conceive
the abstract idea above described. And it is equally impossible for me
to form the abstract idea of motion distinct from the body moving, and
which is neither swift nor slow, curvilinear nor rectilinear; and the
like may be said of all other abstract general ideas whatsoever. To be
plain, I am myself able to abstract in one sense, as when I consider
some particular parts or qualities separated from others, with which
though they are united in some object, yet it is possible they may
really exist without them. But I deny that I can abstract one from
another, or conceive separately, those qualities which it is impossible
should exist so separated; or that I can frame a general notion by
abstracting from particulars in the manner aforesaid. Which two last are
the proper acceptations of abstraction. Edition: current; Page: [305]
And there are grounds to think most men will acknowledge themselves to
be in my case.*

It is evident, indeed, that the existence of Abstract Ideas—the
conception of the class-qualities by themselves, and not as embodied in
an individual—is effectually precluded by the law of Inseparable
Association.

In what manner Sir W. Hamilton manages to combine two theories, which in
words are, and in substance have always been believed to be, directly
contradictory of one another, we learn only from his Lectures on Logic.
The hearers of those on Metaphysics, unless the Professor supplied oral
elucidations which do not appear in the text, must have been
considerably puzzled by finding the task of reconciling the two
doctrines thrown entirely on themselves. In the Lectures on Logic,
however, an attempt is made to perform it for them. It is there stated,
that the General Notion, which Sir W. Hamilton terms a Concept, and
which is the notion we form of some “point of similarity”[*] between
individual objects,

is not cognizable in itself, that is, it affords no absolute or
irrespective object of Knowledge, but can only be realized in
consciousness by applying it as a term of relation, to one or more of
the objects, which agree in the point or points of resemblance which it
expresses. . . . The moment we attempt to represent to ourselves any of
these concepts, any of these abstract generalities, as absolute objects,
by themselves, and out of relation to any concrete or individual
realities, their relative nature at once reappears; for we find it
altogether impossible to represent any of the qualities expressed by a
concept, except as attached to some individual and determinate object,
and their whole generality consists in this, that though we must realize
them in thought under some singular of the class, we may do it under
any. Thus, for example, we cannot actually represent the bundle of
attributes contained in the concept man as an absolute object by itself,
and apart from all that reduces it from a general cognition to an
individual representation. We cannot figure in imagination any object
adequate to the general notion or term man; for the man to be here
imagined must be neither tall nor short, neither fat nor lean, neither
black nor white, neither man nor woman, neither young nor old, but all
and yet none of these at once. The relativity of our concepts is thus
shown in the contradiction and absurdity of the opposite hypothesis.†

This is sound doctrine, but it is pure Nominalism; as the passage first
quoted from our author was pure Conceptualism. It is very necessary that
I should quote the additional elucidations given in the succeeding
Lecture. A Concept or (General) Notion, he there says, is in this
distinguished from a “Presentation of Perception, or Representation of
Phantasy,” that

Edition: current; Page: [306]
our knowledge through either of the latter is a direct, immediate,
irrespective, determinate, individual, and adequate cognition; that is,
a singular or individual object is known in itself, by itself, through
all its attributes, and without reference to aught but itself. A
concept, on the contrary, is an indirect, mediate, indeterminate, and
partial cognition of any one of a number of objects, but not an actual
representation either of them all, or of the whole attributes of any one
object. . . .*

Formed by comparison, [concepts] express only a relation. They cannot,
therefore, be held up as an absolute object to consciousness—they cannot
be represented as universals, in imagination. They can only be thought
of in relation to some one of the individual objects they classify, and
when viewed in relation to it, they can be represented in imagination;
but then, as actually represented, they no longer constitute general
attributions, they fall back into mere special determinations of the
individual object in which they are represented. Thus it is, that the
generality or universality of concepts is potential, not actual. They
are only generals, inasmuch as they may be applied to any of the various
objects they contain; but while they cannot be actually elicited into
consciousness, except in application to some one or other of these, so
they cannot be so applied without losing, pro tanto, their universality.
Take, for example, the concept horse. In so far as by horse we merely
think of the word, that is, of the combination formed by the letters h,
o, r, s, e,—this is not a concept at all, as it is a mere representation
of certain individual objects. This I only state and eliminate, in order
that no possible ambiguity should be allowed to lurk. By horse, then,
meaning not merely a representation of the word, but a concept relative
to certain objects classed under it,—the concept horse, I say, cannot,
if it remain a concept, that is, a universal attribution, be represented
in imagination; but, except it be represented in imagination, it cannot
be applied to any object, and, except it be so applied, it cannot be
realized in thought at all. You may try to escape the horns of the
dilemma, but you cannot. You cannot realize in thought an absolute or
irrespective concept, corresponding in universality to the application
of the word; for the supposition of this involves numerous
contradictions. An existent horse is not a relation, but an extended
object possessed of a determinate figure, colour, size, &c.; horse, in
general, cannot, therefore, be represented, except by an image of
something extended, and of a determinate figure, colour, size, &c. Here
now emerges the contradiction. If, on the one hand, you do not represent
something extended and of a determinate figure, colour, and size, ayou
have no representation of any horse. There is, therefore, in this
alternative, nothing which can be called the actual concept or image of
a horse at all. If, on the other hand, you do represent something
extended, and of a determinate figure, colour, and size,a then you have,
indeed, the image of an individual horse, but not a universal concept
coadequate with horse in general. For how is it possible to have an
actual representation of a figure, which is not a determinate figure?
but if of a determinate figure, it must be that of some one of the many
different figures under which horses appear; but then, if it be only of
one of these, it cannot be the general concept of the others, which it
does not represent. In like manner, how is it possible to have the
actual representation of a thing coloured, which is not the
representation of a determinate colour, that is, either white, or black,
or grey, or brown, &c.? but if it be any one of these, it can only
represent a horse of this or that particular colour, Edition: current;
Page: [307] and cannot be the general concept of horses of every colour.
The same result is given by the other attributes; and what I originally
stated is thus manifest—that concepts have only a potential, not an
actual, universality, that is, they are only universal, inasmuch as they
may be applied to any of a certain class of objects, but as actually
applied, they are no longer general attributions, but only special
attributes.*

But if, as our author says, concepts are “incapable of being realized in
thought at all,” except as representations of individual objects, how
are they, even potentially, universal? Being mere mental creations, they
are nothing except what they can be thought as being; and they cannot be
thought as being universal, but only as being part of the thought of an
individual object, though the individual object needs not always be the
same. This is not a potential universality, though it is an universal
potentiality. If, then, the Nominalists are thus completely right, how
can it be that the Conceptualists are not wrong?

Our author thinks that the apparent difference between them is a mere
case of verbal ambiguity; arising from the “employment of the same terms
to express the representations of Imagination, and the notions or
concepts of the Understanding.” “A relation,” he says,

cannot be represented in imagination. The two terms,—the two relative
objects, can be severally imaged in the sensible phantasy, but not the
relation itself. This is the object of the Comparative Faculty, or of
Intelligence Proper. To objects so different as the images of sense and
the unpicturable notions of intelligence, different names ought to be
given.†

In Germany the question of nominalism and conceptualism has not been
agitated, and why? Simply because the German language supplies terms by
which concepts (or notions of thought proper) have been
contradistinguished from the presentations and representations of the
subsidiary faculties.‡

We are therefore to understand that although Imagination cannot figure
to itself anything general or universal, Thought Proper, or the
Comparative Faculty, or the Understanding, can. But I do not believe
that Berkeley, whose argument our author declares “irrefragable,” or any
other of the great Nominalist thinkers whom he enumerates, would have
accepted this distinction. They would, I apprehend, have denied that the
attributes included in the so-called General Notion can be bthoughtb
separately, any more than they can be imaged separately. But why do I
talk of Berkeley? Sir W. Hamilton has himself negatived the distinction
in the very passage Edition: current; Page: [308] just quoted, when he
says, “the concept horse cannot, if it remain a concept, that is, a
universal attribution, be represented in imagination; but, except it be
represented in imagination, it cannot be applied to any object, and
except it be so applied, it cannot be realized in thought.” The simple
question is, Can the attributes of horse as a class be objects of
thought, except as part of a representation of some individual horse? If
the Concept cannot exist in the mind except enveloped in the
miscellaneous attributes of an individual—which is the truth, and fully
recognised as such in the passages quoted from Sir W. Hamilton,—then it
can no more be thought separately by the intellect than depicted
separately in the imagination.

This notion of a Concept as something which can be thought, but “cannot
in itself be depicted to sense or imagination,”* is supported, as we
saw, by calling it a relation. “As the result of a comparison,” a
concept “necessarily expresses a relation:”† and “a relation cannot be
represented in imagination.”[*] If a concept is a relation, what
relation is it, and between what? “As the result of a comparison,” it
must be a relation of resemblance among the things compared. I might
observe that a concept, which is defined by our author himself “a bundle
of attributes,”[†] does not signify the mere fact of resemblance between
objects; it signifies our mental representation of that in which they
resemble; of the “common circumstance”[‡] which Sir W. Hamilton spoke of
in his exposition of Classification. The attributes are not the
relation, they are the fundamentum relationis. This objection, however,
I can afford to wave. However inappropriate the expression, let us admit
that a concept is a relation. But if a relation cannot be represented in
imagination, our author has just said that “the two terms, the two
relative objects,”[§] can. The relation, according to him, though it
cannot be imagined, can be thought. But can a relation be thought
without thinking the related objects between which it exists? Assuredly,
no: and this impossibility can the less be denied by Sir W. Hamilton, as
it is the basis on which he founds his theory of Consciousness—of the
direct apprehension of the Ego and the Non-ego. Consequently, when we
think a relation, we must think it as existing between some particular
objects which we think along with it: and a Concept, even if it be the
apprehending of a relation, can only be thought as individual, not as
general.

Edition: current; Page: [309]
The true theory of Concepts needs not, I think, be sought farther off
than in our author’s own account of their origin. “In the formation,” he
says,

of a concept or notion, the process may be analysed into four momenta.
In the first place, we must have a plurality of objects presented or
represented by the subsidiary faculties. These faculties must furnish
the rude material for elaboration. In the second place, the objects thus
applied are, by an act of the Understanding, compared together, and
their several qualities judged to be similar or dissimilar. In the third
place, an act of volition, called Attention, concentrates consciousness
on the qualities thus recognised as similar; and that concentration, by
attention, on them, involves an abstraction of consciousness from those
which have been recognised and thrown aside as dissimilar; for the power
of consciousness is limited, and it is clear or vivid precisely in
proportion to the simplicity or oneness of the object. Attention and
Abstraction are the two poles of the same act of thought: they are like
the opposite scales in a balance, the one must go up as the other goes
down. In the fourth place, the qualities, which by comparison are judged
similar, and by attention are constituted into an exclusive object of
thought,—these are already, by this process, identified in
consciousness; for they are only judged similar, inasmuch as they
produce in us indiscernible effects. Their synthesis in consciousness
may, however, for precision’s sake, be stated as a fourth step in the
process. But it must be remembered, that at least the three latter steps
are not, in reality, distinct and independent acts, but are only so
distinguished and stated, in order to enable us to comprehend and speak
about the indivisible operation in the different aspects in which we may
consider it.*

Let me remark, in passing, the fresh crecognitionc in the last sentence,
of an important principle, already several times adverted to, in the
theory of Naming.

The formation, therefore, of a Concept, does not consist in separating
the attributes which are said to compose it, from all other attributes
of the same object, and enabling us to conceive those attributes,
disjoined from any others. We neither conceive them, nor think them, nor
cognise them in any way, as a thing apart, but solely as forming, in
combination with numerous other attributes, the idea of an individual
object. But, though thinking them only as part of a larger
agglomeration, we have the power of fixing our attention on them, to the
neglect of the other attributes with which we think them combined. While
the concentration of attention actually lasts, if it is sufficiently
intense, we may be temporarily unconscious of any of the other
attributes, and may really, for a brief interval, have nothing present
to our mind but the attributes constituent of the concept. In general,
however, the attention is not so completely exclusive as this; it leaves
room in consciousness for other elements of the concrete idea: though of
these the consciousness is faint, in proportion to the energy of the
concentrative effort; and the moment the attention relaxes, if the same
concrete idea continues to be contemplated, its other constituents
Edition: current; Page: [310] come out into consciousness. General
concepts, therefore, we have, properly speaking, none; we have only
complex ideas of objects in the concrete: but we are able to attend
exclusively to certain parts of the concrete idea: and by that exclusive
attention, we enable those parts to determine exclusively the course of
our thoughts as subsequently called up by association; and are in a
condition to carry on a train of meditation or reasoning relating to
those parts only, exactly as if we were able to conceive them separately
from the rest.

What principally enables us to do this is the employment of signs, and
particularly the most efficient and familiar kind of signs, viz. Names.
This is a point which Sir W. Hamilton puts well and strongly, and there
are many reasons for stating it in his own language.

The concept thus formed by an abstraction of the resembling from the
nonresembling qualities of objects, would again fall back into the
confusion and infinitude from which it has been called out, were it not
rendered permanent for consciousness, by being fixed and ratified in a
verbal sign. Considered in general, thought and language are
reciprocally dependent; each bears all the imperfections and perfections
of the other; but without language there could be no knowledge realized
of the essential properties of things, and of the connexion of their
accidental states.*

The rationale of this is, that when we wish to be able to think of
objects in respect of certain of their attributes—to recall no objects
but such as are invested with those attributes, and to recall them with
our attention directed to those attributes exclusively—we effect this by
giving to that combination of attributes, or to the class of objects
which possess them, a specific Name. We create an artificial association
between those attributes and a certain combination of articulate sounds,
which guarantees to us that when we hear the sound, or see the written
characters corresponding to it, there will be raised in the mind an idea
of some object possessing those attributes, in which idea those
attributes alone will be suggested vividly to the mind, our
consciousness of the remainder of the concrete idea being faint. As the
name has been directly associated only with those attributes, it is as
likely, in itself, to recall them in any one concrete combination as in
any other. What combination it shall recall in the particular case,
depends on recency of experience, accidents of memory, or the influence
of other thoughts which have been passing, or are even then passing,
through the mind: accordingly, the combination is far from being always
the same, and seldom gets itself strongly associated with the name which
suggests it; while the association of the name with the attributes that
form its conventional signification, is constantly becoming stronger.
The association of that particular set of attributes with a given word,
is what keeps them Edition: current; Page: [311] together in the mind by
a stronger tie than that with which they are associated with the
remainder of the concrete image. To express the meaning in Sir W.
Hamilton’s phraseology, this association gives them an unity* in our
consciousness. It is only when this has been accomplished, that we
possess what Sir W. Hamilton terms a Concept; and this is the whole of
the mental phænomenon involved in the matter. We have a concrete
representation, certain of the component elements of which are
distinguished by a mark, designating them for special attention; and
this attention, in cases of exceptional intensity, excludes all
consciousness of the others.

Sir W. Hamilton thinks, however, that we can form, though scarcely
preserve, concepts without the aid of signs. “Language,” he says, “is
the attribution of signs to our cognitions of things. But as a cognition
must have been already there, before it could receive a sign;
consequently, that knowledge which is denoted by the formation and
application of a word, must have preceded the symbol which denotes it.”
A sign, however, he continues, in one of his happiest specimens of
illustration,

is necessary to give stability to our intellectual progress,—to
establish each step in our advance as a new starting point for our
advance to another beyond. A country may be overrun by an armed host,
but it is only conquered by the establishment of fortresses. Words are
the fortresses of thought. They enable us to realize our dominion over
what we have already overrun in thought; to make every intellectual
conquest the basis of operations for others still beyond. Or another
illustration: You have all heard of the process of tunnelling—of
tunnelling through a sand-bank. In this operation it is impossible to
succeed, unless every foot, nay almost every inch in our progress, be
secured by an arch of masonry, before we attempt the excavation of
another. Now, language is to the mind precisely what the arch is to the
tunnel. The power of thinking and the power of excavation are not
dependent on the word in the one case, on the mason-work in the other;
but without these subsidiaries, neither process could be carried on
beyond its rudimentary commencement. Though, therefore, we allow that
every movement forward in language must be determined by an antecedent
movement forward in thought; still, unless thought be accompanied at
each point of its evolution, by a corresponding evolution of Edition:
current; Page: [312] language, its further development is arrested. . .
. Admitting even that the mind is capable of certain elementary concepts
without the fixation and signature of language, still these are but
sparks which would twinkle only to expire, and it requires words to give
them prominence, and by enabling us to collect and elaborate them into
new concepts, to raise out of what would otherwise be only scattered and
transitory scintillations, a vivid and enduring light.*

Mr. Mansel, who agrees with Sir W. Hamilton in the essentials of his
doctrine of Concepts, goes beyond him on this point, being of opinion
that without signs we could not form concepts at all.[*] The objection,
that we must have had the concept before we could have given it a name,
he meets by the suggestion that names when first used are names only of
individual objects, but being extended from one object to another under
the law of Association by Resemblance, they become specially associated
with the points of Resemblance, and thus generate the Concept. In Mr.
Mansel’s opinion, no one, “without the aid of symbols,” can advance

beyond the individual objects of sense or imagination. In the presence
of several individuals of the same species, the eye may observe points
of similarity between them; and in this no symbol is needed; but every
feature thus observed is the distinct attribute of a distinct
individual, and however similar, cannot be regarded as identical. For
example: I see lying on the table before me a number of shillings of the
same coinage. Examined severally, the image and superscription of each
is undistinguishable from that of its fellow; but in viewing them side
by side, space is a necessary condition of my perception, and the
difference of locality is sufficient to make them distinct, though
similar individuals. The same is the case with any representative image,
whether in a mirror, in a painting, or in the imagination, waking or
dreaming. It can only be depicted as occupying a certain place; and thus
as an individual, and the representative of an individual. It is true
that I cannot say that it represents this particular coin rather than
that; and consequently it may be considered as the representative of
all, successively but not simultaneously. To find a representative which
shall embrace all at once, I must divest it of the condition of
occupying space; and this, experience assures us can only be done by
means of symbols, verbal or other, by which the concept is fixed in the
understanding. Such, for example, is a verbal description of the coin in
question, which contains a collection of attributes freed from the
condition of locality, and hence from all resemblance to an object of
sense. If we substitute Time for Space, the same remarks will be equally
applicable to the objects of our internal consciousness. Every appetite
and desire, every affection and volition, as presented, is an individual
state of consciousness, distinguished from every other by its relation
to a different period of time. States in other respects exactly similar
may succeed one another at regular intervals; but the hunger which I
feel to-day is an individual feeling as numerically distinct from that
which I felt yesterday or that which I shall feel to-morrow, as a
shilling lying in my pocket is from a similar shilling lying at the
bank. Whereas my notion of hunger, or fear, or volition, is a general
concept, having no relation to one period of time rather than to
another, and, as such, requires, like other concepts, a representative
sign. Language, taking the word in its Edition: current; Page: [313]
widest sense, is thus indispensable, not merely to the communication,
but to the formation of Thought.*

This is a step in advance of Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrine, but is open to
the same criticism, namely, that after showing all Concepts to be
concrete and individual, it endeavours to make out by an indirect
process, a sort of abstract existence for them. According to Mr. Mansel,
signs are necessary to concepts, because signs alone can give this
abstract existence. Signs are wanted, to emancipate our mental
apprehension from the conditions of space and time which are in all our
concrete representations. The other miscellaneous attributes which have
to be cast out, do not, he seems to think, embarrass the formation of
the Concept; but it is hampered by the conditions of space and time, and
only by means of a sign can we get rid of these. But do we get rid of
them by employing signs? To take Mr. Mansel’s own instance: When we
establish our concept of a shilling by a verbal description of the coin,
does the description enable us to conceive a shilling as not occupying
any space? When we think of a shilling, either by name or anonymously,
is not the circumstance of occupying space called up as an inevitable
part of the mental representation? Not, indeed, the circumstance of
occupying a given part of space; but if that is what Mr. Mansel means,
it would follow that we need signs to enable us to form a mental
representation even of an individual object, provided it be moveable:
for the same object does not always occupy the same part of space. The
truth is, that the condition of space cannot be excluded; it is an
essential part of the concept of Body, and of every kind of bodies. But
any given space, or any given time, is not a part of the concept, any
more than any of the slight peculiarities in which one shilling differs
from another are part of the concept of a shilling. Some space and time,
and some individual peculiarities, are always thought along with the
concept, and make up the whole, of which it can only be thought as a
part: but these are not directly recalled by the class-name, and the
attributes composing the concept are. Mr. Mansel, therefore, has not, I
conceive, hit the mark: but in the passages which follow, there is real
power of metaphysical discrimination.

Observe what actually takes place in the formation of language and
thought among ourselves. To the child learning to speak, words are not
the signs of thoughts, but of intuitions:† the words man and horse do
not represent a collection of attributes, but are only the name of the
individual now before him. It is not until the name has been
successively appropriated to various individuals, that reflection begins
to inquire into the common features of the class. Language, therefore,
as Edition: current; Page: [314] taught to the infant, is
chronologically prior to thought and posterior to sensation. In
inquiring how far the same process can account for the invention of
language, which now takes place in the learning it, the real question at
issue is simply this. Is the act of giving names to individual objects
of sense, a thing so completely beyond the power of a man created in the
full maturity of his faculties, that we must suppose a Divine Instructor
performing precisely the same office as is now performed for the infant
by his mother or his nurse; teaching him, that is, to associate this
sound with this sight? . . . All concepts are formed by means of signs
which have previously been representative of individual objects only. .
. . Similarities are noticed earlier than differences: and our first
abstractions may be said to be performed for us, as we learn to give the
same name to individuals presented to us under slight, and at first
unnoticed, circumstances of distinction. The same name is thus applied
to different objects, long before we learn to analyse the growing powers
of speech and thought, to ask what we mean by each several instance of
its application, to correct and fix the signification of words used at
first vaguely and obscurely. To point out each successive stage of the
process by which signs of intuition become gradually signs of thought,
is as impossible as to point out the several moments at which the
growing child receives each successive increase of his stature.*

These remarks of Mr. Mansel remove, as it seems to me, the only real
argument for the supposition that Concepts, or what are called General
Notions, are formed without the aid of signs. But the counter-doctrine
must be received with an important reservation. Signs are necessary, but
the signs need not be artificial; there are such things as natural
signs. The only reality there is in the Concept is, that we are somehow
enabled and led, not once or accidentally, but in the common course of
our thoughts, to attend specially, and more or less exclusively, to
certain parts of the presentation of sense or representation of
imagination which we are conscious of. Now, what is there to make us do
this? There must be something which, as often as it recurs either to our
senses or to our thoughts, directs our attention to those particular
elements in the perception or in the idea: and whatever performs this
office is virtually a sign; but it needs not be a word; the process
certainly takes place, to a limited extent, in the inferior animals; and
even with human beings who have but a small vocabulary, many processes
of thought take place habitually by other symbols than words. It is a
doctrine of one of the most fertile thinkers of modern times, Auguste
Comte, that besides the logic of signs, there is a logic of images, and
a logic of feelings.[*] In many of the familiar processes of thought,
and especially in uncultured minds, a visual image serves instead of a
word. Our visual sensations—perhaps only because they are almost always
present along with the impressions of our other senses—have a facility
of becoming associated with them. Hence, the characteristic visual
appearance of an Edition: current; Page: [315] object easily gathers
round it, by association, the ideas of all other peculiarities which
have, in frequent experience, coexisted with that appearance: and,
summoning up these with a strength and certainty far surpassing that of
the merely casual associations which it may also raise, it concentrates
the attention on them. This is an image serving for a sign—the logic of
images. The same function may be fulfilled by a feeling. Any strong and
highly interesting feeling, connected with one attribute of a group,
spontaneously classifies all objects according as they possess or do not
possess that attribute. We may be tolerably certain that the things
capable of satisfying hunger form a perfectly distinct class in the mind
of any of the more intelligent animals; quite as much so as if they were
able to use or understand the word food. We here see in a strong light
the important truth, that hardly anything universal can be affirmed in
psychology except the laws of association. As almost all general
propositions which can be laid down respecting Mind, are consequences of
these laws, so do these ultimate laws, in varying cases, generate
different derivative laws; and are continually raising up exceptions to
the empirical generalizations yielded by direct psychical observation,
which, so far as true, being mere cases of the wider laws, are always
limited by them.

We have now attained a theory of Classification, of Class Notions, and
of Class Names, which is clear, free from difficulties, and, in its
essential elements, understood and assented to by Sir W. Hamilton. With
the exception of a few minor matters, I find no fault in his theory. It
is where his theory ends and his practice begins, that I am obliged to
diverge from him. His theory is a complete condemnation of his practice.
His theory is that of Nominalism; but he affirms, in opposition to every
Conceptualist, that Nominalism and Conceptualism are the same, and on
this justification expounds all the operations of the intellect in the
language, and on the assumptions, of Conceptualism. If a Concept does
not exist as a separate or independent object of thought, but is always
a mere part of a concrete image, and has nothing that discriminates it
from the other parts except a special share of attention, guaranteed to
it by special association with a name; what is meant by the paramount
place assigned to Concepts in all the intellectual processes? Can it be
right to found the whole of Logic, the entire theory of Judgment and
Reasoning, upon a thing which has merely a fictitious or constructive
existence? Is it correct to say that we think by means of Concepts?
Would it not convey both a clearer and a truer meaning, to say that we
think by means of ideas of concrete phænomena, such as are presented in
experience or represented in imagination, and by means of names, which
being in a peculiar manner associated with certain elements of the
concrete images, arrest our attention on those elements? Sir W. Hamilton
has told us that a concept cannot, as such, be “realized in Edition:
current; Page: [316] thought,” or “elicited into consciousness.”[*] Can
it be, that we think and reason by means of that which cannot be
thought, of which we cannot become conscious? Of course Sir W. Hamilton
did not mean, nor do I, that we cannot think or be conscious of the
attributes which are said to compose the concept; but we can only be
conscious of them as forming a representation jointly with other
attributes which do not enter into the concept. And the difference
between the parts of the same representation which are inside and those
which are outside what is called the concept, is not that the former are
attended to and the latter not, for neither of these is always true. It
is, that foreseeing that we shall frequently or occasionally desire to
attend only to the former, we have made for ourselves, or have received
from our predecessors, a contrivance for being reminded of them, which
also serves for fixing our exclusive attention upon them when called to
mind. To say, therefore, that we think by means of concepts, is only a
circuitous and obscure way of saying that we think by means of general
or class names.*d To give an intelligible idea of the fact, we always
need to translate it out of the former language into the latter. It is
possible, no doubt, so to define the terms that both expressions shall
mean the same thing. But the less appropriate language has the immense
disadvantage, that it cannot be used without tacitly assuming that these
mere parts of our complex concrete perceptions and ideas have a separate
mental existence, which is admitted not to belong to them. No one, more
fully than Sir W. Hamilton, recognises the true theory; but the
acknowledgment only serves him as an excuse for Edition: current; Page:
[317] delivering himself up unreservedly to all the logical consequences
of the false theory. To read the account which he and Mr. Mansel, in
common with the great majority of modern logicians, give of our
intellectual processes—which they always make to consist essentially of
some operation practised upon concepts—no one would ever imagine that
concepts were not complete, rounded off, distinct and separate
possessions of the mind, habitually dealt with by it quite apart from
anything else; and this, in the general opinion of Conceptualists, they
are: but according to Sir W. Hamilton and Mr. Mansel, they are secretly,
all the while, incapable of being thought except as parts of something
else which has always to be dealt with along with them, but which these
philosophers, in their expositions, suppress as completely, as if they
had forgotten that its necessary presence is part of their theory. For
these and other reasons, I fthink that the words Concept, General
Notion, and other phrases of like import, convenient as they are for the
lighter and every-day uses of philosophical discussion, should be
abstained from where precision is requiredf. Above all, I hold that
nothing but confusion ever results from introducing the term Concept
into Logic, and that instead of the Concept of a class, we should always
speak of the signification of a class name.*

The signification of a class name has two aspects, corresponding to the
distinction to which Sir W. Hamilton attaches so much importance,
between the Extension and the Comprehension of a concept; which is
merely a bad expression for the distinction between the two modes of
signification of a concrete general name. Most names are still, what
according to Mr. Mansel they all were originally, names of objects;[*]
and do not cease to be so by becoming class names; but, though names of
objects, they become expressive of certain attributes of those objects,
and when predicated of an Edition: current; Page: [318] object, they
affirm of it those attributes. The name is said, in the language of
logicians, to denote the objects and connote the attributes. White
denotes chalk and other white substances, and connotes the particular
colour which is common to them. Bird denotes eagles, sparrows, crows,
geese, and so forth, and connotes life, the possession of wings, and the
other properties by which we are guided in applying the name. The
various objects denoted by the class name are what is meant by the
Extension of the concept, while the attributes connoted are its
Comprehension. It must be remarked, however, that the Extension is not
anything intrinsic to the concept; it is the sum of all the objects, in
our concrete images of which, the concept is included: but the
Comprehension is the very concept itself, for the concept means nothing
but our mental representation of the sum of the attributes composing it.

And here it is important to take notice of a psychological truth, which
forms an additional reason for preferring the expression that we think
by general names, to that of thinking by concepts. Since the concept
only exists as a part of a concrete mental state; if we say that we
think by means of it, and not by the whole which it is a part of, it
ought at least to be the part by which we think. Since that is the only
distinction between it and the remainder of the presentation or
representation in which it is embedded, at least that distinction should
be real: all which enters into the concept ought to be operative in
thought. So far is this from being true, that in our processes of
thought, seldom more than a part, sometimes a very small part, of what
is comprehended in the concept, is attended to, or comes into play. This
is forcibly stated, though in Conceptualist phraseology, by Mr. Mansel.
“We can,” he says,

and in the majority of cases do, employ concepts as instruments of
thought, without submitting them to the test of even possible
individualization. . . . I cannot conceive a triangle which is neither
equilateral, nor isosceles, nor scalene; but I can judge and reason
about a triangle without at the moment trying to conceive it at all.
This is one of the consequences of the representation of concepts by
language. The sign is substituted for the notion signified; a step which
considerably facilitates the performance of complex operations of
thought; but in the same proportion endangers the logical accuracy of
each successive step, as we do not, in each, stop to verify our signs.
Words, as thus employed, resemble algebraical symbols, which, during the
process of a long calculation, we combine in various relations to each
other, without at the moment thinking of the original signification
assigned to each.*

The attempt to stand at once on two incompatible theories, leads to
strange freaks of expression. Mr. Mansel describes us as thinking by
means of concepts which we are incapable of forming, and do not even
attempt to form, but use the signs instead. Yet he will not consent to
call this thinking by the signs, but insists that it is the concepts
which are even in this case the Edition: current; Page: [319]
“instruments of thought.” It is surely a very twisted logical position
which, when he is so entirely right in what he has to say, compels him
to use so strangely contorted a mode of saying it.

The same important psychological fact is excellently illustrated by Sir
W. Hamilton in one of the very best chapters of his works, the Tenth
Lecture on Logic, in which it is stated as follows:

As a notion or concept is the fictitious whole or unity made up of a
plurality of attributes,—a whole, too, often of a very complex
multiplicity; and as this multiplicity is only mentally held together,
inasmuch as the concept is fixed and ratified in a sign or word; it
frequently happens that, in its employment, the word does not suggest
the whole amount of thought for which it is the adequate expression,
but, on the contrary, we frequently give and take the sign, either with
an obscure or indistinct consciousness of its meaning, or even without
an actual consciousness of its signification at all.*

The word does not always serve the purpose of fixing our attention on
the whole of the attributes which it connotes; some of them may be only
recalled to mind faintly, others possibly not at all: a phænomenon
heasilyh to be accounted for by the laws of Obliviscence. But the part
of the attributes signified which the word does recal, may be all that
it is necessary for us to think of, at the time and for the purpose in
hand; it may be a sufficient part to set going all the associations by
means of which we proceed through that thought to ulterior thoughts.
Indeed, it is because part of the attributes have generally sufficed for
that purpose, that the habit is acquired of not attending to the
remainder. When the attributes not attended to are really of no
importance for the end in view, and if attended to would not have
altered the results of the mental process, there is no harm done: much
of our valid thinking is carried on in this manner, and it is to this
that our thinking processes owe, in a great measure, their proverbial
rapidity. This kind of thinking was called, by Leibnitz, Symbolical. A
passage of one of the early writings of that eminent thinker, in which
it is brought to notice with his accustomed clearness, is translated by
Sir W. Hamilton, from whom I re-quote it.

For the most part, especially in an analysis of any length, we do not
view at once (non simul intuemur) the whole characters or attributes of
the thing, but in place of these we employ signs, the explication of
which into what they signify we are wont, at the moment of actual
thought, to omit, knowing or believing that we have this explication
always in our power. Thus, when I think a chiliagon (or polygon of a
thousand sides) I do not always consider the various attributes of the
side, of the equality, and of the number or thousand, but use these
words (whose meaning is obscurely and imperfectly presented to the mind)
in lieu of the notions which I have of them, because I remember, that I
possess the signification of these words, though Edition: current; Page:
[320] their application and explication I do not at present deem to be
necessary:—this mode of thinking, I am used to call blind or symbolical:
we employ it in Algebra and in Arithmetic, but in fact universally. And
certainly when the notion is very complex, we cannot think at once all
the ingredient notions: but where this is possible,—at least, inasmuch
as it is possible,—I call the cognition intuitive. Of the primary
elements of our notions, there is given no other knowledge than the
intuitive: as of our composite notions there is, for the most part,
possible only a symbolical.*

Yet the elements which are thus habitually left out, and of which in the
case of a composite notion, if Leibnitz is right, some must be left out,
are really parts of the signification of the name, and if the word
Concept has any meaning, are parts of the concept. Leibnitz accordingly
knew better than to say, as Mr. Mansel says[*] and Sir W. Hamilton
implies, that even in these cases we think by means of the concept.
According to him we sometimes think entirely without the concept,
generally only by a part of it, which may be the wrong part, or an
insufficient part, but which may be, and in all sound thinking is,
sufficient. On this point, therefore, a false apprehension of the facts
of thought is conveyed by the doctrine which speaks of Concepts as its
instrument. Leibnitz would perhaps have said, that the name is the
instrument in one of the two kinds of thinking, and the concept in the
other. The more reasonable doctrine surely is, that the name is the
instrument in both; the difference being, that in one case it does the
whole, and in the other only a part, perhaps the minimum, of the work
for which it is intended and fitted, that of reminding us of the
portions of our concrete mental representations which we expect that we
shall have need of attending to.

Edition: current; Page: [321]
In summary; if the doctrine, that we think by concepts, means that a
concept is the only thing present to the mind along with the individual
object which (to use Sir W. Hamilton’s language) we think under the
concept, this is not true: since there is always present a concrete idea
or image, of which the attributes comprehended in the concept are only,
and cannot be conceived as anything but, a part. Again, if it be meant
that the concept, though only a part of what is present to the mind, is
the part which is operative in the act of thought, neither is this true:
for what is operative is, in a great majority of cases, much less than
the entire concept, being that portion only which we have retained the
habit of distinctly attending to. In neither of these senses, therefore,
do we think by means of the concept: and all that is true is, that when
we refer any object or set of objects to a class, some at least of the
attributes included in the concept are present to the mind; being
recalled to consciousness and fixed in attention, through their
association with the class-name.

Before leaving this part of the subject, it seems necessary to remark,
that Sir W. Hamilton is by no means consistent in the extension which he
gives to the signification of the word Concept. In most cases in which
he uses it, he makes it synonymous with General Notion, and allows
concepts of classes only, not of individuals.* It is thus that he
expressly defines the term. “A Concept,” he says, “is the cognition or
idea of the general character or characters, point or points, in which a
plurality of objects coincide.”† “Concept,” he says again, “is
convertible with general notion, or more correctly, notion simply.”‡ He
speaks of the extending of the term to our direct knowledge of
individuals, as an “abusive employment” of it.§ He also says, “Notions
and Concepts are sometimes designated by the style of general
notions,—general conceptions. This is superfluous, for in propriety of
speech, notions and concepts are, in their very nature, general.”¶ In
certain places, however, he speaks of concepts of individuals. “If I
think of Socrates as son of Sophroniscus, as Athenian, as philosopher,
as pugnosed, these are only so many characters, limitations, or
determinations which I predicate of Socrates, which distinguish him from
all other men, and together make up my notion or concept of him.”∥ And
again, “When the Extension of a concept becomes a minimum, that is, when
it contains no other notions under it, it is called an individual.”**
And further on,

It is evident that the more distinctive characters the concept contains,
the more minutely it will distinguish and determine, and that if it
contain a plenum of distinctive characters, it must contain the
distinctive, the determining characters of Edition: current; Page: [322]
some individual object. How do the two quantities now stand? In regard
to the comprehension or depth, it is evident that it is here at its
maximum, the concept being a complement of the whole attributes of an
individual object, which, by these attributes, it thinks and
discriminates from every other. On the contrary, the extension or
breadth of the concept is here at its minimum; for, as the extension is
great in proportion to the number of objects to which the concept can be
applied, and as the object here is only an individual one, it is evident
that it could not be less without ceasing to exist at all.*

But, in the sequel of the same exposition, he again seems to surrender
this use of the word Concept as an improper one, saying, “If a concept
be an individual, that is, only a bundle of individual qualities, it is
. . . not a proper abstract concept at all, but only a concrete
representation of Imagination.”† And indeed, no other doctrine is
consistent with the proposition elsewhere laid down by our author
(though founded, as I think, on an error), that the “words Conception,
Concept, Notion, should be limited to the thought of what cannot be
represented in imagination, as the thought suggested by a general
term.”‡

Mr. Mansel, on the contrary, justifies the phrase, concept of an
individual, maintaining that “the subjects of all logical judgments are
concepts.”§ “The man,” he says,

as an individual existing at some past time, cannot become immediately
an object of thought, and hence is not, properly speaking, the subject
of any logical proposition. If I say, Cæsar was the conqueror of Pompey,
the immediate object of my thought is not Cæsar as an individual
existing two thousand years ago, but a concept now present in my mind,
comprising certain attributes which I believe to have coexisted in a
certain man. I may historically know that these attributes existed in
one individual only; and hence my concept, virtually universal, is
actually singular, from the accident of its being predicable of that
individual only. But there is no logical objection to the theory that
the whole history of mankind may be repeated at recurring intervals, and
that the name and actions of Cæsar may be successively found in various
individuals at corresponding periods of every cycle.¶

If this be so, one of two things follows. Either, if I met with a person
who exactly corresponded to the concept I have formed of Cæsar, I must
suppose that this person actually is Cæsar, and lived in the century
preceding the birth of Christ; or else, I cannot think of Cæsar as
Cæsar, but only as a Cæsar; and all those which are mistakenly called
proper names are general names, the names of virtual classes, signifying
a set of attributes which carry the name with them, wherever they are
found. Either theory Edition: current; Page: [323] seems to be
sufficiently refuted by stating it. Surely the true doctrine is that of
Sir W. Hamilton, that what is called my concept of Cæsar is the
presentation in imagination of the individual Cæsar as such. Mr. Mansel
might have learnt better from Reid, who says “Most words (indeed all
general words) are the signs of ideas: but proper names are not; they
signify individual things, and not ideas.”* And again, soon after:

The same proper name is never applied to several individuals on account
of their similitude, because the very intention of a proper name is to
distinguish one individual from all others; and hence it is a maxim in
grammar that proper names have no plural number. A proper name signifies
nothing but the individual whose name it is; and when we apply it to the
individual, we neither affirm nor deny anything concerning him.†

The whole of Reid’s doctrine respecting names and general notions is not
only far more clear, but nearer to the true doctrine of the connotation
of names, than Sir W. Hamilton’s or Mr. Mansel’s.‡

Edition: current; Page: [324]


CHAPTER XVIII: Of Judgment

though, as has appeared in the last chapter, the proposition that we
think by concepts is, if not positively untrue, at least an unprecise
and misleading expression of the truth, it is not, however, to be
concluded that Sir W. Hamilton’s view of Logic, being wholly grounded on
that proposition, must be destitute of value. Many writers have given
good and valuable expositions of the principles and rules of Logic, from
the Conceptualist point of view. The doctrines which they have laid down
respecting Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning, have been capable of
being rendered into equivalent statements respecting Terms,
Propositions, and Arguments; these, indeed, were what the writers really
had in their thoughts, and there was little amiss except a mode of
expression which attempted to be more philosophical than it knew how to
be. To say nothing of less illustrious examples, this is true of all the
properly logical part of Locke’s Essay. His admirable Third Book
requires hardly any other alteration to bring it up to the scientific
level of the present time, than to be corrected by blotting out
everywhere the words Abstract Idea, and replacing them by “the
connotation of the class-name.”[*]

We shall, accordingly, proceed to examine the explanation of Judgment,
and of Reasoning, which Sir W. Hamilton has built on the foundation of
the doctrine of Concepts.

“To judge,” he says, “is to recognise the relation of congruence or of
confliction in which two concepts, two individual things, or a concept
and an individual, compared together, stand to each other. This
recognition, considered as an internal consciousness, is called a
Judgment; considered as expressed in language, it is called a
Proposition or Predication.”*

To be certain of understanding this, we must inquire what is meant by a
relation of congruence or of confliction between concepts. To consult
Sir W. Hamilton’s definitions of words is, as we have seen, not a sure
way of ascertaining the sense in which he practically uses them; but it
is one of the ways, and we are bound to employ it in the first instance.
A few pages Edition: current; Page: [325] before, he has given a sort of
definition of these terms. “Concepts, in relation to each other, are
said to be either Congruent or Agreeing, inasmuch as they may be
connected in thought; or Conflictive, inasmuch as they cannot. The
confliction constitutes the Opposition of notions.” This Opposition is
twofold. “1°. Immediate or Contradictory Opposition, called likewise
Repugnance; and 2°. Mediate or Contrary Opposition. The former emerges
when one concept abolishes directly, or by simple negation, what another
establishes; the latter, when one concept does this not directly, or by
simple negation, but through the affirmation of something else.”*

Congruent Concepts, therefore, adoesa not mean concepts which coincide,
either wholly or in any of their parts, but such as are mutually
compatible; capable of being predicated of the same individual; of being
combined in the same presentation of sense or representation of
imagination. This is more clearly expressed in a passage from Krug,
which our author adopts as part of his own exposition.

Identity is not to be confounded with Agreement or Congruence, nor
Diversity with Confliction. All identical concepts are, indeed,
congruent, but all congruent notions are not identical. Thus learning
and virtue, beauty and riches, magnanimity and stature, are congruent
notions, inasmuch as, in thinking a thing, they can easily be combined
in the notion we form of it, although themselves very different from
each other. In like manner, all conflicting notions are diverse or
different notions, for unless different, they could not be mutually
conflictive; but, on the other hand, all different concepts are not
conflictive; but those only whose difference is so great that each
involves the negation of the other; as for example, virtue and vice,
beauty and deformity, wealth and poverty.†

Thus interpreted, our author’s doctrine is, that to judge, is to
recognise whether two concepts, two things, or a concept and a thing,
are capable of coexisting as parts of the same mental representation.
This I will call Sir W. Hamilton’s first theory of Judgment; I will
venture to add, his best.

But he soon after proceeds to say,

When two or more thoughts are given in consciousness, there is in
general an endeavour on our part to discover in them, and to develop, a
relation of congruence or of confliction; that is, we endeavour to find
out whether these thoughts will or will not coincide—may or may not be
blended into one. If they coincide, we judge, we enounce, their
congruence or compatibility: if they do not coincide, we judge, we
enounce, their confliction or incompatibility. Thus, if we compare the
thoughts, water, iron, and rusting, find them congruent, and connect
them into a single thought, thus—water rusts iron—in that case we form a
judgment.

But if two notions be judged congruent, in other words, be conceived as
one, this Edition: current; Page: [326] their unity can only be realized
in consciousness, inasmuch as one of these notions is viewed as an
attribute or determination of the other. For, on the one hand, it is
impossible for us to think as one two attributes, that is, two things
viewed as determining, and yet neither determining or qualifying the
other; nor, on the other hand, two subjects, that is, two things thought
as determined, and yet neither of them determined or qualified by the
other.*

In this regress from ignotum to ignotius, the next thing to be
ascertained is, what relation between one thought and another is
signified by the verb “to determine.” Such explanation as our author
deemed it necessary to give, may be found a few pages further back. He
there stated, that by determining a notion, he means adding on more
characters, by each of which “we limit or determine more and more the
abstract vagueness or extension of the notion; until at last, if every
attribute be annexed, the sum of attributes contained in the notion
becomes convertible with the sum of attributes of which some concrete
individual or reality is the complement.”† Substituting, then, the
definition for what it defines, we find our author’s opinion to be, that
two notions can only be congruent, that is, capable of being blended
into one, if we conceive one of them as adding on additional attributes
to the other. This is not yet very clear. We must have recourse to his
illustration. “For example, we cannot think the two attributes
electrical and polar as a single notion, unless we convert the one of
these attributes into a subject, to be determined or qualified by the
other.” Do we ever think the two attributes electrical and polar as a
single notion? We think them as distinct parts of the same notion, that
is, as attributes which are constantly combined. “But if we do,—if we
say, what is electrical is polar, we at once reduce the duality to
unity; we judge that polar is one of the constituent characters of the
notion electrical, or that what is electrical is contained under the
class of things, marked out by the common character of polarity.”‡ The
last italics are mine, intended to mark the place where an intelligible
meaning first emerges. “We may, therefore, articulately define a
judgment or proposition to be the product of that act in which we
pronounce that of two notions, thought as subject and as predicate, the
one does or does not constitute a part of the other, either in the
quantity of Extension, or in the quantity of Comprehension.”§

This is Sir W. Hamilton’s second theory of Judgment, enunciated at a
distance of exactly three pages from the first, without the smallest
suspicion on his part that they are not one and the same. Yet they
differ by the whole interval which separates a part of from along with.
According to the Edition: current; Page: [327] first theory, concepts
are recognised as congruent whenever they are not mutually repugnant;
when they are capable of being objectively realized along with one
another; when the attributes comprehended in both of them can be
simultaneously possessed by the same object. According to the second
theory, they are only congruent when the one concept is actually a part
of the other. The only circumstance in which the two theories resemble
is, that both of them are unfolded out of the vague expression “capable
of being connected in thought.”[*] They are, in fact, two different and
conflicting interpretations of that expression. How irreconcilable they
are, is apparent when we descend to particulars. Krug’s examples,
learning and virtue, beauty and riches, &c., are congruent in the first
sense, since they are attributes which can be thought as existing
together in the same subject. But is the concept learning a part of the
concept virtue, the concept beauty a part of the concept riches, or vice
versâ? Sir W. Hamilton would scarcely affirm that they are in a relation
of part and whole in Comprehension; and such relation as they have in
Extension is not a relation between the concepts, but between the
aggregates of real things of which they are predicable. One of those
aggregates might be part of the other, though it is not; but one of the
concepts can never be part of the other. No one can ever find the notion
beauty in the notion riches, nor conversely.

Our author having thus gently slid back into the common Conceptualist
theory of judgment, that it consists in recognising the identity or
non-identity of two notions, adheres to it thenceforward with as much
consistency as we need ever expect to find in him. We may consider as
his final theory of Judgment, on which his subsequent logical
speculations are built, that a judgment is a recognition in thought, a
proposition a statement in words, that one notion is or is not a part of
another. He makes use of the word notion b(doubtless)b to include the
case in which either of the terms of the proposition is singular. The
two notions, one of which is recognised as being or not being a part of
the other, may be either Concepts, that is, General Notions, or one of
them may be a mental representation of an individual object.

The first objection which, I think, must occur to any one, on the
contemplation of this definition, is that it omits the main and
characteristic element of a judgment and of a proposition. Do we never
judge or assert anything but our mere notions of things? Do we not make
judgments and assert propositions respecting actual things? A Concept is
a mere creation of the mind: it is the mental representation formed
within us of a phænomenon; or rather, it is a part of that mental
representation, marked off by a sign, for a Edition: current; Page:
[328] particular purpose. But when we judge or assert, there is
introduced a new element, that of objective reality, and a new mental
fact, Belief. Our judgments, and the assertions which express them, do
not enunciate our mere mode of mentally conceiving things, but our
conviction or persuasion that the facts as conceived actually exist: and
a theory of Judgments and Propositions which does not take account of
this, cannot be the true theory. In the words of Reid, “I give the name
of Judgment to every determination of the mind concerning what is true
or what is false. This, I think, is what logicians, from the days of
Aristotle, have called judgment.”* And this is the very element which
Sir W. Hamilton’s definition omits from it.

I am aware that Sir W. Hamilton would have an apparent answer to this.
He would, I suppose, reply, that the belief of actual reality, implied
in assent to a proposition, is not left out of account, but brought to
account in another place. The belief, he would say, is not inherent in
the judgment, but in the notions which are the subject and predicate of
the judgment; these being either mental representations of real objects,
which if represented in the mind at all, must be represented as real, or
Concepts formed by a comparison of real objects, which therefore exist
in the mind as concepts of realities. Accordingly, when we judge and
make assertions respecting objects known to be imaginary, the judgments
are accompanied with no belief in any real existence except that of the
mental images; what our author calls the “presentations of phantasy.”[*]
When, indeed, a judgment is formed or an assertion is made respecting
something imaginary which is supposed to be real, as for instance
concerning a ghost, there is a belief in the real existence of more than
the mental image; but this belief is not anything superadded to the
comparison of concepts; it already existed in the concepts; a ghost was
thought as something having a real existence.

This, at least, is what might be said in behalf of Sir W. Hamilton,
though he has not himself said it. But though it cescapes fromc the
objection dagainstd omitting the element Belief from the definition of
Judgment, it does so by an entire inversion of the logical process of
definition. The element of Belief, or Reality, may indeed be in the
concepts; but it never could have got into the concepts, if it had not
first been in the judgments by which the concepts were constructed. If
the belief of reality had been absent from those judgments originally,
it never could have come round to them through the concepts. Belief is
an essential element in a judgment; it may be either present or absent
in a concept. Our author, and those who Edition: current; Page: [329]
agree with him, postpone this part of the subject until they are
treating of the distinction between True and False Propositions. They
then say, that if the relation which is judged to exist between the
notions, exists between the corresponding realities, the proposition is
true, and if not, false. But if the operation of forming a judgment or a
proposition includes anything at all, it includes judging that the
judgment or the proposition is true. The recognition of it as true is
not only an essential part, but the essential element of it as a
judgment; leave that out, and there remains a mere play of thought, in
which no judgment is passed. It is impossible to separate the idea of
Judgment from the idea of the truth of a judgment; for every judgment
consists in judging something to be true. The element Belief, instead of
being an accident which can be passed in silence, and admitted only by
implication, constitutes the very difference between a judgment and any
other intellectual fact, and it is contrary to all the laws of
Definition to define Judgment by anything else. The very meaning of a
judgment, or a proposition, is something which is capable of being
believed or disbelieved; which can be true or false; to which it is
possible to say yes or no. And though it cannot be believed until it has
been conceived, or (in plain terms) understood, the real object of
belief is not the concept, or any relation of the concept, but the fact
conceived. That fact need not be an outward fact; it may be a fact of
internal or mental experience. But even then the fact is one thing, the
concept of it is another, and the judgment is concerning the fact, not
the concept. The fact may be purely subjective, as that I dreamed
something last night; but the judgment is not the cognition of a
relation between the presentation I and the concept having dreamed, but
the cognition of the real memory of a real event.

This first, and insuperable objection, the force of which will be seen
more and more the further we proceed, is applicable to the Conceptualist
doctrine of Judgment, howsoever expressed, and to Sir W. Hamilton’s as
one of the modes of expressing that doctrine. There are other objections
special to Sir W. Hamilton’s form of it.

In what I have called Sir W. Hamilton’s first theory of judgment, we
found him saying that the comparison, ending in a recognition of
congruence or confliction, may be between “individual things”[*] as well
as between concepts. But in his second theory, one at least of the terms
of comparison must be a concept. For a judgment, according to this
theory, is “the product of that act in which we pronounce that of two
notions, thought as subject and predicate, the one does or does not
constitute a part of the other.”[†] Now a concept, that is, a bundle of
attributes, may be a part of another concept, and may be a part of our
mental image of an individual Edition: current; Page: [330] object; but
one notion of an individual object cannot be a part of another notion of
an individual object. One object may be an integrant part of another,
but it cannot be a part in Comprehension or in Extension, as these words
are understood of a Concept. St. Paul’s is an integrant part of London,
but neither an attribute of it, nor an object of which it is predicable.

Since, therefore, a judgment, in Sir W. Hamilton’s second theory, is the
recognition of the relation of part and whole, either between two
concepts, or between a concept and an individual presentation; the
theory supposes that the mind furnishes itself with concepts, or general
notions, before it begins to judge. Now this is not only evidently
false, but the contrary is asserted, in the most decisive terms, by Sir
W. Hamilton himself. He affirms, and it is denied by nobody, that every
Concept is built up by a succession of judgments. We conceive an object
mentally as having such and such an attribute, because we have first
judged that it has that attribute in reality. Let us see what our author
says on this point in his Lectures on Metaphysics. He says that there is
a judgment involved in every mental act.

The fourth condition of consciousness, which may be assumed as very
generally acknowledged, is that it involves judgment. A judgment is the
mental act by which one thing is affirmed or denied of another. It may
to some seem strange that consciousness, the simple and primary act of
intelligence, should be a judgment, which philosophers in general
[including Sir W. Hamilton in his second theory] have viewed as a
compound and derivative operation. This is, however, altogether a
mistake. A judgment is, as I shall hereafter show you, a simple act of
mind, for every act of mind implies a judgment. Do we perceive or
imagine without affirming, in the act, the external or internal
existence of the object? Now these fundamental affirmations are the
affirmations,—in other words, the judgments,—of consciousness.*

And in a subsequent part of his Course:

You will recollect that, when treating of Consciousness in general, I
stated to you that consciousness necessarily involves a judgment; and as
every act of mind is an act of consciousness, every act of mind,
consequently, involves a judgment. A consciousness is necessarily the
consciousness of a determinate something, and we cannot be conscious of
anything without virtually affirming its existence, that is, judging it
to be. Consciousness is thus primarily a judgment or affirmation of
existence. Again, consciousness is not merely the affirmation of naked
existence, but the affirmation of a certain qualified or determinate
existence. We are conscious that we exist, only in and through our
consciousness that we exist in this or that particular state—that we are
so and so affected,—so and so active: and we are only conscious of this
or that particular state of existence, inasmuch as we discriminate it as
different from some other state of existence, of which we have been
previously conscious and are now reminiscent; but such a discrimination
supposes, in consciousness, the affirmation of the existence of one
state of a specific character, and Edition: current; Page: [331] the
negation of another. On this ground it was that I maintained, that
consciousness necessarily involves, besides recollection, or rather a
certain continuity of representation, also judgment and comparison; and
consequently, that, so far from comparison or judgment being a process
always subsequent to the acquisition of knowledge through perception and
self-consciousness, it is involved as a condition of the acquisitive
process.*

But if judgment is a comparison of two concepts, or of a concept and an
individual object, and a recognition that one of them is a part of (or
even merely congruent with) the other, it must be a process “always
subsequent to the acquisition of knowledge,” or, in other words, to the
formation of Concepts. The theory of Judgment in the third volume of the
Lectures, belongs to a different mode of thinking altogether from the
theory of Consciousness in the first and second; and when Sir W.
Hamilton was occupied with either of them, he must have temporarily
forgotten the other.

But in the third volume itself the same inconsistency is obtruded on us
still more openly. We are there told in plain words,

Both concepts and reasonings may be reduced to judgments: for the act of
judging, that is, the act of affirming or denying one thing of another
in thought, is that in which the Understanding or Faculty of comparison
is essentially expressed. A concept is a judgment: for, on the one hand,
it is nothing but the result of a foregone judgment, or series of
judgments fixed and recorded in a word, a sign, and it is only amplified
by the annexation of a new attribute, through a continuance of the same
process. On the other hand, as a concept is thus the synthesis or
complexion, and the record, I may add, of one or more prior acts of
judgment, it can, it is evident, be analysed into these again; every
concept is, in fact, a judgment or a fasciculus of judgments,—these
judgments only not explicitly developed in thought, and not formally
expressed in terms.†

That the same philosopher should have written these words, and a little
more than a hundred pages after should have defined a judgment as the
result of a comparison of concepts, either between themselves, or with
individual objects, is, I think, the very crown of the
self-contradictions which we have found to be sown so thickly in Sir W.
Hamilton’s speculations. Coming from a thinker of such ability, it
almost makes one despair of one’s own intellect and that of mankind, and
feel as if the attainment of truth on any of the more complicated
subjects of thought were impossible.

It is necessary to renounce one of these theories or the other. Either a
concept is not the “synthesis and record of one or more prior acts of
judgment,” or a judgment is not, at least in all cases, the recognition
of a relation of which one or both of the terms are Concepts. The least
that could be required of Sir W. Hamilton would be so to modify his
doctrine as to admit two kinds of judgment: the one kind, that by which
concepts are Edition: current; Page: [332] formed, the other that which
succeeds their formation. When concepts have been formed, and we
subsequently proceed to analyse them, then, he might say, we form
judgments which recognise one concept as a whole, of which another is a
part. But the judgments by which we constructed the concepts, and every
subsequent judgment by which, to use his own words, we amplify them by
the addition of a new attribute, have nothing to do with comparison of
concepts: it is the Anschauungen, the intuitions, the presentations of
experience, which we in this case compare and judge.*

Take, for instance, Sir W. Hamilton’s own example of a judgment, “Water
rusts iron:”[*] and let us suppose this truth to be new to us. Is it not
like a mockery to say with our author, that we know this truth by
comparing “the thoughts, water, iron, and rusting”? Ought he not to have
said the facts, water, iron, and rusting? and even then, is comparing
the proper name for the mental operation? We do not examine whether
three thoughts agree, but whether three outward facts coexist. If we
lived till doomsday we should never find the proposition that water
rusts iron in our concepts, if we had not first found it in the outward
phænomena. The proposition expresses a sequence, and what we call a
causation, not between our concepts, but between the two sensible
presentations of moistened iron Edition: current; Page: [333] and rust.
When we have already judged this sequence to exist outside us, that is,
independently of our intellectual combinations, we know it, and once
known, it may find its way into our concepts. But we cannot elicit out
of a concept any judgment which we have not first put into it; which we
have not consciously assented to, in the act of forming the concept.
Whenever, therefore, we form a new judgment—judge a truth new to us—the
judgment is not a recognition of a relation between concepts, but of a
succession, a coexistence, or a similitude, between facts.

This is the smallest sacrifice on the part of Sir W. Hamilton’s theory
of Judgment, which would satisfy his theory of Consciousness. But when
thus reconciled with a part of his system with which it now conflicts,
it would not be the better founded. It might still be chased from point
to point, unable to make a stand anywhere. For let us next suppose, that
the judgment is not new; that the truth, Water rusts iron, is known to
us of old. When we again think of it, and think it as a truth, and
assent to it, should we even then give a correct account of what passes
in our mind, by calling this act of judgment a comparison of our
thoughts—our concepts—our notions—of water, rust, and iron? We do not
compare our artificial mental constructions, but consult our direct
remembrance of facts. We call to mind that we have seen, or learned from
credible testimony, that when iron is long in contact with water, it
rusts. The question is not one of notions, but of beliefs; belief of
past and expectation of future presentations of sense. Of course it is
psychologically true that when I believe, I have a notion of that which
I believe; but the ultimate appeal is not to the notion, but to the
presentation or intuition. If I am in any doubt, what is the question I
ask myself? Is it—Do I think of, or figure to myself, water as rusting
iron? or is it—Did I ever perceive, and have other people perceived,
that water rusts iron? There are persons, no doubt, whose criterion of
judgment is the relation between their own concepts, but these are not
the persons whose judgments the world has usually found worth adopting.
If the question between Copernicus and Ptolemy had depended on whether
we conceive the earth moving and the sun at rest, or the sun moving and
the earth at rest, I am afraid the victory would have been with Ptolemy.

But, again, even if judging were entirely a notional operation,
consisting of the recognition of some relation between concepts, it
remains to be proved that the relation is that of Whole and Part. Could
it, even then, be said, that every judgment in which I predicate one
thing of another, on the faith of previous judgments recorded, as our
author says, in the concepts, consists in recognising that one of the
concepts includes the other as a part of itself? When I judge that
Socrates is mortal, or that all men are mortal, does the judgment
consist in being conscious that my concept mortal is part of my
representation of Socrates, or of my concept man?

This doctrine ignores the famous distinction, admitted, I suppose, in
Edition: current; Page: [334] some shape or other, by all philosophers,
but most familiar to modern metaphysics in the form in which it is
stated by Kant—the distinction between Analytical and Synthetical
judgments. Analytical judgments are supposed to unfold the contents of a
concept; affirming explicitly of a class, attributes which were already
part of the corresponding concept, and may be brought out into distinct
consciousness by mere analysis of it. Synthetical judgments, on the
contrary, affirm of a class, attributes which are not in the concept,
and which we therefore do not and cannot judge to be a part of the
concept, but only to be conjoined in fact with the attributes composing
the concept. This distinction, though obtruded upon our author by many
of the writers with whom he was familiar, has so little in common with
his mode of thought, that he only slightly refers to it, in a very few
passages of his works: in one of these, however,* he speaks of it as of
something very important, eexpresses his preference for the terms
Explicative and Ampliative as names for ite, and discusses, not the
distinction itself, but its history; apparently unconscious that his own
theory entirely does away with it. According to that, all judgments are
analytical, or, fas he prefers to sayf, explicative. Even giving up so
much of his theory as contradicts his own doctrine on the formation of
concepts, the part remaining would compel him to maintain that all
judgments which are not new are analytical, and that synthetical
judgments are limited to truths, or supposed truths, which we learn for
the first time.g

This discrepancy between our author and almost all philosophers, even of
his own general way of thinking, (including, among the rest, Mr.
Mansel), arises from the fact, that he understands by concept something
different from what they have usually understood by it. The concept of a
class, in Sir W. Hamilton’s acceptation of the term, includes all the
attributes which we have judged, and still judge, to be common to the
whole class. It means, in short, our entire knowledge of the class. But,
with philosophers in general, the concept of the class as such,—my
concept of man, for example, as distinguished from my mental
representation of an individual man,—includes, not all the attributes
which I ascribe to man, but such of them only as the classification is
grounded on, and as are implied in the meaning of the name. Man is a
living being, or Man is rational, they would call analytical judgments,
because the attributes hofh life and rationality are of the number of
those which are already given in the concept Man: but Edition: current;
Page: [335] Man is mortal, they would account synthetical, because,
familiar as the fact is, it is not already affirmed in the very name
Man, but has to be superadded in the predicate.

It is quite lawful for a philosopher (though seldom prudent) to alter
the meaning of a word, provided he gives fair notice of his intention;
but he is bound, if he does so, to remain consistent with himself in the
new meaning, and not to transfer to it propositions which are only true
in the old. This condition Sir W. Hamilton does not observe. It often
happens that different opinions of his belong to different and
inconsistent systems of thought, apparently through his retaining from
former writers some doctrine, the grounds of which he has, by another
doctrine, subverted. His whole theory of Concepts being infected by an
inconsequence of this description, the retention of all the
Conceptualist conclusions along with Nominalist premises, it is no
wonder if further oversights of the same kind meet us in every part of
the details. The following is one of the most palpable. As we just
mentioned, the concept of a class in our author’s sense, includes all
the attributes of the class, so far as the thinker is acquainted with
them; the whole of the thinker’s knowledge of the class. This is Sir W.
Hamilton’s own doctrine; but along with it he retains a doctrine
belonging to the other meaning of Concept, which I have contrasted with
his. “The exposition of the Comprehension of a notion is called its
Definition:”* and again “Definition is the analysis of a complex concept
into its component parts or attributes.”† But a thing is not analysed
into its component parts if any of the parts are left out. The two
opinions taken together lead, therefore, to the remarkable consequence,
that the definition of a class ought to include the whole of what is
known of the class. Those who mean by the concept not all known
attributes of the class, but such only as are included in the
connotation of the name, may be permitted to say of a Definition that it
is the analysis of the concept: but to Sir W. Hamilton this was not
permissible. To crown the inconsistency, he still presents the stock
example, Man is a rational animal, as a good definition, and a typical
specimen of what a Definition is;‡ as if the notions animal and rational
exhausted the whole of the concept Man, according to his meaning of
Concept—the entire sum of the attributes common to the class. It would
hardly be believed, prior to a minute examination of his writings, how
much vagueness of thought, leading to the unsuspecting admission of
opposite doctrines in the same breath, lurks under the specious
appearance of philosophical precision which distinguishes him.§

Edition: current; Page: [336]
To return, from Sir W. Hamilton’s self-contradictions, to the merits of
the question itself; the word Judgment, by universal consent, is
coextensive with the word Proposition: a Judgment must be so defined
that a Proposition shall be the expression of it in words. Now, if a
Judgment expresses a relation between Concepts (which for the purpose of
the present discussion I have conceded) the corresponding Proposition
represents that same relation by means of names: the names, therefore,
must be signs of the concepts, and the concepts must be the meaning of
the names. To make this tenable, the Concept must be so construed as to
consist of those attributes only which are connoted by the name.
Corporeity, life, rationality, and any other attributes of man which are
part of the meaning of the word, insomuch that where those attributes
were not, we should withhold the name of man—these are part of the
concept. But mortality, and all the other human attributes which are the
subject of treatises either on the human body or on human nature, are
not in the concept, because we do not affirm them of any individual by
merely calling him a man; they are so much additional knowledge. The
concept Man is not the sum of all the attributes of a man, but only of
the essential attributes—of those which constitute him a man; in other
words, those on which the class Man is grounded, and which are connoted
by the name—what used to be called the essence of Man, that without
which Man cannot be, or in other words, would not be what he is called.
Without mortality, or without thirty-two teeth, he would still be called
a man: we should not say, This is not a man; we should say, This man is
not mortal, or has fewer than thirty-two teeth.

Instead, therefore, of saying with Sir W. Hamilton, that the attributes
Edition: current; Page: [337] composing the concept of the predicate are
part of those which compose the concept of the subject, we ought to say,
they are either a part, or are invariably conjoined with them, not in
our conception, but in fact. Propositions in which the concept of the
predicate is part of the concept of the subject, or, to express
ourselves more philosophically, in which the attributes connoted by the
predicate are part of those connoted by the subject, are a kind of
Identical Propositions: they convey no information, but at most remind
us of what, if we understood the word which is the subject of the
proposition, we knew as soon as the word was pronounced. Propositions of
this kind are either definitions, or parts of definitions. These
judgments are analytical: they analyse the connotation of the
subject-name, and predicate separately the different attributes which
the name asserts collectively. All other affirmative judgments are
synthetical, and affirm that some attribute or set of attributes is, not
a part of those connoted by the subject-name, but an invariable
accompaniment of them.*

Edition: current; Page: [338]
There remains something to be said on another very prominent feature in
Sir W. Hamilton’s theory of Judgment. Having said, that in every
judgment we compare “two notions, thought as subject and predicate,” and
pronounce that “the one does or does not constitute a part of the
other,” he adds, “either in the quantity of Extension, or in the
quantity of Comprehension.”* He developes this distinction as follows:

If the Subject or determined notion be viewed as the containing whole,
we have an Intensive or Comprehensive proposition; if the Predicate or
determining notion be viewed as the containing whole, we have an
Extensive proposition. . . . The relation of subject and predicate is
contained within that of whole and part, for we can always view either
the determining or the determined notion as the whole which contains the
other. The whole, however, which the subject constitutes, and the whole
which the predicate constitutes, are different, being severally
determined by the opposite quantities of comprehension and of extension;
and as subject and predicate necessarily stand to each other in the
relation of these inverse quantities, it is manifestly a matter of
indifference, in so far as the meaning is concerned, whether we view the
subject as the whole of comprehension which contains the predicate, or
the predicate as the whole of extension which contains the subject. In
point of fact, in single propositions it is rarely apparent which of the
two wholes is meant; for the copula is, est, &c., equally denotes the
one form of the relation or the other. Thus, in the proposition man is
two-legged,—the copula here is convertible with comprehends or contains
in it, for the proposition means man contains in it two-legged, that is,
the subject man as an intensive whole or complex notion, comprehends as
a part the predicate two-legged. Again, in the proposition, man is a
biped, the copula corresponds to contained under, for this proposition
is tantamount to man is contained under biped,—that is, the predicate
biped, as an extensive whole or class, contains under it as a part the
subject man. But in point of fact, neither of the two propositions
unambiguously shows whether it is to be viewed as of an intensive or of
an extensive purport; nor in a single proposition is this of any moment.
All that can be said is that the one form of expression is better
accommodated to express the one kind of proposition, the other better
accommodated to express the other. It is only when propositions are
connected into syllogisms, that it becomes evident whether the subject
or the predicate be the whole in or under which the other is contained;
and it is only as thus constituting two different—two contrasted, forms
of reasoning—forms the most general, as under each of these every other
is included,—that the distinction becomes necessary in regard to
concepts and propositions.†

Edition: current; Page: [339]
I shall not insist on such of the objections to this passage as have
been sufficiently stated; the impropriety, for instance, of saying that
the notion Man contains the predicate two-legged, when that attribute is
evidently not part of the signification of the word; or that the meaning
of a proposition is, that an attribute is part of a notion: which, the
first time it is observed, it cannot possibly be, and at no time is this
the thing asserted by a proposition, unless by those which are avowedly
definitions. All these considerations I at present forego: and I will
even give our author’s theory its necessary correction, by restoring to
Propositions the alternative meaning which belongs to them, namely, that
a certain attribute is either part of a given set of attributes, or
invariably coexists with them. Having thus dissociated the doctrine in
the quotation from all errors which are incidental and not essential to
it, we may state it as follows:—Every proposition is capable of being
understood in two meanings, which involve one another, inasmuch as if
either of them is true the other is so, but which are nevertheless
different; of which only one may be, and commonly is, in the mind; and
the words used do not always show which. Thus, All men are bipeds, may
either mean, that the objects called men are all of them numbered among
the objects called bipeds, which is interpreting the proposition in
Extension; or that the attribute of having two feet is one of, or
coexists with, the attributes which compose the notion Man: which is
interpreting the proposition in Comprehension.

I maintain, that these two supposed meanings of the proposition are not
two matters of fact or of thought, reciprocally inferrible from one
another, but one and the same fact, written in different ways; that the
supposed meaning in Extension is not a meaning at all, until interpreted
by the meaning in Comprehension; that all concepts and general names
which enter into Propositions, require to be construed in Comprehension,
and that their Comprehension is the whole of their meaning.

That the meaning in Extension follows if the meaning in Comprehension is
granted, is a point which both sides are agreed in. If the attribute
signified by biped is either one of, or always conjoined with, the
attributes signified by man, we are entitled to assert that the class
Man is included in, is a part of, the class Biped. But my position is,
that this second assertion is not a conclusion from, but a mere
repetition of, the first. For what is the second assertion, if we leave
out of it all reference to the attributes? It can then only mean, that
we have ascertained the fact independently of the attributes—that is,
that we have examined the aggregate whole “all men,” and the still
greater aggregate whole “all bipeds,” and that all the former were found
among the latter. Now, do we assert this? or would it be true? Assuredly
no one of us ever represented and contemplated, even with his mind’s
eye, either of these wholes: still less did we ever compare them as
realities, and ascertain that the fact is as stated. Neither could this
be done, by anything Edition: current; Page: [340] short of infinite
power: for all men and all bipeds, except a comparatively few, have
either ceased to exist, or have not yet come into existence. What, then,
do we mean by making an assertion concerning all men? The phrase does
not mean, all and each of a certain great number of objects, known or
represented individually. It means, all and each of an unascertained and
indefinite number, mostly not known or represented at all, but which if
they came within our opportunities of knowledge, might be recognised by
the possession of a certain set of attributes, namely, those forming the
connotation of the wordk. “All men,” and “the class man,” are
expressions which point to nothing but attributes; they cannot be
interpreted except in comprehension. To say, all men are bipeds, is
merely to say, given the attributes of man, that of being a biped will
be found along with them; which is the meaning in Comprehension. If the
proposition has nothing to do with the concept Man except as to its
comprehension, still less has it with the concept Biped. When I say, All
men are bipeds, what has my assertion to do with the class biped as to
its Extension? Have I any concern with the remainder of the class, after
Man is subtracted from it? Am I necessarily aware even whether there is
any remainder at all? I am thinking of no such matter, but only of the
attribute two-footed, and am intending to predicate that. I am thinking
of it as an attribute of man, but of what else it may happen to be an
attribute does not concern me. Thus, all propositions into which general
names enter, and consequently all reasonings, are in Comprehension only.
Propositions and Reasonings may be written in Extension, but they are
always understood in Comprehension. The only exception is in the case of
propositions which have no meaning in Comprehension, and have nothing to
do with Concepts—those of which both the subject and the predicate are
proper names; such as, Tully is Cicero, or, St. Peter is not St. Paul.
These words connote nothing, and the only meaning they have is the
individual whom they denote. But where a meaning in Comprehension, or,
in other words, in Connotation, is possible, that is always the one
intended. And Sir W. Hamilton’s distinction (though he lays great stress
on it) between Reasoning in Comprehension and Reasoning in Extension,
will be found (as we shall see hereafter)[*] to be a mere superfetation
on Logic.

It is worth while to add, that even could it be admitted that general
propositions have a meaning in Extension capable of being conceived as
different from their meaning in Comprehension, Sir W. Hamilton would
still be wrong in deeming that the recognition of this meaning depends
on, or can possibly result from, a comparison of the Concepts. The
Extension Edition: current; Page: [341] of a concept, as I have before
remarked, is not, like the Comprehension, intrinsic and essential to the
concept; it is an external and wholly accidental relation of the
concept, and no contemplation or analysis of the concept itself will
tell us anything about it. It is an abstract name for the aggregate of
objects possessing the attributes included in the concept: and whether
that aggregate is greater or smaller does not depend on any properties
of the concept, but on the boundless productive powers of Nature.

Edition: current; Page: [342]


CHAPTER XIX: Of Reasoning

in common with the majority of modern writers on Logic, whose language
is generally that of the Conceptualist school, Sir W. Hamilton considers
Reasoning, as he considers Judgment, to consist in a comparison of
Notions: either of Concepts with one another, or of Concepts with the
mental representations of individual objects. Only, in simple Judgment,
two notions are compared immediately; in Reasoning, mediately. Reasoning
is the comparison of two notions by means of a third. As thus:
“Reasoning is an act of mediate Comparison or Judgment; for to reason is
to recognise that two notions stand to each other in the relation of a
whole and its parts, through a recognition that these notions severally
stand in the same relation to a third.”* The foundation, therefore, of
all Reasoning is “the self-evident principle that a part of the part is
a part of the whole.”† “Without reasoning we should have been limited to
a knowledge of what is given by immediate intuition; we should have been
unable to draw any inference from this knowledge, and have been shut out
from the discovery of that countless multitude of truths, which, though
of high, of paramount importance, are not self-evident.”‡ This
recognition that we discover a “countless multitude of truths,”
composing a vast proportion of all our real knowledge, by mere
reasoning, will be found to jar considerably with our author’s theory of
the reasoning process, and with his whole view of the nature and
functions of Logic, the science of Reasoning: but this inconsistency is
common to him with nearly all the writers on Logic, because, like him,
they teach a theory of the science too small and narrow to contain their
own facts.

Notwithstanding the great number of philosophers who have considered the
definition cited above to be a correct account of Reasoning, the
objections to it are so manifest, that until after much meditation on
the subject, one can scarcely prevail on oneself to utter them: so
impossible does it seem that difficulties so obvious should always be
passed over unnoticed, unless they admitted of an easy answer.
Reasoning, we are told, is a mode of ascertaining that one notion is a
part of another; and the use of reasoning Edition: current; Page: [343]
is to enable us to discover truths which are not self-evident. But how
is it possible that a truth, which consists in one notion being part of
another, should not be self-evident? The notions, by supposition, are
both of them in our mind. To perceive what parts they are composed of,
nothing surely can be necessary but to fix our attention on them. We
cannot surely concentrate our consciousness on two ideas in our own
mind, without knowing with certainty whether one of them as a whole
includes the other as a part. If we have the notion biped and the notion
man, and know what they are, we must know whether the notion of a biped
is part of the notion we form to ourselves of a man. In this case the
simply Introspective method is in its place. We cannot need to go beyond
our consciousness of the notions themselves.

Moreover, if it were really the case that we can compare two notions and
fail to discover whether one of them is a part of the other, it is
impossible to understand how we could be enabled to accomplish this by
comparing each of them with a third. A, B, and C, are three concepts, of
which we are supposed to know that A is a part of B, and B of C, but
until we put these two propositions together we do not know that A is a
part of C. We have perceived B in C intuitively, by direct comparison:
but what is B? By supposition it is, and is perceived to be, A and
something more. We have therefore, by direct intuition, perceived that A
and something more is a part of C, without perceiving that A is a part
of C. Surely there is here a great psychological difficulty to be got
over, to which logicians of the Conceptualist school have been
surprisingly blind.

Endeavouring, not to understand what they say, for they never face the
question, but to imagine what they might say, to relieve this apparent
absurdity, two things occur to athe minda. It may be said, that when a
notion is in our consciousness, but we do not know whether something is
or is not a part of it, the reason is that we have forgotten some of its
parts. We possess the notion, but are only conscious of part of it, and
it does its work in our trains of thought only symbolically. Or, again,
it may be said that all the parts of the notion are in our
consciousness, but are in our consciousness indistinctly. The meaning of
having a distinct notion, according to Sir W. Hamilton, is that we can
discriminate the characters or attributes of which it is composed. The
admitted fact, therefore, that we can have indistinct notions, may be
adduced as proof that we can possess a notion, and not be able to say
positively what is included in it. These are the best, or rather the
only presentable arguments I am able to invent, in support of the
paradox involved in the Conceptualist theory of Reasoning.

It is a great deal easier to refute these arguments than it was to
discover Edition: current; Page: [344] them. The refutation, like the
original difficulty, is two deep. To begin; a notion, part of which has
been forgotten, is to that extent a lost notion, and is as if we had
never had it. The parts which we can no longer discern in it are not in
it, and cannot therefore be proved to be in it, by reasoning, any more
than by intuition. We may be able to discover by reasoning that they
ought to be there, and may, in consequence, put them there; but that is
not recognising them to be there already. As a notion in part forgotten
is a partially lost notion, so an indistinct notion is a notion not yet
formed, but in process of formation. We have an indistinct notion of a
class when we perceive in a general way that certain objects differ from
others, but do not as yet perceive in what; or perceive some of the
points of difference, but have not yet perceived, or have not yet
generalized, the others. In this case our notion is not yet a completed
notion, and the parts which we cannot discern in it, are undiscernible
because they are not yet there. As in the former case, the result of
reasoning may be to put them there; but it certainly does not effect
this by proving them to be there already.

But even if these explanations had solved the mystery of our being
conscious of a whole and unable to be directly conscious of its part,
they would yet fail to make intelligible how, not having this knowledge
directly, we are able to acquire it through a third notion. By
hypothesis we have forgotten that A is a part of C, until we again
become aware of it through the relation of each of them to B. We
therefore had not forgotten that A is a part of B, nor that B is a part
of C. When we conceived B, we conceived A as a part of it; when we
conceived C, we conceived B as a part of it. In the mere fact,
therefore, of conceiving C, we were conscious of B in it, and
consciousness of A is a necessary part of that consciousness of B, and
yet our consciousness of C did not enable us to find in it our
consciousness of A, though it was really there, and though they both
were distinctly present. If any one can believe this, no contradiction
and no impossibility in any theory of Consciousness need stagger him.
Let us now substitute for the hypothesis of forgetfulness, the
hypothesis of indistinctness. We had a notion of C, which was so
indistinct that we could not discriminate A from the other parts of the
notion. But it was not too indistinct to enable us to discriminate B,
otherwise the reasoning would break down as well as the intuition. The
notion of B, again, indistinct as it may have been in other respects,
must have been such that we could with assurance discriminate A as
contained in it. Here then returns the same absurdity: A is distinctly
present in B, which is distinctly present in C, therefore A, if there be
any force in reasoning, is distinctly present in C; yet A cannot be
discriminated or perceived in the consciousness in which it is
distinctly present: so that, before our reasoning commenced, we were at
once distinctly conscious of Edition: current; Page: [345] A, and
entirely unconscious of it. There is no such thing as a reduction to
absurdity if this is not one.

The reason why a judgment which is not intuitively evident, can be
arrived at through the medium of premises, is that judgments which are
not intuitively evident do not consist in recognising that one notion is
part of another. When that is the case, the conclusion is as well known
to us ab initio as the premises; which is really the case in analytical
judgments. When reasoning really leads to the “countless multitudes of
truths” not self-evident, which our author speaks of—that is, when the
judgments are synthetical—we learn, not that A is part of C, because A
is part of B and B of C, but that A is conjoined with C, because A is
conjoined with B, and B with C. The principle of the reasoning is not, a
part of the part is a part of the whole, but, a mark of the mark is a
mark of the thing marked, Nota notæ est nota rei ipsius.[*] It means,
that two things which constantly coexist with the same third thing,
constantly coexist with one another; the things meant not being our
concepts, but the facts of experience on which our concepts ought to be
grounded.

This theory of reasoning is free from the objections which are fatal to
the Conceptualist theory. We cannot discover that A is a part of C
through its being a part of B, since if it really is so, the one truth
must be as much a matter of direct consciousness as the other. But we
can discover that A is conjoined with C through its being conjoined with
B; since our knowledge that it is conjoined with B, may have been
obtained by a series of observations in which C was not perceptible. C,
we must remember, stands for an attribute, that is, not an actual
presentation of sense, but a power of producing such presentations: and
that a power may have been present without being apparent, is in the
common course of things, implying nothing more than that the conditions
necessary to determine it into act were not all present. This power or
potentiality, C, may in like manner have been ascertained to be
conjoined with B, by another set of observations, in which it was A’s
turn to be dormant, or perhaps to be active, but not attended to. By
combining the two sets of observations, we are enabled to discover what
was not contained in either of them, namely, a constancy of conjunction
between C and A, such that one of them comes to be a mark of the other:
though, in neither of the two sets of observations, nor in any others,
may C and A have been actually observed together; or, if observed, not
with the frequency, or under the experimental conditions, which would
Edition: current; Page: [346] warrant us in generalizing the fact. This
is the process by which we do, in reality, acquire the greater part of
our knowledge; all of it (as our author says) which is not “given by
immediate intuition.”[*] But no part of this process is at all like the
operation of recognising parts and a whole; or of recognising any
relation whatever between Concepts; which have nothing to do with the
matter, more than is implied in the fact, that we cannot reason about
things without conceiving them, or representing them to the mind.

The theory which supposes Judgment and Reasoning to be the comparison of
concepts, is obliged to make the term concept stand for, not the
thinker’s or reasoner’s own notion of a thing, but a sort of normal
notion, which is understood as being owned by everybody, though
everybody does not always use it; and it is this tacit substitution of a
concept floating in the air for the very concept I have in my own mind,
which makes it possible to fancy that we can, by reasoning, find out
something to be in a concept, which we are not able to discover in it by
consciousness, because, in truth, that concept is not in bourb
consciousness. But a concept of a thing, which is not that whereby I
conceive it, is to me as much an external fact, as a presentation of the
senses can be: it is another person’s concept, not mine. It may be the
conventional concept of the world at large—that which it has been
tacitly agreed to associate with the class; in other words, it may be
the connotation of the class-name; and if so, it may very possibly
contain elements which I cannot directly recognise in it, but may have
to learn from external evidence: but this is because I do not know the
signification of the word, the attributes which determine its
application—and what I have to do is to learn them: when I have done
this, I shall have no difficulty in directly recognising as a part of
them, anything which really is so. But with regard to all attributes not
included in the signification of the name, not only I do not find them
in the concept, but they do not even become part of it after I have
learnt them by experience; unless we understand by the concept, not,
with philosophers in general, only the essence of the class, but with
Sir W. Hamilton, all its known attributes. Even in Sir W. Hamilton’s
sense, they are not found in the concept, but added to it; and not until
we have already assented to them as objective facts—subsequently,
therefore, to the reasoning by which they were ascertained.

Take such a case as this. Here are two properties of circles. One is,
that a circle is bounded by a line, every point of which is equally
distant from a certain point within the circle. This attribute is
connoted by the name, and is, on both theories, a part of the concept.
Another property of the circle is, that the length of its circumference
is to that of its diameter in the approximate Edition: current; Page:
[347] ratio of 3·14159 to 1. This attribute was discovered, and is now
known, as a result of reasoning. Now, is there any sense, consistent
with the meaning of the terms, in which it can be said that this
recondite property formed part of the concept circle, before it had been
discovered by mathematicians? Even in Sir W. Hamilton’s meaning of
concept, it is in nobody’s but a mathematician’s concept even now: and
if we concede that mathematicians are to determine the normal concept of
a circle for mankind at large, mathematicians themselves did not find
the ratio of the diameter to the circumference in the concept, but put
it there; and could not have done so until the long train of difficult
reasoning which culminated in the discovery was complete.

It is impossible, therefore, rationally to hold both the opinions
professed simultaneously by Sir W. Hamilton—that Reasoning is the
comparison of two notions through the medium of a third, and that
Reasoning is a source from which we derive new truths. And the truth of
the latter proposition being indisputable, it is the former which must
give way. The theory of Reasoning which attempts to unite them both, has
the same defect which we have shown to vitiate the corresponding theory
of Judgment: it makes the process consist in eliciting something out of
a concept which never was in the concept, and if it ever finds its way
there, does so after the process, and as a consequence of its having
taken place.

Edition: current; Page: [348]


CHAPTER XX: On Sir William Hamilton’s Conception of Logic as a Science. Is Logic the Science of the Laws, or Forms, of Thought?

having discussed the nature of the three psychological processes which,
together, constitute the operations of the Intellect, and having
considered Sir W. Hamilton’s theory of each, we are in a condition to
examine the general view which he takes of the Science or Art, whose
purpose it is to direct our intellectual operations into their proper
course, and to protect them against error.

Sir W. Hamilton defines Logic “the Science of the Laws of Thought as
Thought.”* He proceeds to justify each of the component parts of this
definition. And first, is Logic a Science?

Archbishop Whately says that it is both a Science and an Art.[*] He says
this in an intelligible sense. He means that Logic both determines what
is, and prescribes what should be. It investigates the nature of the
process which takes place in Reasoning, and lays down rules to enable
that process to be conducted as it ought. For this distinction, Sir W.
Hamilton is very severe on Archbishop Whately. In the Archbishop’s sense
of the words, he says, it never has been, and never could have been,
disputed that Logic is both a Science and an Art. But

the discrimination of art and science is wrong. Dr. Whately considers
science to be any knowledge viewed absolutely, and not in relation to
practice,—a signification in which every art would, in its doctrinal
part, be a science; and he defines art to be the application of
knowledge to practice, in which sense Ethics, Politics, and all
practical sciences, would be arts. The distinction of arts and sciences
is thus wrong. But . . . were the distinction correct it would be of no
value, for it would distinguish nothing, since art and science would
mark out no real difference between the various branches of knowledge,
but only different points of view under which the same branch might be
contemplated by us,—each being in different relations at once a science
and an art. In fact, Dr. Whately confuses the distinction of science
theoretical and science practical with the distinction of science and
art.†

Edition: current; Page: [349]
But if the difference between science and art is not the same as that
between knowledge theoretical and practical, we are entitled to ask,
what is it? If Archbishop Whately has placed the distinction where it is
not, does his rather peremptory critic and censor tell us where it is?
He declines the problem. “I am well aware that it would be no easy
matter to give a general definition of science as contradistinguished
from art, and of art as contradistinguished from science; but if the
words themselves cannot validly be discriminated, it would be absurd to
attempt to discriminate anything by them.”[*] In the only other part of
his Lectures where the distinction between Art and Science is touched
on,* he says that the “apparently vague and capricious manner in which
the terms art and science are applied,” is not “the result of some
accidental and forgotten usage,” but is founded on a “rational principle
which we are able to trace.”[†] But when the reader is expecting a
statement of this rational principle, Sir W. Hamilton puts him off with
a merely historical explanation. Without stating what the usage actually
is, he derives it from a distinction drawn by Aristotle between “a habit
productive,” and “a habit practical,” which he admits to be “not perhaps
beyond the reach of criticism:” which he does not undertake to
“vindicate,” and which he confesses to have been lost sight of by the
moderns ever since they ceased to think “mechanical” arts “beneath their
notice,”[‡] all these being called arts without any reference to
Aristotle’s supposed criterion.† So that Sir W. Hamilton cannot claim
even accordance Edition: current; Page: [350] with usage for the
distinction which he seems, but does not distinctly profess, to
patronize. Yet the principal fault he finds with Archbishop Whately’s
distinction, is that it does not agree with usage. According to it, he
says, “ethics, politics, religion, and all other practical sciences
would be arts:”* and he speaks of the “incongruity we feel in talking of
the art of Ethics, the art of Religion, &c., though these are eminently
practical sciences.”†

Religion may abe herea placed out of the question, for if there be
incongruity with common feelings in calling Religion an art, there is
quite as much in calling it a science, and especially a practical
science, as if the theoretical doctrines of religion were no part of
religion. If religion is either a science or an art, it must be both,
and it is commonly understood to consist preeminently in things
different from either, namely, a state of the feelings, and a
disposition of the will. As for Ethics and Politics, the one and the
other are, like Logic, both sciences and arts. Ethics, so far as it
consists of the theory of the moral sentiments, and the investigation of
those conditions of human well-being, disclosed by experience, which the
practical part of Ethics has for its object to secure, is, in all senses
of the word, a science. The rules or precepts of morals are an art. If
there is any reluctance felt to speak of an art of morals, it is not
because people prefer calling morals a science, but because most people
are unwilling to look upon it as scientific at all, but prefer to regard
it as a matter of instinct, bor of religious belief,b or as depending
solely on the state of the will and the affections. In the case of
Politics there is not, even to the vulgarest apprehension, any
incongruity in the use of the word art: on the contrary, “the art of
government” is the vernacular expression, and “science of government” a
sort of speculative refinement. Philosophic writers on politics have
generally preferred to call their subject a science, in order to
indicate that it is a fit subject for speculative thinkers, the word art
being apt to suggest to modern ears (it did not to the ancients)
something which is the proper business only of practitioners. In reality
Politics includes both a science and an art. The Science of Politics
treats of the laws of political phænomena; it is the Edition: current;
Page: [351] science of human nature under social conditions. The Art of
Politics consists (or would consist if it existed) of rules, founded on
the science, for the right guidance and government of the affairs of
society.

But, says Sir W. Hamilton, if the difference between Science and Art
were merely that between affirmations and precepts, the distinction
would be of no value, since it would “mark out no real difference
between the various branches of knowledge, but only different points of
view under which the same branch might be contemplated by us,—each being
in different relations at once a science and an art.” Was it from Sir W.
Hamilton we should have expected to hear that a distinction is of no
value, because it does not mark a difference between two things, but a
difference in the cpointsc of view in which we may regard the same
thing? How often has he told us, of many of the most important
distinctions in philosophy, that they are precisely of this character!
The remark, moreover, in the particular case, is so extremely
superficial, that, coming from an author of whom it was by no means the
habit to look only at the surface of things, it is one of the strongest
of the many proofs which appear in his works, how little thought he had
bestowed upon the sciences or arts, beyond his own speciality. The
reason why systems of precepts require to be distinguished from systems
of truths, is, that an entirely different classification is required for
the purposes of theoretical knowledge, and for those of its practical
application. Take the art of navigation, for example: where is the
single science corresponding to this art, or which could with any
propriety be included under the same name with it? Navigation is an art
dependent on nearly the whole circle of the physical sciences: on
astronomy, for the marks by which it determines the ship’s place on the
ocean; on optics, for the construction and use of its instruments; on
abstract mechanics, to understand and regulate the ship’s movements; on
pneumatics, for the laws of winds; on hydrostatics, for the tides and
currents, and the waves as influenced by dwindsd; on meteorology, for
the weather; on electricity, for thunderstorms; on magnetism, for the
use of the compass; on physical geography, and so on nearly to the end
of the list. Not only has each one of all these sciences furnished its
contingent towards the rules composing the one art of navigation, but
many single rules could only have been framed by the union of
considerations drawn from several different sciences. For the purposes
of the art, the rules by themselves are sufficient, wherever it has been
found practicable to make them sufficiently precise. But if the learner,
not content with knowing and practising the rules, wishes to understand
their reasons, and so possess science as well as art, he finds no one
science corresponding in its object-matter with the art; he must extract
from many Edition: current; Page: [352] sciences those truths of each
which have been turned to practical account for the furtherance of
navigation. All this is obvious to any one (not to say a person of Sir
W. Hamilton’s sagacity), who has sufficiently reflected on the sciences
and arts, to be aware of the relation between them. Archbishop Whately’s
distinction, therefore, in no way merits the contemptuous treatment
which it receives in the Lectures, and still more in the Discussions.[*]
It is eminently practical, it conforms to the natural and logical order
of thought, and accords better with the ends and even with the custom of
language, than any other mode in which Arts can be distinguished from
Sciences. Sir W. Hamilton, though he condemns it, has not ventured to
set up any competing distinction in its place, but (as we have seen)
almost intimates that no satisfactory one can be found.

Next after the question whether Logic is a science, comes the
consideration of its object-matter as a science, namely, “the Laws of
Thought as Thought.”[†] “The consideration of this head,” says our
author, “divides itself into three questions—1. What is Thought? 2. What
is Thought as Thought? 3. What are the Laws of Thought as Thought?”*
These three questions are successively discussed.

To the question, “What is Thought?” Sir W. Hamilton answers—It is not
the direct perception of an object, nor its representation in memory or
imagination, nor its mere suggestion by association, but is a product of
intelligence. Intelligence acts only by comparison.

All thought is a comparison, a recognition of similarity or difference,
a conjunction or disjunction, in other words a synthesis or analysis of
its objects. In Conception, that is, in the formation of Concepts (or
general notions) it compares, disjoins or conjoins, attributes; in an
act of Judgment, it compares, disjoins or conjoins, concepts; in
Reasoning, it compares, disjoins or conjoins, judgments. In each step of
this process there is one essential element; to think, to compare, to
conjoin or disjoin, it is necessary to recognise one thing through or
under another, and therefore, in defining Thought proper, we may either
define it as an act of Comparison, or as a recognition of one notion as
in or under another. It is in performing this act of thinking a thing
under a general notion, that we are said to understand or comprehend it.
For example: An object is presented, say a book: this object determines
an impression, and I am even conscious of the impression, but without
recognising to myself what the thing is; in that case, there is only a
perception, and not properly a thought. But suppose I do recognise it
for what it is, in other words, compare it with and reduce it under a
certain concept, class, or complement of attributes, which I call book;
in that case, there is more than a perception,—there is a thought.†

Further on, he again defines an act of thought as “the recognition of a
Edition: current; Page: [353] thing as coming under a concept; in other
words, the marking an object by an attribute or attributes previously
known as common to sundry objects, and to which we have accordingly
given a general name.”* And subsequently, as “the comprehension of a
thing under a general notion or attribute;”† and again, “the cognition
of any mental object by another in which it is considered as included;
in other words, thought is the knowledge of things under conceptions.”‡
And again, “Thought is the Knowledge of a thing through a concept or
general notion, or of one notion through another.”§

From these different expressions we may infer, that the author confines
the name Thought to cases where there is a judgment; and, it would seem,
a judgment affirming more than mere existence. We think an object, or
make anything an object of thought, when we are able to predicate
something of it; to affirm that it is something in particular; that it
is a certain sort of thing; that it belongs to a class—has something
which is (or may be) common to it with a number of other things; that it
has, in short, a certain attribute, or attributes. This is intelligible,
and unobjectionable: but our author’s technical expressions, instead of
facilitating the understanding of it, tend, on the contrary, very much
to confuse it. Like the transcendental metaphysicians generally, Sir W.
Hamilton, when he attempts to state the nature of a mental phænomenon
with peculiar precision, does it by a peculiarly unprecise employment of
the common prepositions. What light is thrown upon the simple process of
referring objects to a class, by calling it the recognition of one thing
through, or in, or under, another? What distinct signification is
conveyed by the phrases, “thinking a thing under a general notion,”
“reducing it under a concept,” “knowing things under, or through,
conceptions?” To find the meaning of the explanation we have to resort
to the thing explained. The only passage in which the author speaks
distinctly, is that in which he paraphrases these expressions by the
following: “the marking an object by an attribute or attributes
previously known as common to sundry objects, and to which we have
accordingly given a general name.” To think of an object, then, is to
mark it by an attribute or set of attributes, which has received a name,
or (what is much more essential) which gives a name to the object. It
gives to the object the concrete name, to which its own abstract name,
if it has an abstract name, corresponds: but it is not indispensable
that the attribute should have received a name, provided it gives one to
the object possessing it. An animal is called a bull, in sign of its
possessing certain attributes, but there does not exist an abstract word
Edition: current; Page: [354] bullness. Having, then, in Sir W.
Hamilton’s language, thought the object, by marking it with a name
derived from an attribute, it is perhaps an allowable, though an
obscure, expression, to say that we know the thing through the
attribute, or through the notion of the attribute: but what is meant by
saying that we know it, or think it under the attribute? We know it and
think it, simply as possessing the attribute. The other phrase, while
seeming to mean more, means less. Again, when we are asserted to “know
one notion through another;” when, for example, we think, or judge, that
men, meaning all men, are mortal; is this to know the notion Man through
the notion Mortal? The knowledge we really have, is that the objects Men
have the attribute mortality; in other words, that the outward facts by
which we distinguish men, exist along with subjection to the outward
fact, death. If there is a recommendation I would inculcate on every one
who commences the study of metaphysics, it is, to be always sure what he
means by his particles. A large portion of all that perplexes and
confuses metaphysical thought, comes from a vague use of those small
words.

After this definition of Thought, our author proceeds to explain what he
means by Thought as Thought. He means, “that Logic is conversant with
the form of thought, to the exclusion of the matter.”* We have here
arrived at one of the cardinal points in Sir W. Hamilton’s philosophy of
Logic. However he may vary on other doctrines, to this he is constant,
that the province of Logic is the form, not the matter, of thought. It
is a pity that the only terms he can find to denote the distinction, are
a pair of the obscurest and most confusing expressions in the whole
range of metaphysics. Still more unfortunate eit ise, that, thinking it
necessary to employ such terms, he has never, in unambiguous language,
explained their meaning. When Archbishop Whately, in somewhat similar
phraseology, tells us that Logic has to do with the form of the
reasoning process, but not with its matter, we know what he means.[*] It
is, that Logic is not concerned with the actual truth either of the
conclusion or of the premises, but considers only whether the one
follows from the other; whether the conclusion must be true if the
premises are true. Sir W. Hamilton is not content to mean only this. He
means much more; but if we wish to know what, the only information he
here gives us is a quotation from a German philosopher, Esser.

We are able, by abstraction, to distinguish from each other,—1°. The
object thought of; and 2°. The kind and manner of thinking it. Let us,
employing the old established technical expressions, call the first of
these the matter, the second the form, of the thought. For example, when
I think that the book before me is a folio, the matter of the thought is
book and folio, the form of it is a judgment.[†]

Edition: current; Page: [355]
Thus far Esser. The Form, therefore, of Thought, with which alone Logic
is conversant, is not the object thought of, but “the kind and manner of
thinking it.” It is not necessary to show that this explanation is
insufficient. But to find any other, we must have recourse, not to Sir
W. Hamilton, but to Mr. Mansel. One of the chapters of Mr. Mansel’s
Prolegomena Logica is entitled “On the Matter and Form of Thought.” It
commences as follows:

The distinction between Matter and Form in common language relatively to
works of Art, will serve to illustrate the character of the
corresponding distinction in Thought. The term Matter is usually applied
to whatever is given to the artist, and consequently, as given, does not
come within the province of the art itself to supply. The Form is that
which is given in and through the proper operation of the art. In
Sculpture, for example, the Matter is the marble in its rough state as
given to the sculptor; the Form is that which the sculptor in the
exercise of his art communicates to it.

Let me here ask, had the block of marble no form at all when it came out
of the quarry?

The distinction between Matter and Form in any mental operation is
analogous to this. The former includes all that is given to, the latter
all that is given by, the operation. In the division of notions, for
example, whether performed by an act of pure thinking or not, the
generic notion is that given to be divided; the addition of the
difference in the act of division constitutes the species. And
accordingly, Genus is frequently designated by logicians the material,
Difference the formal, part of the Species. [An illustration which,
whatever else it may do, does not illustrate.] So likewise in any
operation of pure thinking, the Matter will include all that is given to
and out of the thought; the Form is what is conveyed in and by the
thinking act itself.*

This is a fair account of the meaning of Matter and Form in the Kantian
philosophy, and the philosophies which descend genealogically from the
Kantian. But this meaning must always be taken with, and interpreted by,
the characteristic doctrine of the Kantian metaphysics, that the mind
does not perceive, but itself creates, all the most general attributes
which, by a natural illusion, we ascribe to outward things; which
attributes, consequently, are called, by that philosophy, Forms.
Extension and Duration, for example, it calls forms of our sensitive
faculty; Substance, Causality, Quantity, forms of our Understanding,
which is our faculty of thought. These, however, are not what Sir W.
Hamilton and Mr. Mansel[*] mean, when they say that Logic is the science
of the fformsf of thought. They do not mean that it is the science of
Substance, Causality, and Quantity. The truth is, that as soon as the
word Form is stretched beyond its proper signification of bodily figure,
it becomes entirely vague: every thinker uses Edition: current; Page:
[356] it in a sense of his own. The only bond connecting its various
meanings, is the negative one of opposition to Matter. Whenever anything
is called Form, there is something which, relatively to it, is regarded
as Matter: and whenever anything is called Matter, there is something
capable of being superinduced upon it, which when superinduced will be
styled its Form. How completely the notion of Form accompanies that of
Matter as its relative opposite, we have an illustrious example in
Aristotle, when he defines the Soul as the Form of the Body;[*] so, at
least, Sir W. Hamiltong, very freely,g translates ἐντελέχεια.* It would
be quite warranted by the practice of metaphysicians, to call any
compound the form of its component elements; water, for instance, the
form of hydrogen and oxygen. And since there is nothing that may not be
regarded as matter relatively to something which can be constructed out
of it, and which is form relatively to it, but matter relatively to some
other thing, we have form within form, like a nest of boxes. Kant
actually calls the conclusion of a syllogism the form of it, the
premises being its matter: so that in every train of reasoning, the
successive conclusions pass over one by one from Form to Matter.[†]
Without going this length, Sir W. Hamilton,† after Krug, considers the
propositions and terms as the matter of the syllogism, and the mode in
which they are connected as its form. Yet propositions and terms (i.e.
concepts) are classed by him as Forms of Thought. Thus it is impossible
to draw any line between the Matter of Thought and its Form, or to
convey any distinct conception of the province of a science by saying
that it is conversant with the one and not with the other. We may,
however, in a general way, understand Sir W. Hamilton to mean, that
Logic is not concerned with the actual contents of our knowledge—with
the particular objects, or truths, which we know—but only with our mode
of knowing them: with what the mind does when it knows, or thinks,
irrespectively of the particular things which it thinks about: with the
theory of the act or fact of thinking, so far as that fact is the same
in all our thought, or can be reduced to universal principles.

Edition: current; Page: [357]
But the fact of thinking is a psychological phænomenon; and Logic is a
different thing from Psychology. It is for the purpose of marking this
difference that Sir W. Hamilton adds a third point to his definition of
Logic, calling it the science not simply of Thought as Thought, but of
the Laws of Thought as Thought. For Psychology also treats of thought,
considered merely as thought; and professes to give an acount of Thought
as a mental operation. In what, then, consists the difference between
the two? I cannot venture to state it in any but our author’s own words.

The phænomena of the formal, or subjective phases of thought, are of two
kinds. They are either such as are contingent, that is, such as may or
may not appear; or they are such as are necessary, that is, such as
cannot but appear. These two classes of phænomena are, however, only
manifested in conjunction; they are not discriminated in the actual
operations of thought; and it requires a speculative analysis to
separate them into their several classes. In so far as these phænomena
are considered merely as phænomena, that is, in so far as philosophy is
merely observant of them as manifestations in general, they belong to
the science of Empirical or Historical Psychology. But when philosophy,
by a reflective abstraction, analyses the necessary from the contingent
forms of thought, there results a science, which is distinguished from
all others by taking for its object-matter the former of these classes;
and this science is Logic. Logic, therefore, is at last fully and
finally defined as the science of the necessary forms of thought.*

If language has any meaning, this passage must be understood to say,
that the “laws” or “forms” which are the province of Logic, are certain
“phænomena” of thought, distinguished from its other phænomena by being
necessarily present in it,—“such as cannot but appear,”—while the
remaining phænomena “may or may not appear.” If this be meant, we are
landed in a strange conclusion. There is a science, Psychology, which is
the science of all mental phænomena, and among others, of the phænomena
of Thought, and yet another science, Logic, is required to teach us its
necessary phænomena. There is a portion of the properties of Thought
which are expressly excluded from the science which treats of Thought,
to be reserved as the matter of another science, and these are precisely
its Necessary hqualitiesh. Those which are merely contingent, “such as
may or may not appear”—the properties which are not common to all
thought, or do not belong to it at all times—these, it seems to be said,
Psychology knows something about: but the Necessary properties, “such as
cannot but appear”—the properties which all thoughts possess, which
thought must possess, without the possession of which it would not be
thought—these Psychology knows not of, and it is the office of a
different science to investigate them. We may next expect to be told,
that the science of dynamics knows nothing of the laws of motion, the
composition of forces, Edition: current; Page: [358] the theory of
continuous and accelerating force, the doctrines of Momentum and Vis
Viva, &c.; it only knows of wind power and water power, steam power and
animal power, and the accidents by flood and field which accompany them
and disturb their operation.

This, however, supposes that our author means what he expressly says. It
assumes that by the “Laws of Thought,” and the “Necessary Forms of
Thought,” he means the modes in which, and the conditions subject to
which, by the constitution of our nature, we cannot but think. But when
we turn over a few pages, to the place where he is preparing to treat of
those laws or necessary forms one by one, it appears that this is an
entire mistake. Laws now no longer mean necessities of nature; they are
laws in a totally different sense; they mean precepts: and the
“necessary forms of thought” are not attributes which it must, but only
which it ought to possess.

When I speak of laws, and of their absolute necessity in relation to
thought, you must not suppose that these laws and that necessity are the
same in the world of mind as in the world of matter. For free
intelligences, a law is an ideal necessity given in the form of a
precept, which we ought to follow, but which we may also violate if we
please; whereas, for the existences which constitute the universe of
nature, a law is only another name for those causes which operate
blindly and universally in producing certain inevitable results. By law
of thought, or by logical necessity, we do not, therefore, mean a
physical law, such as the law of gravitation, but a general precept
which we are able certainly to violate, but which if we do not obey, our
whole process of thinking is suicidal, or absolutely null. These laws
are, consequently, the primary conditions of the possibility of valid
thought; and . . . the whole of Pure Logic is only an articulate
development of the various modes in which they are applied.*

Edition: current; Page: [359]
So that, after all, the real theory of Thought—the laws, in the
scientific sense of the term, of Thought as Thought—do not belong to
Logic, but to Psychology: and it is only the validity of thought which
Logic takes cognisance of. It is not with Thought as Thought, but only
as Valid thought, that Logic is concerned. There is nothing to prevent
us from thinking contrary to the laws of Logic: only, if we do, we shall
not think rightly, or well, or conformably to the ends of thinking, but
falsely, or inconsistently, or confusedly. This doctrine is at complete
variance with the saying of our author in his controversy with Whately,
that Logic is, and never could have been doubted to be, in Whately’s
sense of the terms, both a Science and an Art. For the present
definition reduces it to the narrowest conception of an Art—that of a
mere system of rules. It leaves Science to Psychology, and represents
Logic as merely offering to thinkers a collection of precepts, which
they are enjoined to observe, not in order that they may think, but that
they may think correctly, or validly.

It appears to me, however, that our author, though inconsistent with
himself, is much nearer the mark in this mode of regarding Logic than in
the previous one. I conceive it to be true that Logic is not the theory
of Thought as Thought, but of valid Thought; not of thinking, but of
correct thinking. It is not a Science distinct from, and coordinate
with, Psychology. So far as it is a science at all, it is a part, or
branch, of Psychology; differing from it, on the one hand as a part
differs from the whole, and on the other, as an Art differs from a
Science. Its theoretic grounds are wholly borrowed from Psychology, and
include as much of that science as is required to justify the rules of
the art. Logic has no need to know more of the Science of Thinking, than
the difference between good thinking and bad. A consequence of this is,
that the Necessary Laws of Thought, those which our author in his first
doctrine reserved especially to Logic, are precisely those with which
Logic has least to do, and which belong the most exclusively to
Psychology. What is common to all thought, whether good or bad, and
inseparable from it, is irrelevant to Logic, unless by the light it may
indirectly throw on something besides itself. The properties of Thought
which concern Logic, are some of its contingent properties; those,
namely, on the presence of which depends good thinking, as distinguished
from bad.

I therefore accept our author’s second view of the province of Logic,
which makes it a collection of precepts or rules for thinking, grounded
on a Edition: current; Page: [360] scientific investigation of the
requisites of valid thought. It is this doctrine which governs his
treatment of the details of Logic, and it is by this that we must
interpret the assertion that Logic has for its only subject the Form of
Thought. By the Form of Thought we must understand Thinking itself; the
whole work of the Intellect. The Matter of Thought is the sensations,
perceptions, or other presentations (intuitions, as Mr. Mansel calls
them),[*] in which the intellect has no share; which are supplied to it,
independently of any action of its own. What the mind adds to these, or
puts into them, is Forms of Thought. Logic, therefore, is concerned only
with Forms, since, being rules for thinking, it can have no authority
but over that which depends on thought. Logic and Thinking are
coextensive; it is the art of Thinking, of all Thinking, and of nothing
but Thinking. And since every distinguishable variety of thinking act is
called a Form of Thought, the Forms of Thought compose the whole
province of Logic; though it would be hardly possible to invent a worse
phrase for expressing so simple a fact.

But what are the Forms of Thought? Kant, as already observed, gives to
that expression a very wide extent. He holds that every ifundamentali
attribute which we ascribe to external objects is a Form of Thought,
being created, not simply discerned, by our thinking faculty.[†] Neither
Sir W. Hamilton nor Mr. Mansel goes this length; and at all events they
do not consider the theory of the various attributes of bodies to be a
part of Logic. It was incumbent on them, therefore, to state clearly
what are the Forms of Thought with which Logic is concerned, and for
which it supplies precepts. This question is never put, in an express
form, by Sir W. Hamilton: but the answer which he rather leaves to be
picked up than directly presents, may be gathered from his
classification of our intellectual operations. These he reduces to
three, Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning. He must have recognised,
therefore, that number of general Forms of Thought. The Forms of Thought
are Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning: Logic is the Science of the
Laws (meaning the rules) of these three operations. If, however, we
rigorously hold our author to this short list, we shall perpetually
mistake his meaning: for (as already observed) the mode in which the
word Form is used, allows of form within form to an unlimited extent.
Every concept, judgment, or reasoning, after having received its form
from the mind, may again be contemplated as the Matter of some further
mental act; and the product of that further act (according to Kant),[‡]
or the relation of the product to the matter (according to Sir W.
Hamilton and Mr. Edition: current; Page: [361] Mansel), is again a Form
of Thought; as we find, to our confusion, when we proceed further, and
the more profusely, the further we proceed. We have, first, however, to
consider a proposition of Sir W. Hamilton, which qualifies his
definition of the province of Logic. He says:

“Logic considers Thought, not as the operation of thinking, but as its
product; it does not treat of Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning, but
of Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings.”*

Let me begin by saying that I give my entire adhesion to this
distinction, and propose to reform the definition of Logic accordingly.
It does not, as we now see, relate to the Laws of Thought as Thought,
but to those of the Products of Thought. Instead of the Laws of
Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning, we must speak of the Laws of
Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings. This would be mere nonsense in the
scientific sense of the word law: for a product, as such, can have no
laws but those of the operation which produces it. But understanding by
laws, as it seems we are intended to do, Precepts, Logic becomes the
science of the precepts for the formation of concepts, judgments, and
reasonings: or rather (a science of precepts being an improper
expression) the science of the conditions on which right concepts,
judgments, and reasonings depend. Thus, Logic is the Art of Thinking,
which means of correct thinking, and the Science of the Conditions of
correct thinking. This seems to me a sufficiently accurate definition of
it. But, in attempting a deeper metaphysical analysis of the distinction
he has just drawn, our author raises fresh difficulties. He says:

The form of thought may be viewed on two sides, or in two relations. It
holds, as has been said, a relation both to its subject and to its
object, and it may accordingly be viewed either in the one of these
relations or in the other. In so far as the form of thought is
considered in reference to the thinking mind,—to the mind by which it is
exerted,—it is considered as an act, or operation, or energy; and in
this relation it belongs to Phænomenal Psychology. Whereas, in so far as
this form is considered in reference to what thought is about, it is
considered as the product of such an act, and in this relation it
belongs to Logic. Thus Phænomenal Psychology treats of thought proper as
conception, judgment, reasoning: Logic, or the Nomology of the
Understanding, treats of thought proper as a concept, as a judgment, as
a reasoning.†

Just when the puzzled reader fancied that he had at last arrived at
something clear, comes an explanation which throws all back into
darkness. The learner who had been wandering in the mazes of “Thought as
Thought,” laws which are not laws, and “Forms of Thought” in which Form
stands for something which he never before heard of in connexion with
that word, at last descried what seemed to be firm ground: he was told
that Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning are acts of the mind, that
Concepts, Edition: current; Page: [362] Judgments, and Reasonings are
products of those acts, and that Psychology is conversant with the
former and Logic with the latter. And now it turns out that the products
are the acts. The two series of things are one and the same series. They
are both of them only “Thought proper.” The product is another word for
the act itself, considered in one of its aspects—“in reference to what
thought is about.” It is curious that this should occur only a few pages
after Whately has been rebuked for reducing a distinction to inutility,
by making it coincide with a difference not between things, but between
the aspects in which the same thing is regarded.

Sir W. Hamilton therefore is of opinion that the thinking act, though
verbally, is not psychologically different from the thought itself. He
does not hold, with Berkeley, that an Idea is a concrete object distinct
from the mind, and contained in it, like furniture in a house; nor with
Locke (if that was Locke’s opinion), that it is a modification of the
mind, but a modification distinct from the mind’s act in cognising it;
but with Brown, that a sensation is only myself feeling, and a thought
only myself thinking. Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings, are only acts
of conceiving, judging, and reasoning; acts of thought, considered not
in their relation to the thinking mind, but to their object, to “what
thought is about.”* But what is thought about? Not about Concepts, for
all our thoughts are not about the thinking act. It must be about the
objective presentation, the Anschauung, or Intuition, which the Concept
represents, or from which it has been abstracted. According, therefore,
to the doctrine here distinctly laid down by Sir W. Hamilton, there are
but two things present in any of our intellectual operations; on one
hand, the mind itself thinking (that is, conceiving, judging, or
reasoning), and, on the other, a mental presentation or representation
of the phænomenal Reality which it conceives, or concerning which it
judges or reasons. I can understand that the thinking act, or in other
words, the mind in a thinking state, may be contemplated in its relation
to the Reality thought of, and may receive a name which connotes
Edition: current; Page: [363] that Reality; but how does this entitle us
to call it a product of thought? How can the act of thought, or the mind
thinking, be looked upon, even hypothetically, as a product of thinking?
How can Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings be regarded as products of
thought, jifj they are the thought itself? Can they be both the act and
something resulting from the act? Are they results and products of
themselves?

I conceive that there is a way out of this difficulty; a sense in which
the two assertions can be reconciled, though it has not been pointed out
by Sir W. Hamilton, and is hardly compatible with some of his opinions.
There is a difference between what can properly be called Acts of the
mind, and the other mental phænomena which may be termed its passive
States. And I know but one way of conceiving the distinction, in which
it can possibly be upheld, namely, by considering as Acts only those
mental phænomena which are results of Volition. Now, the first formation
of a Concept, and generally (though not always) any fresh operation of
judgment or reasoning, requires a mental effort, a concentration of
consciousness upon certain definite objects, which concentration depends
on the will, and is called Attention. When this takes place, the mind is
properly said to be active. But after frequent repetition of this act of
will, the associations to which it has given rise are sufficiently
riveted to do their work spontaneously; the effort of attention, after
becoming less and less, is finally null, and the operation, originally
voluntary, becomes, in Hartley’s language, secondarily automatic.[*]
When this transition has been completed, what remains of the mental
phænomenon has lost the character of an Act, and become numbered among
passive States. It is now either a mere mental representation of an
object, differing from those copied directly from sense, only in having
certain of its parts artificially made intense and prominent; or it is a
fasciculus of representations of imagination, held together by the tie
of an association artificially produced. When the mental phænomenon has
assumed this passive character, it comes to be termed a Concept, or,
more familiarly and vaguely, an Idea, and to be felt as if it were, not
the mind modified, but something in the mind: and in this ultimate
phasis of its existence we may properly consider it, not as an act, but
as the product of a previous act; since it now takes place without any
conscious activity, and becomes a subject on which fresh activity may be
exercised, by an act of voluntary attention concentrating consciousness
on it, or on some particular part of it. This explanation, which I leave
for the consideration of philosophers, would not have suited Sir W.
Hamilton, since it would have required him to limit the extent which he
habitually gave to the expression Edition: current; Page: [364] “mental
act.”k Every phænomenon of mind, down to the mere reception of a
sensation, he regards as an act: therein differing from Kant, and
annihilating the need and use of the word, the sole function of which is
to distinguish what the mind originates, from what something else
originates in the mind.

To return to the definition of Logic, as the science of the Forms of
Thought, considered in relation, not to the thinking act itself, but, so
far as they are distinguishable from it, to the products of thought. The
products of thought are Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings, and the
Forms of Thought are Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning. Logic is the
science of those Forms, so far as concerns the rules for the right
formation of the products: or, as our author elsewhere phrases it, the
science of the “formal conditions” of valid thinking.[*] These modes of
expression have a rare power of darkening the subject, but I am
endeavouring to give them an intelligible interpretation, by means of
that which they profess to explain. If, then, all thinking consists in
adding, to given matter, a Form derived from the mind itself, what shall
we say of the division, on which so much stress is laid, of Thinking
itself into two kinds, Formal and Material Thinking, the first of which
alone belongs to Logic, or at all events to pure Logic? Mr. Mansel has
written a volume for the express purpose of showing that Logic is only
concerned with Formal Thinking; and Sir W. Hamilton’s division of Logic
into Pure and Modified, agrees with Mr. Mansel’s distinction.[†] Yet,
according to the definition we have just considered, all thinking
whatever is Formal Thinking: since all thinking is either conceiving,
judging, or reasoning, and these are the Forms of Thought. If Logic
investigates the conditions requisite for the right formation of
concepts, of judgments, and of reasonings, it investigates all the
conditions of right thought, for there are no other kinds of thought
than these; and if it does all this, what is left for the so-called
Material Thinking which Logic is said not to be concerned with?

The answer to this question affords an additional specimen of the
incurable confusion, in which the processes of thought are involved by
the unhappy misapplication to them of the metaphorical word Form. Though
Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings, are said to be the forms of
thought, and the only forms which thought takes, or rather gives; the
metaphysicians who deal in Forms are in the habit of using phrases which
signify that Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings, though themselves
Forms, have also, in themselves, a formal part and a material. Different
concepts, Edition: current; Page: [365] judgments, and reasonings, have
different matter, according to what it is that the conception, the
judgment, or the reasoning, is about: and as whatever part of anything
is not its Matter, is always styled its Form, whatever is common to all
Concepts, or whatever belongs to them irrespectively of all differences
in their matter, is said to be their Form; and so of Judgments and of
Reasonings. Thus, the difference between an affirmative and a negative
judgment is a difference of form, because a judgment may be either
affirmative or negative whatever be the matter to which it relates. The
difference between a categorical and an hypothetical syllogism is a
difference of form, because it neither depends on, nor is it at all
affected by, any differences in the matter. Logic, according to Mr.
Mansel[*]—pure Logic, according to Sir W. Hamilton—is conversant only
with the Forms of Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings, not with their
Matter. Not only is it concerned exclusively with the Forms of thought,
but exclusively with the Forms of those Forms. And here I fairly
renounce any further attempt to deduce Sir W. Hamilton’s or Mr. Mansel’s
lconceptionl of Logic from their definitions of it. I collect it from
the general evidence of their treatises, and I proceed to show why I
consider it to be wrong.

Logic, Sir W. Hamilton has told us, lays down the laws or precepts
indispensable to Valid Thought; the conditions to which thought is bound
to conform, under the penalty of being invalid, ineffectual, not
accomplishing its end. And what is, peculiarly and emphatically, the end
of Thinking? Surely it is the attainment of Truth. Surely, if not the
sole, at all events the first and most essential constituent of valid
thought, is that its results should be true. Concepts, Judgments, and
Reasonings, should agree with the reality of things, meaning by things
the Phænomena or sensible presentations, to which those mental products
have reference. A concept, to be rightly framed, must be a concept of
something real, and must agree with the real fact which it endeavours to
represent, that is, the collection of attributes composing the concept
must really exist in the objects marked by the class-name, and in no
others. A judgment, to be rightly framed, must be a true judgment, that
is, the objects judged of must really possess the attributes predicated
of them. A reasoning, to be rightly framed, must conduct to a true
conclusion, since the only purpose of reasoning is to make known to us
truths which we cannot learn by direct intuition. Even those who take
the most limited view of Logic, allow that the conclusion must be true
conditionally—provided that the premises are true. The most important,
then, and at bottom the only important quality of a thought being its
truth, the laws or precepts provided for the guidance of thought must
surely have for their principal purpose that the products of thinking
shall be true. Edition: current; Page: [366] Yet with this, according to
Mr. Mansel, Logic has no concern;[*] and Sir W. Hamilton reserves it for
a sort of appendix to the science, under the title of Modified Logic.
Questions of truth and falsity, according to both writers, regard only
Material Thinking, while Formal Thinking is the province of Logic. The
only precepts for thinking with which Logic concerns itself, are those
which have some other purpose than the conformity of our thoughts to the
fact. Yet every possible precept for thought, if it be an honest one,
must have this for at least its ultimate object. What, then, is excluded
from Logic, and what is left in it, by the doctrine that it is only
concerned with Formal Thinking? What is excluded is the whole of the
evidences of the validity of thought. What is included is part of the
evidences of its invalidity.

In no case can thinking be valid unless the concepts, judgments, and
conclusions resulting from it are conformable to fact. And in no case
can we satisfy ourselves that they are so, by looking merely at the
relations of one part of the train of thought to another. We must ascend
to the original sources, the presentations of experience, and examine
the train of thought in its relation to these. But we can sometimes
discover, without ascending to the sources, that the process of thought
is not valid; having been so conducted that it cannot possibly avail for
obtaining concepts, judgments, or conclusions in accordance with fact.
This, for example, is the case, if we have allowed ourselves to travel
from premises to a conclusion through an ambiguous term. The process
then gives no ground at all for believing the conclusion to be true: it
is perhaps true, but we have no more reason to believe so than we had
before. Or again, the concept, the judgment, or the reasoning may
involve a contradiction, and so cannot possibly correspond to any real
state of facts. It is with this part of the subject only, in the opinion
of these philosophers, that Logic concerns itself. According to Mr.
Mansel, Logic “accepts, as logically valid, all such concepts,
judgments, and reasonings, as do not, directly or indirectly, imply
contradictions; pronouncing them thus far to be legitimate as thoughts,
that they do not in ultimate analysis destroy themselves . . . leaving
to this or that branch of material science to determine how far the same
products of thought are guaranteed by the testimony of this or that
special experience.”* Mr. Mansel has not here conceived his own view of
the subject with his usual precision. He narrows the field of Logic more
than he intends. That to which he confines the name of Logic, accepts as
valid all concepts and judgments that do not imply contradictions, but
by no means all reasonings. It rejects these not only when
self-contradictory, but when simply inconclusive. It condemns a
reasoning not only if it draws a conclusion inconsistent Edition:
current; Page: [367] with the premises, but if it draws one which the
premises do not warrant; not only if the conclusion must, but if it may,
be false though the premises be true. For the notion of true and false
will force its way even into Formal Logic, whatever pains Sir W.
Hamilton and Mr. Mansel give themselves to make the notions of
consistent and inconsistent, or of thinkable and unthinkable, do duty
instead of it. The ideas of truth and falsity cannot be eliminated from
reasoning. We may abstract from actual truth, but the validity of
reasoning is always a question of conditional truth—whether one
proposition must be true if others are true, or whether one proposition
can be true if others are true. When Judgments or Reasonings are in
question, “the conditions of the thinkable” are simply the conditions of
the believable.

What Mr. Mansel and Sir W. Hamilton really mean, is to segregate from
the remainder of the theory of the investigation of truth, as much of it
as does not require any reference to the original sufficiency of the
groundwork of facts, or the correctness of their interpretation, and
call this exclusively Logic, or Pure Logic. They assume that concepts
have been formed and judgments made somehow; and if there is nothing
within the four corners of the concept or the judgment which proves it
absurd, that is, no self-contradiction, they do not question it further.
Whether it is grounded on fact or on mere supposition, and if on fact,
whether the fact is represented correctly, they do not ask; but think
only of the conditions necessary for preventing errors from getting into
the process of thought, which were not in the notions or the premises
from whence it started. The theory of these conditions (of which the
doctrine of the Syllogism is the principal part) Mr. Mansel calls Logic,
and Sir W. Hamilton Pure Logic. The expression “Formal Logic,” which is
sometimes applied to it, is perhaps as distinctive and as little
misleading as any other, and is that which, for want of a better, I am
content to use. That this part of Logic should be distinguished and
named, and made an object of consideration separately from the rest, is
perfectly natural. What I protest against, is the doctrine of Sir W.
Hamilton, Mr. Mansel, and many other thinkers, that this part is the
whole; that there is no other Logic, or Pure Logic, at all; that
whatever is more than this, belongs not to a general science and art of
Thinking, but (in the words of Mr. Mansel) to this or that material
science.[*]

This doctrine assumes, that with the exception of the rules of Formal,
that is, of Syllogistic Logic, no other rules can be framed which are
applicable to thought generally, abstractedly from particular matter:
That a general theory is possible respecting the relations which the
parts of a process of thought should bear to one another, but not
respecting the Edition: current; Page: [368] proper relations of all
thought to its matter: That the problem which Bacon set before himself,
and led the way towards resolving, is an impossible one: That there is
not, and cannot be, any general Theory of Evidence: That when we have
taken care that our notions and propositions concerning Things shall be
consistent with themselves and with one another, and have drawn no
inferences from them but such the falsity of which would be inconsistent
with assertions already made, we have done all that a philosophy of
Thought can do—and the agreement and disagreement of our beliefs with
the laws of the thing itself, is in each case a special question,
belonging to the science of that thing in particular: That the study of
nature, the search for objective truth, does not admit of any rules, nor
its attainment, of any general test. For if there are such rules, if
there is such a test, and the consideration of it does not belong to
Logic, to what science or study does it belong? There is no other
science, which, irrespectively of particular matter, professes to direct
the intellect in the application of its powers to any matter on which
knowledge is possible. These philosophers must therefore think that
there can be no such rules, or that if there are, they can only be of
the vaguest possible description. Sir W. Hamilton says as much.

If we abstract from the specialities of particular objects and sciences,
and consider only the rules which ought to govern our procedure in
reference to the object-matter of the sciences in general,—and this is
all that a universal Logic can propose,—these rules are few in number,
and their applications simple and evident. A Material or Objective
Logic, except in special subordination to the circumstances of
particular sciences, is therefore of very narrow limits, and all that it
can tell us is soon told.*

It is very true that all Sir W. Hamilton can tell us of it is soon told.
Nothing can be more meagre, trite, and indefinite than the little which
he finds to say respecting what he calls Modified Logic. And no wonder,
when we consider the following extraordinary deliverance, which I quote
from the conclusion of his Thirtieth Lecture on Logic. Speaking of
Physical Science generally, Sir W. Hamilton thus expresses himself:

In this department of Knowledge there is chiefly demanded a patient
habit of attention to details, in order to detect phænomena; and, these
discovered, their generalization is usually so easy that there is little
exercise afforded to the higher energies of Judgment and Reasoning. It
was Bacon’s boast that Induction, as applied to nature, would equalize
all talents, level the aristocracy of genius, accomplish marvels by
co-operation and method, and leave little to be done by the force of
individual intellects. This boast has been fulfilled; Science has, by
the Inductive Process, been brought down to minds, who previously would
have been incompetent for its cultivation, and physical knowledge now
usefully occupies many who would otherwise have been without any
rational pursuit.†

Edition: current; Page: [369]
Sir W. Hamilton had good reason for confining his own logical
speculations to a minor and subordinate department of the Science and
Art of Thinking, when he was so destitute as this passage proves, of the
preliminary knowledge required for making any proficiency in the other
and higher branch. Every one who has obtained any knowledge of the
physical sciences from really scientific study, knows that the questions
of evidence presented, and the powers of abstraction required, in the
speculations on which their greater generalizations depend, are such as
to task the very highest capacities of the human intellect: and a
thinker, however able, who is too little acquainted with the processes
actually followed in the investigation of objective truth, to be aware
of this fact, is entitled to no authority when he denies the possibility
of a Philosophy of Evidence and of the Investigation of Nature; inasmuch
as his own macquirementsm do not furnish him with the means of judging
whether it is possible or not.*

If any general theory of the sufficiency of Evidence and the legitimacy
of Generalization be possible, this must be Logic κατ’ ἐξοχήν, and
anything else called by the name can only be ancillary to it. For the
Logic called Edition: current; Page: [370] Formal only aims at removing
one of the obstacles to the attainment of truth, by preventing such
mistakes as render our thoughts inconsistent with themselves or with one
another: and it is of no importance whether we think consistently or
not, if we think wrongly. It is only as a means to material truth, that
the formal, or to speak more clearly, the conditional, validity of an
operation of thought is of any value; and even that value is only
negative: we have not made the smallest positive advance towards right
thinking, by merely keeping ourselves consistent in what is, perhaps,
systematic error. This by no means implies that Formal Logic, even in
its narrowest sense, is not of very great, though purely negative,
value. On the contrary, I subscribe heartily to all that is said of its
importance by Sir W. Hamilton and Mr. Mansel. It is good to have our
path clearly marked out, and a parapet put up at all the dangerous
points, whether the path leads us to the place we desire to reach, or to
another place altogether. But to call this alone Logic, or this alone
Pure Logic, as if all the rest of the Philosophy of Thought and Evidence
were merely an adaptation of this to something else, is to ignore the
end to which all rules laid down for our thinking operations are meant
to be subservient. The purpose of them all, is to enable us to decide
whether anything, and what, is proved true. Formal Logic conduces
indirectly to this end, by enabling us to perceive, either that the
process which has been performed is one which could not possibly prove
anything, or that it is one which will prove something to be true,
unless the premises happen to be false. This indirect aid is of the
greatest importance; but it is important because the end, the
ascertainment of truth, is important; and it is important only as
complementary to a still more fundamental part of the operation, in
which Formal Logic affords no help.

I do not deny the scientific convenience of considering this limited
portion of Logic apart from the rest—the doctrine of the Syllogism, for
instance, apart from the theory of Induction; and of teaching it in an
earlier stage of intellectual education. It can be taught earlier, since
it does not, like the inductive logic, presuppose a practical
acquaintance with the processes of scientific investigation; and the
greatest service to be derived from it, that of keeping the mind clear,
can be best rendered before a habit of confused thinking has been
acquired. Not only, however, is it indispensable that the larger Logic,
which embraces all the general conditions of the ascertainment of truth,
should be studied in addition to the smaller Logic, which only concerns
itself with the conditions of consistency; but the smaller Logic ought
to be, at least finally, studied as part of the greater—as a portion of
the means to the same end; and its relation to the other parts—to the
other means—should be distinctly displayed. If thought be anything more
than a sportive exercise of the mind, its purpose is to enable us to
know what can be known respecting the facts of the universe: its
Edition: current; Page: [371] judgments and conclusions express, or are
intended to express, some of those facts: and the connexion which Formal
Logic, by its analysis of the reasoning process, points out between one
proposition and another, exists only because there is a connexion
between one objective truth and another, which makes it possible for us
to know objective truths which have never been observed, in virtue of
others which have. This possibility is an eternal mystery and
stumbling-block to Formal Logic. The bare idea that any new truth can be
brought out of a Concept—that analysis can ever find in it anything
which synthesis has not first put in—is absurd on the face of it: yet
this is all the explanation that Formal Logic, as viewed by Sir W.
Hamilton, is able to give of the phænomenon; and Mr. Mansel expressly
limits the province of Logic to analytic judgments—to such as are merely
identical. But what the Logic of mere consistency cannot do, the Logic
of the ascertainment of truth, the Philosophy of Evidence in its larger
acceptation, can. It can explain the function of the Ratiocinative
process as an instrument of the human intellect in the discovery of
truth, and can place it in its true correlation with the other
instruments. It is therefore alone competent to furnish a philosophical
theory of Reasoning. Such partial account as can be given of the process
by looking at it solely by itself, however useful and even necessary to
accurate thought, does not dispense with, but points out in a more
emphatic manner the need of, the more comprehensive Logic of which it
should form a part, and which alone can give a meaning or a reason of
existence to the Logic styled Formal, or to the reasoning process
itself.

Edition: current; Page: [372]


CHAPTER XXI: The Fundamental Laws of Thought According to Sir William Hamilton

having marked out, as the sole province of Logic, the “Laws of Thought,”
Sir W. Hamilton naturally proceeds to specify what these are. The
“Fundamental Laws of Thought,” of which all other laws that can be laid
down for thought are but particular applications, are, according to our
author, three in number: the Law of Identity; the Law of Contradiction;
and the Law of Excluded Middle. In his Lectures he recognised a fourth,
“the Law of Reason and Consequent,” which seems to be compounded of the
Law of Causation, and the Leibnitzian “Principle of Sufficient
Reason.”[*] But as, in his later speculations, he no longer considered
this as an ultimate law, it needs not be further spoken of.

These three laws he otherwise denominates “The Conditions of the
Thinkable:”* from which it might have been supposed that he regarded
them as Laws of Thought in the scientific sense of the word law;
conditions to which thought cannot but conform, and apart from which it
is impossible. One would have said, à priori, that he could not mean
anything but this: since otherwise the expression “Conditions of the
Thinkable” is perverted from its meaning. Nevertheless, this is not what
he means, at least in this place. It is on this very occasion that he
disclaims, as applicable to laws of thought, the scientific meaning of
the term, and declares them to be (like the laws made by Parliament)
general precepts; not necessities of the thinking act, but instructions
for right thinking. Yet it would not have been claiming too much for
these three laws, to have regarded them as laws in the more peremptory
sense; as actual necessities of thought. Our author could hardly have
meant that we are able to disbelieve that a thing is itself, or to
Edition: current; Page: [373] believe that a thing is, and at the same
time that it is not. He not only, like other people, constantly assumes
this to be an impossibility, but makes that impossibility the ground of
some of his leading philosophical doctrines; as when he says that it is
impossible for us to doubt the actual facts of consciousness “because
the doubt implies a contradiction.”* It is true that a person may, in
one sense, believe contradictory propositions, that is, he may believe
the affirmative at some times and the negative at others, alternately
forgetting the two beliefs. It is also true that he may yield a passive
assent to two forms of words, which, had he been fully conscious of
their meaning, he would have known to be, either wholly or in part, an
affirmation and a denial of the same fact. But when once he is made to
see that there is a contradiction, it is totally impossible for him to
believe it.

Now, to compel people to see a contradiction where a contradiction is,
constitutes the entire office of Logic in the limited sense in which Sir
W. Hamilton conceives it: and he is quite right in regarding the whole
of Logic, in that narrow sense, as resting on the three laws specified
by him. To call them the fundamental laws of Thought is aa misnomer; but
they are the laws of Consistency. All inconsistency is a violation of
some one of these laws; an unconscious violation, for knowingly to
violate them is impossible.

Something remains to be said respecting the three Laws considered
singly, as well as respecting our author’s mode of regarding them.

The Law or Principle of Identity (Principium Identitatis) is no other
than the time-honoured axiom, “Whatever is, is,” or, in another
phraseology, “A thing is the same as itself:” the proposition which
Locke, in his chapter on Maxims, treated with so much disrespect.[*] Sir
W. Hamilton, probably finding it difficult to establish the “principle
of all logical affirmation” on such a basis as this, presents the axiom†
in a modified shape, as an assertion of the identity between a whole and
its parts; or rather between a whole Concept, and its parts in
Comprehension—the attributes which compose it; for Logic, as conceived
by him, has nothing to do with any wholes but Concepts, abstracting
altogether (as he asserts) from the reality of the things conceived.‡

Edition: current; Page: [374]
Although our author still so far defers to the old version of the
Principle of Identity, as to say that it is “expressed in the formula A
is A, or A = A,”[*] I must admit that while paying this tribute of
respect to our ancient friend, he has taken a very substantial and
useful liberty with him, and has made him mean much more than he ever
meant before. The only fault that can be found (but that is a serious
one) is, that if we accept this view of the maxim, we shall require many
“principles of logical affirmation” instead of one. For if we are to
make a separate principle for every mode in which we have occasion to
re-affirm the same thing in different words, we need a large number of
them. If we require a special principle to entitle us, when we have
affirmed a set of attributes jointly, to affirm over again the same
attributes severally, we require also a long list of such principles as
these: When one thing is before another, the other is after. When one
thing is after another, the other is before. When one thing is along
with another, the other is along with the first. When one thing is like,
or unlike, another, the other is like (or unlike) the first: in short,
as many fundamental principles as there are kinds of relation. For we
have need of all these changes of expression in our processes of thought
and reasoning. What is at the bottom of them all is, that Logic (to
borrow a phrase from our author)[†] postulates to be allowed to assert
the same meaning in any words which will, consistently with their
signification, express it. The use and meaning of a Fundamental Law of
Thought is, that it asserts in general terms the right to do something,
which the mind needs to do in cases as they arise. It is in this sense
that the Dictum de Omni et Nullo is called the fundamental law of the
Syllogism. But, for this purpose, it is necessary that the Law or
Postulate should be stated in so comprehensive and universal a manner as
to cover every case in which the act authorized by it requires to be
done. Looked at in this light, the Principle of Identity ought to have
been expressed thus: Whatever is true in one form of words, is true in
every other form of words which conveys the same meaning. Thus worded,
it fulfils the requirements of a First Principle of Thought; for it is
the widest possible expression of an act of thought which is always
legitimate, and continually has to be done.*

Edition: current; Page: [375]
Understood in this sense, the Principle of Identity absorbs into itself
a Postulate of Logic on which Sir W. Hamilton lays great stress, and
which he did good service in making prominent, though we shall hereafter
find that he sometimes misapplies it. He expresses it as follows: “The
only Postulate of Logic which requires an articulate enouncement is the
demand, that before dealing with a judgment or reasoning expressed in
language, the import of its terms should be fully understood; in other
words, Logic postulates to be allowed to state explicitly in language,
all that is implicitly contained in the thought.”* There cannot be a
more just demand: but let us carefully note the terms in which our
author enunciates it, that he may be held to them afterwards. Everything
may be stated explicitly in language, which is “implicitly contained in
the thought,” that is (according to his own interpretation) in the
“import of the terms” used. In other words, we have a right to bexpressb
explicitly, what has already been asserted in terms which really mean,
though they do not explicitly declare it. Observe, what has been already
asserted; not what can be inferred from something that has been
asserted. One proposition may imply another, but unless the implication
is in the very meaning of the terms, it avails nothing. It may be
impossible that the one proposition should be true without the other
being true also, and yet Logic cannot “postulate” to be allowed to
affirm this last; she must be required to prove it. Interpreted in this,
its true sense, Sir W. Hamilton’s postulate is legitimate, but is only a
particular case of the Principle of Identity in its most generalized
shape. It is a case of postulating to be allowed to express a given
meaning in another form of words.

As already mentioned, Sir W. Hamilton represents the Principle of
Identity to be “the principle of all logical affirmation.” This I can by
no means admit, whether the Principle in question is taken in Sir W.
Hamilton’s narrower, or in my own wider sense. The reaffirmation in new
language of what has already been asserted—or (descending to particulars
and adopting our author’s phraseology) the thinking of a Concept through
an attribute which is a part of itself—can, as I formerly observed, be
admitted as a correct account of the nature of affirmation, only in the
case of Analytical Judgments. In a Synthetical Judgment, the attribute
predicated is thought not as part of, but as existing in a common
subject along with, the group of attributes composing the Concept: and
of this operation of thought it is plain that no principle of Identity
can give any account, since Edition: current; Page: [376] there is a new
element introduced, which is not identical with any part of what
pre-existed in thought. This is clearly seen by Mr. Mansel, who
expressly limits the dominion of the Law of Identity to analytical
judgments;* and, with perfect consistency, regards these as the only
judgments with which Logic, as such, is concerned. If, then, the Law of
Identity is to be upheld as the principle “of all logical affirmation,”
we must understand that logical affirmation does not mean all
affirmation, but only affirmations which communicate no fact, and merely
assert that what is called by a name, is what the name declares it to
be.

If our author had stated the Law of Identity to be the principle not of
“logical affirmation,” but of affirmative Reasoning, he would have said
something far more plausible, and which had been maintained by many of
his predecessors. The truth is, however, that as far as that law is a
principle of reasoning at all, it is as much a principle of negative, as
of affirmative reasoning. In proving a negative, as much as in proving
an affirmative, we require the liberty of exchanging a proposition for
any other that is æquipollent with it, and of predicating separately of
any subject, all attributes which have been predicated of it jointly.
These liberties the mind rightfully claims in all its intellectual
operations. The Principle of Identity is not the peculiar groundwork of
any special kind of thinking, but an indispensable postulate in all
thinking.

The second of the “Fundamental Laws” is the Law or Principle of
Contradiction (Principium Contradictionis); that two assertions, one of
which denies what the other affirms, cannot be thought together. Most
people would have said, cannot be believed together; but our author
resolutely refuses to recognise belief as any element in the scientific
analysis of a proposition. “This law,” he says, “is the principle of all
logical negation and distinction,”† and “is logically expressed in the
formula, What is contradictory is unthinkable.” To this he subjoins, as
an equivalent mathematical formula, “A = not A = o, or A - A = o:”‡ a
misapplication and perversion of algebraical symbols, not to be omitted
among other evidences how little familiar he was with mathematical modes
of thought.

Concerning the name of this law, Sir W. Hamilton observes that “as it
enjoins the absence of contradiction as the indispensable condition of
thought, it ought to be called, not the Law of Contradiction, but the
Law of Non-Contradiction, or of non-repugnantia.”§ It seems that no
extent and accuracy of knowledge concerning the opinions of
predecessors, can preserve a thinker from giving an erroneous
interpretation of their meaning by Edition: current; Page: [377]
antedating a confusion of ideas which exists in his own mind. The Law of
Contradiction does not “enjoin the absence of contradiction;” it is not
an injunction at all. If those who wrote before Sir W. Hamilton of the
Law or Principle of Contradiction, had meant by those terms what he did,
namely, a rule or precept, it would have been, no doubt, absurd in them
to have given the name Law of Contradiction, to a Precept of
Non-Contradiction. But I venture to assert that when they spoke of the
Law of Contradiction (which most of them, I believe, never did, but
called it the Principle) they were no more dreaming of enjoining
anything, than when they spoke of the Law or Principle of Identity they
intended to enjoin identity. They used those terms in their proper
scientific, and not, as Sir W. Hamilton does, in their moral or
legislative sense. By the Law of Identity they meant one of the
properties of identity, namely, that a proposition which is identical
must be true. And by the Law of Contradiction they meant one of the
properties of contradiction, namely, that what is contradictory cannot
be true. We should express their meaning better if instead of the word
Law, we used the expressions, Doctrine of Identity, and Doctrine of
Contradiction. This is what they had in their minds, and even expressed
by their words; for the word Principle, with them, meant a particular
kind of Doctrine, namely, one which is the groundwork, and justifying
authority, of a whole class of operations of the mind. If the word Law
is to be retained, Principium Contradictionis would be better
translated, not Law of Contradiction but Law of Contradictory
Propositions; were it not for the consideration, that the principle of
Excluded Middle is also a law of contradictory propositions.

The Law of Contradiction, according to Sir W. Hamilton, is the
“principle of all logical negation.”* I do not see how it can be the
principle of any negation except the denial that a thing is the
contradictory of itself. That a sight is not a taste is a negation, and
it must be a very narrow use of the term which refuses it the title of a
logical negation. But there is no contradiction between a sight and a
taste. That blue is not green, involves no logical contradiction. We
could believe that a green thing may be blue, as easily as we believe
that a round thing may be blue, if experience did not teach us the
incompatibility of the former attributes, and the compatibility of the
latter. The negative judgment, that a man is not a horse, may indeed be
said to be grounded on the Principle of Contradiction, inasmuch as the
opposite assertion, that a man is a horse, is in certain of its parts
contradictory, though in others only false. The word man cmay bec
understood as signifying (in precise logical language, connoting) among
dthed other properties, Edition: current; Page: [378] that of having
exactly two legs—the word horse, that of having four; and in respect of
this particular part of the meaning of the terms, the subject and the
predicate are contradictory, the one affirming and the other denying the
extra number of legs. But suppose the subject and predicate of the
judgment to be names of classes constituted by positive attributes
without negative, as mathematician and moralist, or merchant and
philosopher. An affirmation uniting them may then be false, but cannot
possibly be self-contradictory. The Law of Contradiction cannot be the
ground on which it is asserted that a mathematician is not a moralist,
for the two Concepts are only different, not contradictory, nor even
repugnant.

Others have said, that the Law or Doctrine of Contradiction is the
principle of Negative Reasoning. But the obvious truth is, that it is
the principle of all Reasoning, so far as reasoning can be regarded
apart from objective truth or falsehood. For, abstractedly from that
consideration, the only meaning of validity in reasoning is that it
neither involves a contradiction, nor infers anything the denial of
which would not contradict the premises. Valid reasoning, from the point
of view of merely Formal Logic, is a negative conception; it means,
reasoning which is not self-destructive; which cannot be discovered to
be worthless from its own data. It would be absurd to suppose that the
validity of the reasoning process itself, either affirmative or
negative, could be proved from the Doctrine of Contradiction; for though
a given syllogism may be proved valid by showing that the falsity of the
conclusion, combined with the truth of one premise, would contradict the
truth of the other, this can only be done by another syllogism, so that
the validity of Reasoning would be taken for granted in the attempt to
prove it. The Law of Contradiction is a principle of reasoning in the
same sense, and in the same sense only, as the Law of Identity is. It is
the generalization of a mental act which is of continual occurrence, and
which cannot be dispensed with in reasoning. As we require the liberty
of substituting for a given assertion, the same assertion in different
words, so we require the liberty of substituting, for any assertion, the
denial of its contradictory. The affirmation of the one and the denial
of the other are logical equivalents, which it is allowable and
indispensable to make use of as mutually convertible.

The third “Fundamental Law” is the law or principle of Excluded Middle
(principium Exclusi Medii vel Tertii), of which the purport is, that, of
two directly contradictory propositions, one or the other must be true.
I am now expressing the axiom in my own language, for the tortuous
phraseology* by which our author eescapes frome recognising the ideas of
truth and falsity, having already been sufficiently exemplified, may
here be disregarded. Edition: current; Page: [379] This axiom is the
other half of the doctrine of Contradictory Propositions. By the law of
Contradiction, contradictory propositions cannot both be true; by the
law of Excluded Middle, they cannot both be false. Or, to state the
meaning in other language, by the law of Contradiction a proposition
cannot be both true and false; by the law of Excluded Middle it must be
either true or false—there is no third possibility.

Sir W. Hamilton says that this law is “the principle of disjunctive
judgments.”* By disjunctive judgments, logicians have always meant,
judgments in this form: Either this is true or that is true. The law of
Excluded Middle cannot be the principle of any disjunctive judgment but
those in which the subject of both the members is the same, and one of
the predicates a simple negation of the other: as, A is either B or not
B. That indeed rests on the principle of Excluded Middle, or rather, is
the very formula of that principle. It is here to be remarked that Sir
W. Hamilton, after Krug, but by a very unaccountable departure from the
common usage of logicians, confines the name of Disjunctive Judgments to
those in which all the alternative propositions have the same subject:
“D is either B, or C, or A.”† This is not only an arbitrary change in
the meaning of words, but renders the classification of propositions
incomplete, leaving two kinds of disjunctive propositions (Either B, C,
or D, is A, and Either A is B or C is D) unrecognised and without a
name. But even in our author’s restricted sense of the word Disjunctive,
I cannot see how the Law of Excluded Middle can be said to be the
principle of all disjunctive judgments. The judgment that A is either B
or not B, is warranted and its truth certified by the Law of Excluded
Middle: but the judgment that A is either B or C, both B and C being
positive, requires some other voucher than the law that one or other of
two contradictories must be true. Thus, “X is either a man or a brute,”
is not a judgment grounded on the principle of Excluded Middle, since
brute is not a bare negation of man, but includes the positive attribute
of being an animal, which X may possibly not be.

It might be said, with more plausibility, that the Law of Excluded
Middle is the principle of Disjunctive Reasoning. Thus, in the last
example, “X is either a man or a brute” may be a conclusion from two
premises, that X is an animal, and that every animal is either a man or
a brute: the latter of which is a disjunctive judgment grounded on the
Law of Excluded Middle. But it is not the fact that all disjunctive
conclusions are inferred from premises of this nature. Having been told
that A has lost a son, I conclude that either B, C, or D (A having no
other sons) is dead: what kind of reasoning is this? Disjunctive,
surely: it has a disjunctive premise, and leads to a disjunctive
conclusion. But the disjunctive premise (Every son of A is either B, C,
or Edition: current; Page: [380] D) does not rest on the Law of Excluded
Middle, or on any necessity of thought; it rests on my knowledge of the
individual fact.

The third Law, however, like the two others, is one of the principles of
all reasonings, being the generalization of a process which is liable to
be required in all of them. As the Doctrine of Contradiction authorizes
us to substitute for the assertion of either of two contradictory
propositions, the denial of the other, so the doctrine of Excluded
Middle empowers us to substitute for the denial of either of two
contradictory propositions, the assertion of the other. Thus all the
three principles which our author terms the Fundamental Laws of Thought,
are universal postulates of Reasoning; and as such, are entitled to the
conspicuous position which our author assigns to them in Logic: though
it is evident that they ought not to be placed at the very beginning of
the subject, but at the earliest, in its Second Part, the theory of
Judgments, or Propositions: since they essentially involve the ideas of
Truth and Falsity, which are attributes only of judgments, not of names,
or concepts.

It is another question altogether, what we ought to think of these three
principles, considered not as general expressions of legitimate
intellectual processes, but as themselves speculative truths. Sir W.
Hamilton considers them to be such in a very universal sense indeed,
since he thinks we are bound to regard them as true beyond the sphere of
either real or imaginable phænomenal experience—to be true of Things in
Themselves—of Noumena. “Whatever,” he says,

violates the laws, whether of Identity, of Contradiction, or of Excluded
Middle, we feel to be absolutely impossible, not only in thought, but in
existence. Thus we cannot attribute even to Omnipotence the power of
making a thing different from itself, of making a thing at once to be
and not to be, of making a thing neither to be nor not to be. These
three laws thus determine to us the sphere of possibility and of
impossibility: and this not merely in thought but in reality, not only
logically but metaphysically.*

And in another place: “If the true character of objective validity be
universality, the laws of Logic are really of that character, for those
laws constrain us, by their own authority, to regard them as the
universal laws not only of human thought, but of universal reason.”† A
few pages before, our author took pains to impress upon us that we were
not to regard these laws as necessities of thought, but as general
precepts “which we are able to violate:”[*] but they now appear to be
necessities of thought and something more.

I readily admit that these three general propositions are universally
true Edition: current; Page: [381] of all phænomena. I also admit that
if there are any inherent necessities of thought, these are such. I
express myself in this qualified manner, because whoever is aware how
artificial, modifiable, the creatures of circumstances, and alterable by
circumstances, most of the supposed necessities of thought are (though
real necessities to a given person at a given time), will hesitate to
affirm of any such necessities that they are an original part of our
mental constitution. Whether the three so-called Fundamental Laws are
laws of our thoughts by the native structure of the mind, or merely
because we perceive them to be universally true of observed phænomena, I
will not positively decide: but they are laws of our thoughts now, and
invincibly so. They may or may not be capable of alteration by
experience, but the conditions of our existence deny to us the
experience which would be required to alter them. Any assertion,
therefore, which conflicts with one of these laws—any proposition, for
instance, which asserts a contradiction, though it were on a subject
wholly removed from the sphere of our experience, is to us unbelievable.
The belief in such a proposition is, in the present constitution of
nature, impossible as a mental fact.*

But Sir W. Hamilton goes beyond this: he thinks that the obstacle to
belief does not lie solely in an incapacity of our believing faculty,
but in objective incapacities of existence; that the “Fundamental Laws
of Thought” are laws of Existence too, and may be known to be true not
only of Phænomena but also of Noumena. Of this, however, as of all else
relating to Noumena, the verdict of philosophy, I apprehend, must be
that we are entirely ignorant. The distinction itself is but an idle
one; for since Noumena, if they exist, are wholly unknowable by us,
except phænomenally, through their effects on us; and since all
attributes which exist for us, even in our fancy, are but phænomena,
there is nothing for us either to affirm or deny of a Noumenon except
phænomenal attributes: existence Edition: current; Page: [382] itself,
as we conceive it, being merely the power of producing phænomena. Now in
respect to phænomenal attributes, no one denies the three “Fundamental
Laws” to be universally true. Since then they are laws of all Phænomena,
and since Existence has to us no meaning but one which has relation to
Phænomena, we are quite safe in looking upon them as laws of Existence.
This is sufficient for those who hold the doctrine of the Relativity of
human knowledge. But Sir W. Hamilton, as has been seen, does not hold
that doctrine, though he holds a verbal truism which he chooses to call
by the same name. His opinion is that we do know something more than
phænomena: that we know the Primary Qualities of Bodies as existing in
the Noumena, in the things themselves, and not as mere powers of
affecting us. Sir W. Hamilton, therefore, needs another kind of argument
to establish the doctrine that the Laws of Identity, Contradiction, and
Excluded Middle, are laws of all existence: and here we have it:

To deny the universal application of the three laws, is, in fact, to
subvert the reality of thought; and as this subversion is itself an act
of thought, it in fact annihilates itself. When, for example, I say that
A is, and then say that A is not, by the second assertion I sublate or
take away what, by the first assertion, I posited or laid down; thought,
in the one case, undoing by negation what, in the other, it had by
affirmation done.

This proves only that a contradiction is unthinkable, not that it is
impossible in point of fact. But what follows goes more directly to the
mark.

But when it is asserted that A existing and A non-existing are at once
true, what does fitf imply? It implies that negation and affirmation
correspond to nothing out of the mind,—that there is no agreement, no
disagreement between thought and its objects; and this is tantamount to
saying that truth and falsehood are merely empty sounds. For if we only
think by affirmation and negation, and if these are only as they are
exclusive of each other, it follows, that unless existence and
non-existence be opposed objectively in the same manner as affirmation
and negation are opposed subjectively, all our thought is a mere
illusion. Thus it is that those who would assert the possibility of
contradictions being at once true, in fact annihilate the possibility of
truth itself, and the whole significance of thought.*

Of this favourite style of argument with our author we have already had
many specimens, and have said so much about them, that we can afford to
be brief in the present instance. Assuming it to be true that “to deny
the universal application of the three laws” as laws of existence “is to
subvert the reality of thought:” is anything added to the force of this
consideration by saying that “this subversion is itself an act of
thought?” If the reality of thought can be subverted, is there any
peculiar enormity in doing it by means of thought itself? In what other
way can we imagine it to be done? Edition: current; Page: [383] And if
it were true that thought is an invalid process, what better proof of
this could be given than that we could, by thinking, arrive at the
conclusion that our thoughts are not to be trusted? Sir W. Hamilton
always seems to suppose that the imaginary sceptic, who doubts the
validity of thought altogether, is obliged to claim a greater validity
for his subversive thoughts than he allows to the thoughts they subvert.
But it is enough for him to claim the same validity, so that all
opinions are thrown into equal uncertainty.* Sir W. Hamilton, of all
men, ought to know this, for when he is himself on the sceptical side of
any question, as when speaking of the Absolute, or anything else which
he deems inaccessible to the human faculties, this is the very line of
argument he employs. He proves the invalidity, as regards those
subjects, of the thinking process, by showing that it lands us in
contradictions.†

But it is entirely inadmissible that to suppose that a law of thought
need not necessarily be a law of existence, invalidates the thinking
process. If, indeed, there were any law necessitating us to think a
relation between phænomena which does not in fact exist between the
phænomena, then certainly the thinking process would be proved invalid,
because we should be compelled by it to think true something which would
really be false. But Edition: current; Page: [384] if the mind is
incapable of thinking anything respecting Noumena except the Phænomena
which it considers as proceeding from them, and to which it can appeal
to test its thoughts; and if we are under no necessity of thinking these
otherwise than in conformity to what they really are; we may refuse to
believe that our generalizations from the Phænomenal attributes of
Noumena can be applied to Noumena in any other aspect, without in the
least invalidating the operation of thought in regard to anything to
which thought is applicable. We may say to Sir W. Hamilton what he says
himself in another case: “I only say that thought is limited; but,
within its limits, I do not deny, I do not subvert, its truth.”* As he
elsewhere observes, translating from Esser, truth consists “solely in
the correspondence of our thoughts with their objects.”† If the only
real objects of thought, even when we are nominally speaking of Noumena,
are Phænomena, our thoughts are true when they are made to correspond
with Phænomena: and, the possibility of this being denied by no one, the
thinking process is valid whether our laws of thought are laws of
absolute existence or not.

Edition: current; Page: [482]


CHAPTER XXII: Of Sir William Hamilton’s Supposed Improvements in Formal Logic

of all Sir W. Hamilton’s philosophical achievements, there is none,
except perhaps his “Philosophy of the Conditioned,” on account of which
so much merit has been claimed for him, as the additions and corrections
which he is supposed to have contributed to the doctrine of the
Syllogism. These may be summed up in two principal theories, with their
numerous corollaries and applications; the recognition of two kinds of
Syllogism, Syllogisms in Extension and Syllogisms in Comprehension; and
the doctrine of the Quantification of the Predicate. To the former of
these, Sir W. Hamilton ascribed great importance. According to him, all
previous logicians, “with the doubtful exception of Aristotle,” “have
altogether overlooked the reasoning in Comprehension”—“have marvellously
overlooked one, and that the simplest and most natural of these
descriptions of reasoning,—the reasoning in the quantity of
comprehension:” and he claims, in directing attention to it, to have
“relieved a radical defect and vital inconsistency in the present
logical system.”* For the other theory, that of the Quantification of
the Predicate, still loftier claims are advanced both by himself and by
others. Mr. Baynes, with an enthusiasm natural and not ungraceful in a
pupil, concludes his Essay on the subject (which still remains the
clearest exposition of his master’s doctrine) with the following words:

We cannot, however, close without expressing the true joy we feel
(though, were the feeling less strong, we might shrink from the
intrusion), that in our own country, and in our time, this discovery has
been made. We rejoice to know that one has at length arisen, able to
recognise and complete the plan of the mighty builder, Aristotle,—to lay
the top-stone on that fabric, the foundations of which were laid more
than two thousand years ago, by the master-hand of the Stagirite, which,
after the labours of many generations of workmen, who have from time to
time built up one part here and taken down another there—remains
substantially as he left it; but which, when finished, shall be seen to
be an edifice of wondrous beauty, harmony, and completeness.†

Edition: current; Page: [386]
Previous to discussing these additions to the Syllogistic Theory, it is
necessary to revert to a doctrine which has been briefly stated in a
former chapter,[*] but did not then receive all the elucidation it
requires, and which has a most important bearing on both of Sir W.
Hamilton’s supposed discoveries. This is, that all Judgments (except
where both the terms are proper names) are really judgments in
Comprehension; though it is customary, and the natural tendency of the
mind, to express most of them in terms of Extension. In other words, we
never really predicate anything but attributes, though, in the usage of
language, we commonly predicate them by means of words which are names
of concrete objects.

When, for example, I say, The sky is blue; my meaning, and my whole
meaning, is that the sky has that particular colour. I am not thinking
of the class blue, as regards extension, at all. I am not caring, nor
necessarily knowing, what blue things there are, or if there is any blue
thing except the sky. I am thinking only of the sensation of blue, and
am judging that the sky produces this sensation in my sensitive faculty;
or (to express the meaning in technical language) that the quality
answering to the sensation of blue, or the power of exciting the
sensation of blue, is an attribute of the sky. When again I say, All
oxen ruminate, I have nothing to do with the predicate, considered in
extension. I may know, or be ignorant, that there are other ruminating
animals besides oxen. Whether I do or do not know it, it does not,
unless by mere accident, pass through my mind. In judging that oxen
ruminate, I do not, unless accidentally, think under the notion ruminate
(to borrow Sir W. Hamilton’s phraseology) any other notion than that of
an ox. The Comprehension of the predicate—the attribute or set of
attributes signified by it—are all that I have in my mind; and the
relation of this attribute or these attributes to the subject, is the
entire matter of the judgment.

In one of the examples above given, the predicate is an adjective, and
in the other a verb, which, in a logical point of view, is classed with
adjectives: but its being a noun substantive makes no difference. For
reasons easily shown, a substantive is more strongly associated with the
ideas of the concrete objects denoted by it, than an adjective or a verb
is. But when we predicate a substantive—when we say, Philip is a man,
or, A aherringa is a fish—do the words man and fish signify anything to
us but the bundles of attributes connoted by them? Do the propositions
mean anything except Edition: current; Page: [387] that Philip has the
human attributes, and a bherringb the piscine ones? Assuredly not. Any
notion of a multitude of other men, among whom Philip is ranked, or a
variety of fishes besides cherringsc, is foreign to the proposition. The
proposition does not decide whether there is this additional quantity or
no. It affirms the attributes of its own particular subject, and of no
other.

Passing now from the predicate to the subject, we shall find that the
subject also, if a general term or notion, is always construed in
Comprehension, that is, by the attributes which constitute it, and has
no other meaning in thought. When I judge that all oxen ruminate, what
do I mean by all oxen? I have no image in my mind of all oxen. I do not,
nor ever shall, know all of them, and I am not thinking even of all
those I do know. “All oxen,” in my thoughts, does not mean particular
animals—it means the objects, whatever they may be, that have the
attributes by which oxen are recognised, and which compose the notion of
an ox. Wherever these attributes shall be found, there, as I judge, the
attribute of ruminating will be found also: that is the entire purport
of the judgment. Its meaning is a meaning in attributes, and nothing
else. It supposes subjects, but merely as all attributes suppose them.

But there is another mode of interpreting the same proposition, by
considering it as dad part of the statement of a classification and
mental co-ordination of the objects which exist in nature. The
proposition is then looked upon as an assertion respecting given
objects; affirming what other individual objects they are classed among
by the general scheme of human language. Thus interpreted, the
proposition “all oxen ruminate” may be read as follows: If all creatures
that ruminate were collected in a vast plain, and I were required to
search the world and point out all oxen, they would all be found among
the crowd on that plain, and none anywhere else. Moreover, this would
have been the case in all past time, and will at any future, while the
present order of nature lasts. This is the proposition “All oxen
ruminate” interpreted in Extension. Will any one say that a process of
thought like this passes in the mind of whoever makes the affirmation?
It is a point of view in which the proposition may be regarded; it is
one of the aspects of the fact asserted in the proposition. But it is
not the aspect in which the proposition presents it to the mind.

It will, however, very naturally be objected—If the meaning in our mind
is that the bovine attributes are always accompanied by the attribute of
ruminating, why do we, except for the purposes of abstract logic or
metaphysics, never say this, but always say “All oxen ruminate?” The
Edition: current; Page: [388] reason is, that we have no other
convenient and compact mode of speaking. Most attributes, and nearly all
large “bundles of attributes,” have no names of their own. We can only
name them by a circumlocution. We are accustomed to speak of attributes
not by names given to themselves, but by means of the names which they
give to the objects they are attributes of. We do not talk of the
phænomena which accompany piscinity; we talk of the phænomena of fishes.
We do not frame a definition of piscinity, but a definition of a fish.
The definition, however, of a fish is exactly the same which the
definition of piscinity would be; it is an enumeration of the same
attributes. Language is constructed upon the principle of naming
concrete objects first: it does not always name abstractions at all, and
when it does, the names are almost always derived from those of concrete
objects. The reasons are obvious. Objects—even classes of objects—being
conceivable by a much less effort of abstraction than attributes, are in
the necessary order of things conceived and named earlier, and remain
always more familiar to the mind: attributes, even when they come to be
conceived, cannot be conceived in a detached state, but are always (as
may be said by an adaptation of the Hamiltonian phraseology) thought
through objects of some sort. Consequently all familiar propositions are
expressed in the language which denotes objects, and not in that which
denotes attributes. Nor is this all. What is primarily important to us
in our sensations and impressions, is their permanent groups. In our
particular and passing sensations (unless in cases of exceptional
intensity) the important thing to us is, not the sensation itself, but
to what group it belongs; what concrete object, what Permanent
Possibility of Sensation, it indicates the presence of. The mind
consequently hurries on from the sensible impressions that proceed from
an outward object, to the object itself, and its subsequent thoughts
revolve round that. It is on the concrete object indicated, that the
expectation of future sensations depends; and the concrete object,
consequently, in most cases, exclusively engages our thoughts, and
stimulates us to mark it by a name. The name, to answer its purpose,
must remind ourselves, and inform others, of the sensations we or they
have to expect: that is, it must connote an attribute, or set of
attributes. And men did not at first name attributes in any other than
this indirect manner. They gave no direct names to attributes, because
they did not conceive attributes as having any separate existence. As
they began by naming only concrete objects, so the first names by which
they expressed even the results of abstraction, were not names of
attributes in the abstract, regarded apart from their objects, but names
of concrete objects signifying the presence of the attributes. Men
talked of blue, or of blue things, before they talked of blueness. Even
when they did talk of blueness, it was originally not as the Edition:
current; Page: [389] attribute, but as an imaginary cause of the
attribute, which cause they figured to themselves as itself a concrete
thing, residing in the object.

It thus appears that though all judgments consist in ascribing
attributes, the original and natural mode of expressing them was by
general names denoting concrete objects, and only connoting attributes;
and by the structure of language this remains the only concise mode, and
the only one which, addressing itself to familiar associations, conveys
the meaning at once, to minds not exercised in metaphysical abstraction.
But this does not alter the obvious truth, that concrete objects are
only known by attributes, are only distinguished by attributes, and that
the concrete names by which we speak of them mean nothing but
attributes, or “bundles of attributes.” Our representation in thought of
a concrete object is but a representation of attributes, and our concept
of a class of concrete objects is but a certain portion of those
attributes, not, indeed, separately conceived or imaged, but exclusively
attended to. There is, therefore, nothing in our mind when we affirm a
general proposition, but attributes, and their coexistence or
repugnance: and the position is made out, that all judgments, expressed
by means of general terms, are judgments in Comprehension, though
always, unless for some special purpose, expressed in Extension.

If this be the true doctrine of Judgments, what is meant by saying that
there are two sorts of Judgment, one in Extension, the other in
Comprehension, and two kinds of reasoning corresponding to these, one of
which, that in Comprehension, had been overlooked by all logicians,
except possibly Aristotle, up to the time of Sir W. Hamilton? All our
ordinary judgments are in Comprehension only, Extension not being
thought of. But we may, if we please, make the Extension of our general
terms an express object of thought, and this may be called thinking in
Extension, though it is rather thinking about Extension. When I judge
that all oxen ruminate, I have nothing in my thoughts but the attributes
and their coexistence. But when, by reflection, I perceive what the
proposition implies, I remark, that other things may ruminate besides
oxen; and that the unknown multitude of things which ruminate form a
mass, with which the unknown multitude of things having the attributes
of oxen is either identical, or is wholly comprised in it. Which of
these two is the truth I may not know, and if I did, took no notice of
it when I assented to the proposition “all oxen ruminate.” But I
perceive, on consideration, that one or other of them must be true.
Though I had not this in my mind when I affirmed that all oxen ruminate,
I can have it now; I can make the concrete objects denoted by each of
the two names an object of thought, as a collective though indefinite
aggregate; in other words, I can make the Extension of the names (or
notions) an object of direct consciousness. When I do this, I perceive
that this operation Edition: current; Page: [390] introduces no new
fact, but is only a different mode of contemplating the very fact which
I had previously expressed by the words “all oxen ruminate.” The fact is
the same, but the mode of contemplating it is different: the mental
operation, the act of thought, is not only a distinct act, but an act of
a different kind.

There is thus, in all propositions (save those in which both terms are
Proper, that is, in significant, names) a judgment concerning attributes
(called by Sir W. Hamilton a judgment in Comprehension), which we make
as a matter of course, and a possible judgment in or concerning
Extension, which we may make, and which will be true if the former is
true. Nevertheless (as has just been shown), the conditions of primitive
thought, and subsequent convenience, cause us generally to enunciate our
propositions in terms appropriate to the derivative judgment which we
seldom make, rather than to the primitive judgment which we always make.
And this explains why, though the meaning of all propositions in which
general terms are used is in Comprehension, writers on logic always
explain the rules of the Syllogism in reference to Extension alone. It
is because the framers of the rules did not concern themselves with
propositions or reasonings as they exist in thought, but only as they
are expressed in language. And in this they were justified. For the
syllogism is not the form in which we necessarily reason, but a test of
reasoning: a form into which we may translate any reasoning, with the
effect of exposing all the points at which any unwarranted inference can
have got in. According to this view of the Syllogism—for the
justification of which I must refer to the Second Book of my System of
Logic[*]—the syllogistic theory is only concerned with providing forms
suitable to test the validity of inferences; and it was not necessary
that the forms in which reasoning was directed to be written, should be
those in which it is carried on in thought, so long as they are
practically equivalent, that is, so long as the propositions in words
are always true or false according as the judgments in thought are so.
The propositions in Extension, being, in this sense, exactly equivalent
to the judgments in Comprehension, served quite as well to ground forms
of ratiocination upon: and as the validity of the forms was more easily
and conveniently shown through the concrete conception of comparing
classes of objects, than through the abstract one of recognising
coexistence of attributes, logicians were perfectly justified in taking
the course, which, in any case, the established forms of language would
doubtless have forced upon them. They are thus deserving of no blame,
though their mode of proceeding has been attended with some practical
mischief, by diverting the attention of thinkers from what really
constitutes the meaning of Propositions. Edition: current; Page: [391]
It has also been one of the causes of the prejudice so general in the
last three centuries, against the syllogistic theory. For a doctrine
which defined one of the two great processes of the discovery of truth
as consisting in the operation of placing objects in a class and then
finding them there, can never, I think, have really satisfied any
competent thinker, however he may have acquiesced in it for want of a
better. There must always have been a dormant sense of discontent, an
obscure feeling that this was a description of the reasoning process by
one of its accidents, though an inseparable accident.*

Sir W. Hamilton distinguishes two kinds of Syllogism, Extensive and
Comprehensive.

For while every syllogism infers that the part of a part is a part of
the whole, it does this either in the quantity of Extension—the
Predicate of the two notions compared in the Question and Conclusion
being the greatest whole, and the subject the smallest part; or in the
counter quantity of Comprehension, the subject of these two notions
being the greatest whole, and the Predicate the smallest part.

He acknowledges, however, that both syllogisms are identically the same
argument; “every syllogism in the one quantity being convertible into a
Edition: current; Page: [392] syllogism absolutely equivalent in the
other quantity.”* And what is the difference in form and language
between the two syllogisms? According to our author it is merely a
difference in the order of the premises. The following,

-   

    “Every morally responsible agent is a free agent;
-   

    Man is a morally responsible agent;
-   

    Therefore man is a free agent,”†

is, according to him, a syllogism in Extension. Transpose the premises,
and write it thus,

-   

    “Man is a responsible agent;
-   

    But a responsible agent is a free agent;
-   

    Therefore, man is a free agent,”‡

and we have, according to him, a syllogism in Comprehension. Far,
however, from constituting two kinds of reasoning, this does not even
supply us with two different forms of it. He himself says elsewhere,
that “the transposition of the propositions of a syllogism affords no
modifications of form yielding more than a superficial character.”§ And
even this superficial difference he with his own hands abolishes,
saying, that any syllogism whatever “can be perspicuously expressed not
only by the normal, but by any of the five consecutions of its
propositions which deviate from the regular order,” and that “a
syllogism in Comprehension is equally susceptible of a transposition of
its propositions as a syllogism in Extension.”¶ So that the slight
distinction of form which he seemed at first to contend for, does not
exist; a Syllogism in Comprehension, and the corresponding Syllogism in
Extension, are word for word the same. Instead of “every syllogism in
the one quantity” being “convertible into a syllogism absolutely
equivalent in the other quantity,” every syllogism is already a
syllogism in both quantities.∥

The distinction, therefore, is not between two kinds, or even between
two forms, of syllogism, but between two modes of construing the meaning
of the same syllogism. And what are these two modes? Sir W. Hamilton
says, that they are distinguished by a difference in the meaning of the
copula.

Edition: current; Page: [393]
In the one process, that, to wit, in extension, the copula is, means is
contained under, whereas in the other, it means comprehends in. Thus,
the proposition God is merciful, viewed as in the one quantity,
signifies God is contained under merciful, that is, the notion God is
contained under the notion merciful; viewed as in the other, means, God
comprehends merciful, that is, the notion God comprehends in it the
notion merciful.*

I cannot admit this to be a true analysis of the meaning of the
proposition, either in Extension or in Comprehension. The statement that
God is merciful I construe as an affirmation not concerning the notion
God, but the Being God. Interpreted in Comprehension I hold it to mean,
that this Being has the attribute signified by the word merciful, or, in
our author’s language, comprehended in the concept. Interpreted in
Extension I render it thus: The Being, God, is either the only being, or
one of the beings, forming the class merciful, or, in other words,
possessing the attribute mercifulness. Thus stated, who can doubt which
of the two is the original and natural judgment, and which is a
derivative and artificial mode of restating it? The difference between
them is slight, but real, and consists in this, that the second
construction introduces the idea of other possible merciful beings, an
idea not suggested by the first construction. This suggestion gives rise
to the idea of a class merciful, and of God as a member of that class:
notions which are not present to the mind at all when it simply assents
to the proposition that God is merciful. To make a distinction between
Reasoning in Extension and in Comprehension, when the same syllogism
serves for both, could only be admissible if we employed the same words
having sometimes in our mind the meaning in Extension, sometimes that in
Comprehension: but in reality all reasoning is thought solely in
Comprehension, except when we, for a technical purpose, perform a second
act of thought upon the Extension—which in general we do not, and have
no need to, consider.

Nor is this the only objection to Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrine. There is
another, less obvious, but equally fatal. The statement in Comprehension
is, that A has the attributes comprehended in B. The statement in
Extension Edition: current; Page: [394] is, that A belongs to the class
of things which have the attributes comprehended in B. These statements
are either, as I affirm them to be, one and the same assertion in
slightly different words, or they are different assertions. If they are
the same assertion, there is but one judgment, which is both in
Extension and in Comprehension, and but one kind of reasoning, which is
in both. But supposing them, for the sake of argument, to be two
different assertions, the judgment respecting Extension is a corollary
from that in Comprehension, expressing an artificial point of view in
which we may regard the natural judgment. Now, on this supposition, that
the judgment respecting Extension is not the same, but an additional
judgment, it is, like all other judgments, a judgment in Comprehension.
“A is part of class B” must be interpreted thus: The phænomenon A
possesses, or the concept A comprehends, the attribute of being included
in the class B. So that, while every judgment in Comprehension warrants,
by way of immediate inference, a corresponding judgment respecting
Extension, this very judgment respecting Extension is itself but a
particular kind of judgment in Comprehension. Even, therefore, on the
untenable doctrine that there are two different judgments in the case,
the distinction between judgments in Extension and judgments in
Comprehension is not sustainable; and the supposed addition to the
theory of the Syllogism is a mere excrescence and incumbrance on it.

How great the incumbrance is, all are able to judge, who follow our
author through the details of the syllogistic logic. He not only finds
it necessary to expound and demonstrate every one of the doctrines twice
over, as adapted to Extension and to Comprehension, but struggles to
express all the fundamental principles in a manner combining both points
of view; and is thereby compelled either to state those principles in
terms too wide and abstract for easy apprehension, in order that what is
laid down respecting wholes and their parts may be applicable to both
kinds of wholes (in Extension and in Comprehension), or else to
embarrass the learner with the necessity of carrying on two trains of
thought at once, in the attempt to apprehend a single principle. I need
not dwell on the additional error, of considering the relation of whole
and parts as the foundation of the Syllogism in both aspects. To the
point of view of Extension that relation is applicable. In every
affirmative proposition, if true, the object or class of objects denoted
by the subject is a part (when it is not the whole) of the class of
objects denoted by the predicate. But no similar relation exists between
the two “bundles of attributes” comprehended in the subject and in the
predicate, except in the case of Analytical Judgments, that is, of
merely verbal propositions. In Synthetical Judgments, that is, in all
propositions which convey information about anything except the meaning
of words, the Edition: current; Page: [395] relation between the two
sets of attributes is not a relation of Whole and Part, but a relation
of Coexistence.

I now pass to the doctrine of the Quantification of the Predicate;
examining it by the light of the same principles which we have applied
to the distinction between the supposed two kinds of Reasoning.

It will be desirable to state in Sir W. Hamilton’s own words, as first
published in 1846, the claims he prefers in behalf of this doctrine, and
the important consequences to which he considers it to lead.

The self-evident truth,—That we can only rationally deal with what we
already understand, determines the simple logical postulate,—To state
explicitly what is thought implicitly. From the consistent application
of this postulate, on which Logic ever insists, but which Logicians have
never fairly obeyed, it follows:—that, logically, we ought to take into
account the quantity, always understood in thought, but usually, and for
manifest reasons, elided in its expression, not only of the subject, but
also of the predicate of a judgment. This being done, and the necessity
of doing it will be proved against Aristotle and his repeaters, we
obtain, inter alia, the ensuing results:

1°. That the preindesignate terms of a proposition, whether subject or
predicate, are never, on that account, thought as indefinite (or
indeterminate) in quantity. The only indefinite, is particular, as
opposed to definite, quantity; and this last, as it is either of an
extensive maximum undivided, or of an extensive minimum indivisible,
constitutes quantity universal (general) and quantity singular
(individual). In fact, definite and indefinite are the only quantities
of which we ought to hear in Logic; for it is only as indefinite that
particular, it is only as definite that individual and general,
quantities have any (and the same) logical avail.

2°. The revocation of the two terms of a Proposition to their true
relation; a proposition being always an equation of its subject and its
predicate.

3°. The consequent reduction of the Conversion of Propositions from
three species to one—that of Simple Conversion.

4°. The reduction of all the General Laws of Categorical Syllogisms to a
Single Canon.

5°. The evolution from that one canon of all the species and varieties
of Syllogism.

6°. The abrogation of all the Special Laws of Syllogism.

7°. A demonstration of the exclusive possibility of Three Syllogistic
Figures; and (on new grounds) the scientific and final abolition of the
Fourth.

8°. A manifestation that Figure is an unessential variation in
syllogistic form; and the consequent absurdity of Reducing the
syllogisms of the other figures to the first.

9°. An enouncement of one Organic Principle for each Figure.

10°. A determination of the true number of the legitimate Moods, with

11°. Their amplification in number (thirty-six);

12°. Their numerical equality under all the figures; and

13°. Their relative equivalence, or virtual identity, throughout every
schematic difference.

14°. That in the second and third figures, the extremes holding both the
same relation to the middle term, there is not, as in the first, an
opposition and subordination Edition: current; Page: [396] between a
term major and a term minor mutually containing and contained, in the
counter wholes of Extension and Comprehension.

15°. Consequently, in the second and third figures, there is no
determinate major and minor premise, and there are two indifferent
conclusions; whereas, in the first, the premises are determinate, and
there is a single proximate conclusion.

16°. That the third, as the figure in which Comprehension is
predominant, is more appropriate to Induction.

17°. That the second, as the figure in which Extension is predominant,
is more appropriate to Deduction.

18°. That the first, as the figure in which Comprehension and Extension
are in equilibrium, is common to Induction and Deduction indifferently.*

The doctrine which leads to all these consequences, or rather, which
necessitates all these changes of expression (for they are no more), is
that the Predicate is always quantified in thought; that we always think
it either as signifying the whole, or as signifying only a part, of the
objects included in its Extension. “In reality and in thought, every
quantity is necessarily either all, or some, or none.”† The proposition,
All A is B, must mean, in thought, either All A is all B, or All A is
some B. When I judge that all oxen ruminate, it must not only be true,
but I must mean, either that All ox is all ruminating, or that All ox is
some ruminating. Logic, therefore, postulates to express in words what
is already in the thoughts, and to write alle propositions in one or
other of these forms: which makes it necessary that all the rules for
reasoning should be altered, at least in expression, and grounded on the
relation of exact equality between the terms.

But if, as I have endeavoured to show, the predicate B is present in
thought only in respect of its Comprehension; if it be an error to
suppose that it is thought of as an aggregate of objects at all; still
less is it thought of as an aggregate with a determinate quantity, as
some or all. I repeat the appeal which I have already made to every
reader’s consciousness: Does he, when he judges that all oxen ruminate,
advert even in the minutest degree to the question, whether there is
anything else which ruminates? Is this consideration at all in his
thoughts, any more than any other consideration foreign to the immediate
subject? One person may know that there are other ruminating animals,
another may think that there are none, a third may be without any
opinion on the subject: but if they all know what is Edition: current;
Page: [397] meant by ruminating, they all, when they judge that every ox
ruminates, mean exactly the same thing. The mental process they go
through, as far as that one judgment is concerned, is precisely
identical; though some of them may go on further, and add other
judgments to it.*

The fact, that the proposition “Every A is B” only means Every A is some
B, far from being always present in thought, is not at first seized
without some difficulty by the tyro in logic. It requires a certain
effort of thought to perceive that when we say, All As are Bs, we only
identify A with a hportionh of the class B. When the learner is first
told that the proposition All As are Bs can only be converted in the
form “Some Bs are As,” I apprehend that this strikes him as a new idea;
and that the truth of the statement is not quite obvious to him, until
verified by a particular example in which he already knows that the
simple converse would be false, such as, All men are animals, therefore
all animals are men. So far is it from being true that the proposition,
All As are Bs, is spontaneously quantified in thought as All A is some
B.

Edition: current; Page: [398]
The pretension, therefore, of the doctrine of a Quantified Predicate, to
be a more correct representation and analysis of the reasoning process
than the common doctrine of the syllogism, I hold to be psychologically
false. And this is fatal to the doctrine, if we admit Sir W. Hamilton’s
theory that Logic is the science of the laws according to which we must
think in order that our thought may be valid. But according to the very
different view I myself take of Formal Logic, this doctrine might still
be a valuable addition to it: since, in my view, the Syllogistic theory
altogether is not an analysis of the reasoning process, but only
furnishes a test of the validity of reasonings, by supplying forms of
expression into which all reasonings may be translated if valid, and
which, if they are invalid, will detect the hidden flaw. In this point
of view it might well be, that a form which always exhibited the
quantity of the predicate might be an improvement on the common form.
And I am not disposed to deny that for occasional use, and for purposes
of illustration, it is so. The exposition of the theory of the syllogism
is made clearer, by pointing out that All As are B only implies that All
A is some B, while No As are B excludes A from the whole of B. This, in
fact, is taught to all who learn logic in the common way, by what is
called the doctrine of Suppositio; or (in the many books which leave
this doctrine out) by the theory of Conversion, and the syllogistic
rules against Undistributed Middle, and against proceeding à non
distributo ad distributum. There is no harm, and some little good, in
giving to these essential doctrines the more explicit expression
demanded for them by Sir W. Hamilton. But to obtain any advantage from
it, we must be content with quantifying such propositions as, in their
unquantified form, are really asserted and used. To foist in any others,
overlays and confuses, instead of illuminating, the theory. “All A is
some B” is admissible, because it is the quantification really implied
in All As are B; but “All A is all B” is inadmissible, because it is not
the equivalent of any single proposition capable of being asserted in an
unquantified form. As all reasoning, except in the process of teaching
Logic, will always be carried on in the forms which men use in real
life; and as the only purpose of providing other forms, is to supply a
test for those which are really used; it is essential that the forms
provided should be forms into which the propositions expressed in common
language can be translated—that every proposition in logical form,
should be the exact equivalent of some proposition in the common form.
Now, there is no proposition capable of being expressed in the ordinary
form, which is equivalent to the proposition, All A is all B. That form
of expression combines the import of two propositions in common
language, expressive of two separate judgments, All As are Bs, and All
Bs are As.

If this had not been denied, I should have deemed it too obvious to
require either proof or illustration. But Sir W. Hamilton does deny it,
and Edition: current; Page: [399] therefore some enforcement of it is
indispensable. When we make an assertion in the cramped and unnatural
form, All man is all rational, can anything seem more evident than that
to cover the whole ground occupied by this statement, two judgments are
required; namely, first, that every man has the attribute reason; and
secondly, that nothing which is not man has that attribute, or (which is
the same thing) that every rational creature has the attributes of man?
How is it possible to make only one judgment, out of an assertion
divisible into two parts, one of which may be unknown and the other
known, one unthought of and the other thought of, one false and the
other true?*

Unless Sir W. Hamilton was prepared to maintain that whenever the
universal converse of an universal affirmative proposition would be
true, we cannot know the one without knowing the other, it is in vain
for him to contend that a form which asserts both of them at once is
only one proposition. If in judging that “All equilateral triangles are
equiangular,” we judge that all equilateral triangles are all
equiangular, in what condition of judgment is the mind of the tyro to
whom it has just been proved that all equilateral triangles are
equiangular, but who does not yet know the proof of the converse
proposition that all equiangular triangles are equilateral? If “All
equilateral triangles are all equiangular” is only one judgment, what is
the proposition that all equilateral triangles are equiangular? Is it
half a judgment?†

Edition: current; Page: [400]
This is not the only case in which Sir W. Hamilton insists upon wrapping
up two different assertions in one form of words, and demands that they
shall be considered one assertion. He strenuously contends that the form
“Some A is B,” or (in its quantified form) “Some A is some B,” ought in
logical propriety to be used and understood in the sense of “some and
some Edition: current; Page: [401] only.”* No shadow of justification is
shown for thus deviating from the practice of all writers on logic, and
of all who think and speak with any approach to precision, and adopting
into logic a mere sous-entendu of common conversation in its most
unprecise form. If I say to any one, “I saw some of your children
to-day,” he might be justified in inferring that I did not see them all,
not because the words mean it, but because, if I had seen them all, it
is most likely that I should have said so: though even this cannot be
presumed unless it is presupposed that I must have known whether the
children I saw were all or not. But to carry this colloquial mode of
interpreting a statement into Logic, is something novel. If Some A is B
is to be understood of some only, it is a double judgment, compounded of
the propositions, Some As are Bs, and Some As are not Bs. If quantified
in our author’s manner, the propositions would run thus: Some A is some
B, and Some (other) A is not any B. If two statements, one of which
affirms and the other denies a different predicate of a different
subject, are not two distinct judgments, it is impossible to say what
are so. One of the great uses of discipline in Formal Logic, is to make
us aware when something which claims to be a single proposition, really
consists of several, which, not being necessarily involved one in
another, require to be separated, and considered each by itself, before
we admit the compound assertion. This separation may be called, with
reason, stating explicitly in words what is implicitly in thought. But
it is a new postulate of Logic to state implicitly in words what is
explicitly in thought, and I do not think that Logic is at all enriched
by the acquisition.

With these compound propositions falls the whole pretension of the
quantified mode of expression to yield legitimate inferences which are
not recognised by the old Logic. Whatever can be proved from “All A is
all B,” can be proved in the old form from one or both of its elements,
All As are Bs, and All Bs are As. Whatever can be proved from “Some, and
only some, A is some (or all) B,” can be proved in the old form from its
elements, Edition: current; Page: [402] Some As are Bs, Some As are not
Bs, and (in the case last mentioned) All Bs are As. If we choose to
alter the forms of all our propositions, the forms of our syllogisms
naturally require alterations too; and there may be a greater number of
forms in which quantified conclusions can be drawn from quantified
premises, than in which unquantified conclusions can be drawn from
unquantified premises. But there is not a single instance, nor is it
possible in the nature of things that there should be an instance, in
which a conclusion that is provable from quantified premises, could not
be proved from the same premises unquantified, if we set forth all those
which are really involved. If there could be such an instance, the
quantified Syllogism would be a real addition to the theory of Logic: if
not, not.

As I have already once remarked, it does not follow, because the
quantified Syllogism is not a true expression of what is in thought,
that jthe occasionalj writing the predicate with a quantification may
not be a real help to the art of Logic. Though not a correct analysis of
the reasoning process, it may, in some cases, enable us more readily to
see whether the conclusion really follows from the premises. But without
rejecting it as an available help for this purpose, I must observe that
its use in this capacity appears to me extremely limited; for two
reasons. First; the problem is, to test the validity of a reasoning as
expressed in the language in which men ordinarily reason. We do this by
taking the propositions as they are, and measuring the extent of the
assertions made in the two premises and in the conclusion respectively,
so as to ascertain whether the former are broad enough to cover and
include the latter. This it requires some practice to do, but the task
is not avoided by quantifying the predicate; on the contrary, it must
have been actually performed before the predicate can be correctly
quantified; so that by quantifying it in expression, no trouble is
saved. My second reason is, that after the predicate has been
quantified, it is often equally or more difficult to follow the
consecution of the thought through the symbols, than as expressed in
ordinary language. Take one of the common cases of invalid inference, a
syllogism in the first figure with the major premise particular, such as
this:

-   

    Some Ms are Ps
-   

    All Ss are Ms
-   

    Therefore all Ss are Ps;

the inference fails, because the Ms which are identified with Ss may not
be the same Ms which are Ps, but other Ms. Let us now quantify the
predicates thus:

-   

    Some Ms are some Ps
-   

    All Ss are some Ms
-   

    Therefore all Ss are some Ps;

Edition: current; Page: [403]
is the invalidity of the inference at all clearer? Does it require less
exertion of thought to perceive that “some Ms” may not mean the same
some in both premises, than it did to recognise the equivalent truth as
to M in the minor, and “some M” in the major premise? On the contrary,
the quantified form is the more plausibly misleading of the two, since
the middle term, though really ambiguous, is, in that form, verbally the
same, which in the unquantified form it is not.

The general result of these considerations is, that the utility of the
new forms is by no means such as to compensate for the great additional
complication which they introduce into the syllogistic theory; a
complication which would make it at the same time difficult to learn or
remember, and intolerably tiresome both in the learning and in the
using. The sole purpose of any syllogistic forms is to afford an
available test for the process of drawing inferences in the common
language of life from premises in the same common language; and the
ordinary forms of Syllogism effect this purpose completely. The new
forms do not, in any appreciable degree, facilitate the process, while
they are chargeable, in a far greater degree than the common forms, with
diverting the mind from the true meaning of propositions (the ascription
of attributes to objects considered severally), and concentrating it
upon the highly artificial, and generally unimportant, consideration of
the relation of extent between classes of objects, considered not
severally, but as collective wholes. The new forms have thus no
practical advantage which can countervail the objection of their entire
psychological irrelevancy; and the invention and acquisition of them
have little value, except as one among many other feats of mental
gymnastic, by which students of the science may exercise and invigorate
their faculties. They should, in short, be dealt with as Sir W. Hamilton
deals with Mr. De Morgan’s forms of “numerically definite” Syllogism,
viz. “taken into account by Logic as authentic forms, but then relegated
as of little use in practice, and cumbering the science with a
superfluous mass of moods.”*

Edition: current; Page: [404]


CHAPTER XXIII: Of Some Minor Peculiarities of Doctrine in Sir William Hamilton’s View of Formal Logic

the two theories examined in the preceding chapter are the only
important novelties which Sir W. Hamilton has introduced into the
Science or Art of Logic. But he has here and there departed from the
common doctrine of logicians on subordinate points. Some of these
deviations deserve notice from their connexion with some principal part
of our author’s doctrine, others chiefly as throwing light on the
character of his mind. The one to which I shall first advert is of the
former class.

I. Almost all writers on the Syllogistic Logic have directed attention
to the fact, that though we cannot, while observing the forms of Logic,
draw a false conclusion from true premises, we may draw a true one from
false premises: in other words, the falsity of the premises does not
prove the falsity of the conclusion; nor does the truth of the
conclusion prove the truth of the premises. The warning is needed; for
it is by no means unusual to mistake a refutation of the reasons from
which a doctrine has been deduced for a disproof of the doctrine itself;
and there is no error of thought more common than the acceptance of
premises because they lead to a conclusion already assented to as true.
Not only is this caution useful, but it is relevant to Logic, even in
the restricted point of view of Formal Logic. When it is affirmed that
Formal Logic has nothing to do with Material Truth, all that ought to be
meant, is that in Logic we are not to consider whether the conclusion
supposed to be proved is true in fact. But we are to consider whether it
is true conditionally, true if the premises are true: that question is
the specific business of Formal Logic: if Formal Logic does not teach us
that, there is nothing for it to teach. The theorem, that in a valid
Syllogism the falsity of the premises does not prove the falsity of the
conclusion, is as germane to Logic as that the truth of the premises
proves the truth of the conclusion. We have therefore reason to be
surprised at finding Sir W. Hamilton delivering himself as follows:

Logic does not warrant the truth of its premises, except in so far as
these may be the formal conclusions of anterior reasonings; it only
warrants (on the hypothesis Edition: current; Page: [405] that the
premises are truly assumed) the truth of the inference. In this view the
conclusion may, as a separate proposition, be true; but if this truth be
not a necessary consequence from the premises, it is a false conclusion,
that is, in fact, no conclusion at all. Now on this point there is a
doctrine prevalent among logicians, which is not only erroneous, but if
admitted, is subversive of the distinction of Logic as a purely formal
science. The doctrine in question is in its result this,—that if the
conclusion of a syllogism be true, the premises may be either true or
false, but that if the conclusion be false, one or both of its premises
must be false: in other words, that it is possible to infer true from
false, but not false from true. As an example of this I have given the
following syllogism:

-   

    Aristotle is a Roman;
-   

    A Roman is a European;
-   

    Therefore, Aristotle is a European.

The inference, in so far as expressed, is true; but I would remark, that
the whole inference which the premises necessitate, and which the
conclusion, therefore, virtually contains, is not true,—is false. For
the premises of the preceding syllogism gave not only the conclusion,
Aristotle is a European, but also the conclusion, Aristotle is not a
Greek; for it not merely follows from the premises, that Aristotle is
conceived under the universal notion of which the concept Roman forms a
particular sphere, but likewise that he is conceived as excluded from
all the other particular spheres which are contained under that
universal notion. The consideration of the truth of the premise,
Aristotle is a Roman, is, however, more properly to be regarded as
extralogical; but if so, then the consideration of the conclusion,
Aristotle is a European, on any other view than as a mere formal
inference from certain hypothetical antecedents, is likewise
extralogical. Logic is only concerned with the formal truth,—the
technical validity,—of its syllogisms, and anything beyond the
legitimacy of the consequence it draws from certain hypothetical
antecedents, it does not profess to vindicate. Logical truth and
falsehood are thus contained in the correctness and incorrectness of
logical inference; and it was, therefore, with no impropriety that we
made a true or correct, and a false or incorrect, syllogism convertible
expressions.*

The statement that a true proposition may be correctly inferred from
false premises, or in other words, that a true opinion may be supported
by false reasons, is one of which we could hardly have expected to find
the truth disputed, whatever might be said of the connexion of Logic
with it. So unlooked-for a paradox required to be defended by the
strongest arguments: who, then, would expect such shabby, not arguments,
but hints of arguments, as the author presents us with? He stops short
in the middle of the first, as if afraid that it would break down if
relied upon, and hurries to the second, which is still more incapable of
bearing weight. “The consideration of the conclusion, Aristotle is a
European, on any other view than as a mere formal inference from certain
hypothetical antecedents, is extralogical.” Nobody proposes to consider
it as anything but a formal inference from certain hypothetical
antecedents. The gist of the whole question is Edition: current; Page:
[406] that it is such an inference, and consequently that a proposition
really true, may be a formal inference from premises wholly or partially
false: in other words, the falsity of the conclusion does not follow
from the falsity of the premises. It is as much the business of the
theory of “formal inference” to show what conclusions are not formally
legitimate, as what are. It is not the business of Formal Logic to
determine what is actually true, but it is, to tell what does or does
not follow from what. In the first unfinished part of his argument, Sir
W. Hamilton makes a faint attempt to show that the conclusion, Aristotle
is a European, is not true. He admits it to be true as far as expressed,
but says that it virtually contains something which is false, namely,
that Aristotle is not a Greek. By what analysis can he find this in the
proposition, Aristotle is a European? He does not pretend that it is in
the proposition considered in itself, but only in the proposition as
inferred from “Aristotle is a Roman.” But it is a strange doctrine that
a proposition is true or false not according to what it asserts, but
according to the mode in which the belief of it has been arrived at. It
is a very irrational mode of speaking to say that a proposition, besides
its obvious meaning, contains a meaning which the words do not convey,
which in the mouths of other people it does not bear, but which is so
essential a part of it as by its falsity to make the proposition false
which otherwise would be true. Suppose that the register of a man’s
birth having been destroyed, some one to whom the date is of importance,
proves it by a false entry in the parish books: would that make the man
not to have been born on the day he was born on? But let us concede this
point, however unreasonable, and admit that the proposition Aristotle is
a European, when inferred from the premise that he is a Roman, includes
that premise as part of its own meaning. Does it therefore contain an
implication that he is not a Greek? Suppose that I have never heard of
Greeks; or that, having heard of them, I suppose a Greek to be a kind of
Roman, or a Roman a kind of Greek. Will this ignorance or
misapprehension on my part, prevent me from concluding, that if a Roman
is a European and Aristotle a Roman, Aristotle must be a European; or
will it make the inference illegitimate, or the conclusion false? One
sentence in our quotation from Sir W. Hamilton is a singular
illustration of the length he will go to support a favourite thesis.
“The premises,” he says, “of the syllogism gave not only the conclusion,
Aristotle is a European, but also the conclusion, Aristotle is not a
Greek.” Let us try:

-   

    Aristotle is a Roman;
-   

    A Roman is a European;
-   

    Therefore, Aristotle is not a Greek.

This is Formal Logic. This is the philosopher who is so rigidly bent
upon excluding from Logic all consideration of what is true or false vi
materiæ. Edition: current; Page: [407] What shadow of connexion is
there, unless it be vi materiæ, between this conclusion, and those
premises? Nothing can explain this aberration in a thinker of Sir W.
Hamilton’s acuteness, except his dogged determination in no shape to
recognise belief as an element of judgment, or truth as in any way
concerned in Pure Logic.

Sir W. Hamilton has a salvo for all this, though it is one which would
not occur to everybody. According to him there are two kinds of truth,
or rather the word truth has two meanings, so that it is possible for a
proposition to be true although it is false. There is Formal Truth, and
Real Truth.* Real Truth is “the harmony between a thought and its
matter.”[*] Formal Truth is of two kinds, Logical, and Mathematical.
Logical Truth is “the harmony or agreement of our thoughts with
themselves as thoughts, in other words the correspondence of thought
with the universal laws of thinking.”[†] And Mathematical Truth is some
other harmony of thought, in which truth of fact is equally dispensed
with. In another place, he says that if the consequent is correctly
“evolved out of” the antecedent, the conclusion out of the premises,
this is “Logical or Formal or Subjective truth: and an inference may be
subjectively or formally true, which is objectively or really false.”†
To support his denial of the common doctrine, he has to alter the
meaning of words, and make false in the new meaning what cannot be
denied to be true in the old. But I object in toto to such an abuse of
terms as affirming a false proposition to be true, because it is in such
a relation to another false proposition, that if that false proposition
had been true it would have been true likewise. There is no fitness in
the word truth, to express this mere relation of consecution between
false propositions. No qualification by adjectives, whether “logical,”
or “formal,” or “subjective,” will make this assertion anything but a
solecism in language, claiming to be the correction of a philosophical
doctrine.

The whole theory of the difference between Formal and Real Truth is
treated as it deserves, in a passage from one of Sir W. Hamilton’s
favourite authorities, Esser, which he quotes, and, strange to say,
quotes with approbation.

One party of philosophers, [says Esser,] defining truth in general, the
absolute harmony of our thoughts and cognitions,—divide truth into a
formal or logical, and into a material or metaphysical, according as
that harmony is in consonance with the laws of formal thought, or over
and above, with the laws of real knowledge. The criterion of formal
truth they place in the principles of Contradiction and of Sufficient
Reason, enouncing that what is non-contradictory and consequent is
formally true. This criterion, which is positive and immediate of formal
truth Edition: current; Page: [408] (inasmuch as what is
non-contradictory and consequent can always be thought as possible),
they style a negative and mediate criterion of material truth: as what
is self-contradictory and logically inconsequent is in reality
impossible; at the same time, what is not self-contradictory and not
logically inconsequent, is not, however, to be regarded as having an
actual existence. But here the foundation is treacherous: the notion of
truth is false. When we speak of truth, we are not satisfied with
knowing that a thought harmonizes with a certain system of thoughts and
cognitions; but, over and above, we require to be assured that what we
think is real, and is as we think it to be. Are we satisfied on this
point, we then regard our thoughts as true; whereas if we are not
satisfied of this, we deem them false, how well soever they may quadrate
with any theory or system. It is not, therefore, in any absolute harmony
of mere thought, that truth consists, but solely in the correspondence
of our thoughts with their objects. The distinction of formal and
material truth is thus not only unsound in itself, but opposed to the
notion of truth universally held, and embodied in all languages. But if
this distinction be inept, the title of Logic, as a positive standard of
truth, must be denied; it can only be a negative criterion, being
conversant with thoughts and not with things, with the possibility and
not with the actuality of existence.*

After all the experience we have had of the facility with which Sir W.
Hamilton forgets in one part of his speculations what he has thought in
another, it remains scarcely credible that he endorses, in his third
volume, this emphatic protest against the distinction which he draws,
and the opinion which he maintains, in his second and fourth. “Two
opposite doctrines,” he says, “have sprung up, which, on opposite sides,
have overlooked the true relations of Logic;”† and one of these is the
doctrine (the “inaccuracy” our author styles it)[*] which Esser, in this
passage, protests against. And he thereupon quotes Esser’s
condemnation[†] of his (Sir W. Hamilton’s) own doctrine. Truly, if
arguments ad hominem were sufficient, a controversialist who undertakes
to refute Sir W. Hamilton would have an easy task.

II. I have already noticed one unacknowledged departure by our author
from the usage of Logicians as regards the sense of the word
Disjunctive; confining Disjunctive judgments to those in which all the
alternative propositions have the same subject: A is either B, or C, or
D. This limitation excludes two other forms of the assertion of an
alternative: that in which the propositions have different subjects but
the same predicate, “Either A, or B, or C, is D;” and that in which they
have different subjects and different predicates, “Either A is B, or C
is D.” The former is exemplified in such judgments as these, Either
Brown or Smith did this act; Either John or Thomas is dead. The latter
in such as these: Either the witness has told a falsehood, or the
prisoner has committed a murder; Either Macbeth has Edition: current;
Page: [409] killed all Macduff’s children, or Macduff has children who
were not there present.[*] While arbitrarily excluding both these kinds
of assertion from the class and denomination in which they had always
been placed, our author does not assign to them any other; so that the
effect is not a mere innovation in language, but a hiatus in his logical
system; these two kinds of judgment having no place, name, or
recognition in it. I have now to point out a second deviation from the
received doctrine of logicians in connexion with the same subject. In
respect to the class of judgments to which he restricts the name of
Disjunctive, those in which two or more predicates are disjunctively
affirmed of the same subject, he takes for granted through the whole of
his exposition,* that when we say, A is either B or C, we imply that it
cannot be both: that we may as legitimately argue, A is either B or C,
but it is B, therefore it is not C, as we may argue, A is either B or C,
but it is not B, therefore it is C. This is what enables him to affirm,
as he does, that the principle of Disjunctive Judgments is the Law of
Excluded Middle. The predicates are supposed to be either explicitly or
implicitly contradictory, so that one or other of them must be true of
the subject, but both of them cannot. I conceive this to be both an
incompleteness in his theory, and a positive error in fact. An
incompleteness, because we may judge, and legitimately judge, that a
thing is either this or that, though aware that it may possibly be both.
Sir W. Hamilton is so severe on the ordinary Logic for omitting, as he
thinks, some valid forms of thought, that it was peculiarly incumbent on
him not to commit a similar oversight in his own exposition of the
science. But Sir W. Hamilton does not merely leave unrecognised those
disjunctive judgments in which the alternative predicates are mutually
compatible; he assumes that the disjunctive form of assertion denies
their compatibility, which it assuredly does not. If we assert that a
man who has acted in some particular way, must be either a knave or a
fool, we by no means assert, or intend to assert, that he cannot be
both. Very important consequences may sometimes be drawn from our
knowledge that one or other of two perfectly compatible suppositions
must be true. Suppose such an argument as this. To make an entirely
unselfish use of despotic power a man must be either a saint or a
philosopher; but saints and philosophers are rare; therefore those are
rare, who make an entirely unselfish use of despotic power. The
conclusion follows from the premises, and is of great practical
importance. But does the disjunctive premise necessarily imply, or must
it be construed as supposing, that the same person cannot be both a
saint and a philosopher? Such a construction would be ridiculous.†

Edition: current; Page: [410]
There is a great quantity of intricate and obscure speculation, in our
author’s Lectures and their Appendices, relating to Disjunctive and
Hypothetical Propositions. But, much as he had thought on the subject,
the simple idea never seems to have occurred to him a(though he might
have found it in Archbishop Whately’s Logic)a, that every Disjunctive
judgment is compounded of two or more Hypothetical ones. “Either A is B,
or C is D,” means, If A is not B, C is D; and if C is not D, A is B.[*]
This is obvious enough to most people; but if Sir W. Hamilton had
thought of it, he probably would have denied it: its admission would not
have been in keeping with the disposition he shows in so many places, to
consider as one judgment all that it is possible to assert in one
formula. Again, though he takes much pains to determine what is the real
import of a Hypothetical Judgment, the thought never occurs to him that
it is a judgment concerning judgments. If A is B, C is D, means, The
judgment C is D follows as a consequence from the judgment A is B. Not
seeing this, Sir W. Hamilton tacitly adopts the assertion of Krug, that
the conversion of a hypothetical syllogism into a categorical “is not
always possible.”*

III. The next of Sir W. Hamilton’s minor innovations in Logic has
reference to the Sorites. It is scarcely necessary to say, that a
Sorites is an argument in the form, A is B, B is C, C is D, D is E,
therefore A is E: an abridged expression for a series of Syllogisms, but
not requiring to be decomposed into them in order to make its
conclusiveness visible. Sir W. Hamilton accuses all writers on Logic of
having overlooked the possibility of a Sorites in the second or third
Figure.† By this he does not mean, one in which the ultimate syllogism,
which sums up the argument, is in the second or third figure, for this
all logicians have admitted. For example, to the Sorites given above,
there might be added the proposition, No F is E; in which case, the
ultimate syllogism would be, A is E, but no F is E, therefore A is not
an F: a syllogism in the second figure. Or there might be added, at the
opposite end of the series, A is G; when the ultimate syllogism would be
in the third figure; A is E, but A is G, therefore some G is an E. These
are real Sorites, real chain arguments, and they conclude in the second
and third figures: we may call them, if we please, Sorites in the second
and in the third figure, the truth being that they are Sorites in which
one of the steps is in the second or third figure, all the others being
in the first. And every one who understands the laws of the second and
third figures (or even the general laws of the Syllogism) can see that
no more than one step in either of Edition: current; Page: [411] them is
admissible in a Sorites, and that it must either be the first or the
last. About this, however, Logicians have always been agreed. These are
not the kinds of Sorites which Sir W. Hamilton contends for. By a
Sorites in the second or third figure, he means one in which all the
steps are in the second, or all in the third, figure (a thing impossible
in a real Sorites) and in which, accordingly, instead of a succession of
middle terms establishing a connexion between the two extremes, there is
but one middle term altogether. His paradigm in the second figure would
be, No B is A, No C is A, No D is A, No E is A, All F is A, therefore no
B, or C, or D, or E, is F. In the third figure, it would be, A is B, A
is C, A is D, A is E, A is F, therefore some B, and C, and D, and E, are
F. One would have thought that anybody who had the smallest notion of
the meaning of a Sorites, must have seen that either of these is not a
Sorites at all. It is not a chain argument. It does not ascend to a
conclusion by a series of steps, each introducing a new premise. It does
not deduce one conclusion from a succession of premises, all necessary
to its establishment. It draws as many different conclusions as there
are syllogisms, each conclusion depending only on the two premises of
one syllogism. That no B is F, follows from No B is A, and All F is A;
not from those premises combined with No C is A, No D is A, No E is A.
That some B is F, follows from A is B and A is F; and would be proved,
though all the other premises of the pretended Sorites were rejected. If
Sir W. Hamilton had found in any other writer such a misuse of logical
language as he is here guilty of, he would have roundly accused him of
total ignorance of logical writers. Since it cannot be imputed to any
such cause in himself, I can only ascribe it to the passion which
appears to have seized him, in the later years of his life, for finding
more and more new discoveries to be made in Syllogistic Logic. If he had
transported his ardour for originality into the other departments of the
science, in which there was so great an unexhausted field for discovery,
he might have enlarged the bounds of philosophy to a much greater
extent, than I am afraid he will now be found to have done.

IV. I next turn to a singular misapplication of logical language, in
which Sir W. Hamilton departs from all good authorities, and misses one
of the most important distinctions drawn by the Aristotelian logic. I
refer to his use of the word Contrary. He confounds contrariety with
simple incompatibility. “Opposition of Notions,” he says,

is twofold: 1°. Immediate or Contradictory Opposition, called likewise
Repugnance (τὸ ἀντιφατικῶς ἀντικεῖσϑαι, ἀντίφασις, oppositio immediata
sive contradictoria, repugnantia); and 2°. Mediate or Contrary
Opposition (τὸ ἐναντίως ἀντικεῖσϑαι, ἐναντιότης, oppositio media vel
contraria). The former emerges, when one concept abolishes (tollit)
directly or by simple negation, what another Edition: current; Page:
[412] establishes, ponit; the latter, when one concept does this not
directly or by simple negation, but through the affirmation of something
else.*

The exemplification and illustration of this is not of our author’s
devising, but is a citation from Krug, who had preceded him in the
error.

To speak now of the distinction of Contradictory and Contrary
Opposition, or of Contradiction and Contrariety; of these the former,
Contradiction, is exemplified in the opposites,—yellow, not yellow;
walking, not walking. Here each notion is directly, immediately, and
absolutely, repugnant to the other,—they are reciprocal negatives. This
opposition is, therefore, properly called that of Contradiction or of
Repugnance; and the opposing notions themselves are contradictory or
repugnant notions, in a single word, contradictories. The latter, or
Contrary Opposition, is exemplified in the opposites, yellow, blue, red,
&c., walking, standing, lying, &c.†

It can hardly have been imagined by Krug or Sir W. Hamilton, that this
is the meaning of Contrariety in common discourse, or that any one ever
speaks of yellow or blue as the contrary of red, or even as the opposite
of it. The very phrase, “the contrary,” testifies that a thing cannot
have more contraries than one. Black is regarded as the contrary of
white, but no other contrariety is recognised among colours at all. Sir
W. Hamilton, versed as he was in the literature of logic, can hardly
have fancied that the world of logicians, any more than the common
world, was on his side. In the language of logicians, as in that of
life, a thing has only one contrary—its extreme opposite; the thing
farthest removed from it in the same class. Black is the contrary of
white, but neither of them is the contrary of red. Infinitely great is
the contrary of infinitely small, but is not the contrary of finite. It
is the more strange that Krug and Sir W. Hamilton should have
misunderstood or rejected this, as the definition they ignore is the
foundation of the distinction between Contradictory and Contrary
Propositions, in the famous Parallelogram of Opposition. The contrary
proposition to All A is B, is No A is B, its extreme opposite; the
assertion most widely differing from it that can be made; denying, not
it merely, but bevery part of itb. Its contradictory is merely, Some A
is not B. Sir W. Hamilton could not have imagined the distinction
between these negative propositions to be, that the one denies by simple
negation, the other through the affirmation of something else.

That the teachers of the Syllogistic Logic have taken this view, and not
Sir W. Hamilton’s, of the meaning of Contrariety, might be shown by any
number of quotations. I have only looked up the authorities nearest at
Edition: current; Page: [413] hand. I begin with Aristotle: Τὰ γὰρ
πλεῖστον ἀλλήλων διεστηκότα τῶν ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ γένει, ἐναντία ὁρίζονται.*

Aristotle again: Τὰ γὰρ ἐναντία τῶν πλεῖστον διαφερόντων περὶ τὸ αὐτό.†

Aristotle ἐν τῷ δεκάτῳ τῆς θεολογικῆς πραγματείας, as cited by Ammonius
Hermiæ: Ἐπεὶ δὲ διαφέρειν ἐνδέχεται ἀλλήλων τὰ διαφέροντα πλεῖον καὶ
ἔλαττον, ἔστι τις, καὶ μεγίστη διαφορά, καὶ ταύτην λέγω ἐναντίωσιν.[*]

Ammonius himself thereon: Ἡ τῶν ἐναντίων διαφορὰ μεγίστη τῶν ἄλλων, καὶ
οὐδὲν ἔχουσα ἐξωτέρω αὐτὴς δυνάμενον πεσεῖν.‡

My next extract shall be from a well-known treatise, which Sir W.
Hamilton particularly recommended to his pupils: Burgersdyk’s
Institutiones Logicæ.

Oppositorum species sunt quinque: Disparata, contraria, relative
opposita, privative opposita, et contradictoria.

Disparata sunt, quorum unum pluribus opponitur, eodem modo. Sic homo et
equus, album et cæruleum, sunt disparata: quia homo non equo solum, sed
etiam cani, leoni, cæterisque bestiarum speciebus, et album, non solum
cæruleo, sed etiam rubro, viridi, cæterisque coloribus mediis, opponitur
eodem modo, hoc est, eodem oppositorum genere. . . .

Contraria sunt duo absolute, quæ sub eodem genere plurimum distant.§

This passage informs us, not only that what Sir W. Hamilton terms
Contraries were not so called by the Aristotelian logicians, but also
what they were called. They were called Disparates: a term employed by
Sir W. Hamilton, but in a totally different meaning.¶

The next is from one of the ablest, and, though in a comparatively small
compass, one of the completest in essentials, of all the expositions I
have seen of Logic from the purely Aristotelian point of view:
Manuductio ad Logicam, by the Père Du Trieu, of Douai.

Contraria sunt, quæ posita sub eodem genere maxime a se invicem distant,
eidem subjecto susceptivo vicissim insunt, a quo se mutuo expellunt,
nisi alterum insit a natura; ut, album, et nigrum.

In hac definitione continentur quatuor conditiones, sive leges
contrariorum.

Prima, ut sint sub eodem genere. . . .

Edition: current; Page: [414]
Secunda conditio contrariorum est ut sub illo eodem genere maxime
distent, id est precise repugnent. . . . Hinc excluduntur disparata.*

The next is from Saunderson’s Logicæ Artis Compendium, one of the
best-known elementary treatises on Logic by British authors.

Oppositio Contraria est inter terminos contrarios. Sunt autem ea
contraria quæ posita sub eodem genere maxime inter se distant, et vim
habent expellendi se vicissim ex eodem subjecto susceptibili.†

Crackanthorp:

Contraria sunt Opposita quorum unum alteri sic opponitur ut nulli alteri
aut æque aut magis opponatur. Sic Albedo Nigredini, Homini Brutum,
Rationale Irrationali contrarium est. Nam nihil est quod æque Albedini
opponitur atque Nigredo, et sic in reliquis.

On the other hand,

Disparata sunt Opposita quorum unum uni sic opponitur, ut alteri vel
æque vel magis opponatur. Sic Liberalitas et Avaritia disparata sunt.
Nam Avaritia magis opponitur Prodigalitati quam Liberalitati. Sic Albedo
et Rubedo disparata sunt, quia Albedo æque opponitur Viriditati atque
Rubedini, et magis Nigredini quam ambobus. Nam plus inter se semper
distant extrema, quam vel media inter se, vel medium ab alterutro
extremo.‡

Brerewood:

Contraria a Dialecticis ita definiri solent: Sunt Opposita quæ sub eodem
genere posita maxime a se invicem distant, et eodem subjecto
susceptibili vicissim insunt, a quo se mutuo expellunt, nisi alterum
insit a natura. . . . Sed quoniam hæc definitio (quamvis sit præcipue in
Dialecticorum scholis authoritans) laborat et tædio, et summa
difficultate, placet ex Aristotele faciliorem adducere, et breviorem:
Contraria sunt quæ sub eodem genere posita, maxime distant.§

Samuel Smith:

Contraria sunt quæ sub eodem genere posita, maxime a se invicem distant,
et eidem susceptibili vicissim insunt, a quo se mutuo expellunt, nisi
alterum eorum insit a natura. Ad Contraria igitur tria requiruntur:
primo ut sint sub eodem genere, scilicet Qualitatis: nam solarum
qualitatum est contrarietas; secundo, ut maxime a se invicem distent in
natural positiva, id est, ut ambo extrema sint positiva.¶

Edition: current; Page: [415]
Wallis:

Contraria definiri solent, quæ sub eodem genere maxime distant. Ut
calidum et frigidum, album et nigrum: quæ contrariæ qualitatis dici
solent.*

Even Aldrich, right for once, may be added to the list of Oxford
authorities.

Contraria sub eodem genere maxime distant. Non maxime distant omnium;
magis enim distant quæ nec idem genus summum habent, magis
Contradictoria: sed maxime eorum quæ in genere conveniunt.†

Keckermann does not employ this, but another definition of Contraries;
not, however, Sir W. Hamilton’s: and all his examples of Contraries are
taken from Extreme Opposites.‡

Casparus Bartholinus:

Contraria sunt, quæ sub eodem genere maxime distant, eidemque subjecto
susceptibili a quo se mutuo expellunt, vicissim insunt, nisi alterum
insit a natura.§

Du Hamel:

Oppositio contraria est inter duo extrema positiva, quæ sub eodem genere
posita maxime distant, et ab eodem subjecto sese expellunt.¶

Grammatica Rationis, sive Institutiones Logicæ:

Contraria adversa sunt accidentia, posita sub eodem genere, quæ maxime
distant, et se mutuo pellunt ab eodem subjecto in quo vicissim insunt.∥

Familiar as Sir W. Hamilton was with the whole series of writers on
Logic, he cannot have overlooked, and can hardly have forgotten, such
passages as these. I have not had the fortune to meet with a single
passage, from a single Aristotelian writer, cwhichc can be cited in his
support. I presume, therefore, that he intentionally made (or adopted
from Krug) a change in the meaning of a scientific term, the inverse of
that which it is the proper office and common tendency of science to
make. Instead of giving a Edition: current; Page: [416] more determinate
signification to a name vaguely used, by binding it down to express a
precise specific distinction, he laid hold of a name which already
denoted a definite species, and applied it to the entire genus, which
stood in no need of a name; leaving the particular species unnamed. But
if he knowingly took this very unscientific liberty with a scientific
term, diverting it from both its scientific and its popular
meaning,—leaving the scientific vocabulary, never too rich, with one
expression the fewer, and an important scientific distinction without a
name,—he at least should not have done so without informing the reader.
He should not have led the unsuspecting learner to believe that this was
the received use of the term. Remark, too, that he embezzles not only
the English word, but its Greek and Latin equivalents, exactly as if he
agreed with the writers of the Greek and Latin treatises, and was only
explaining their meaning.

V. One of the charges brought by Sir W. Hamilton against the common mode
of stating the doctrine of the Syllogism, is that it does not obviate
the objection often made to the syllogism of being a petitio principii,
grounded on the admitted truth, that it can assert nothing in the
conclusion which has not already been asserted in the premises. This
objection, our author says, “stands hitherto unrefuted, if not
unrefutable.”* But he entertains the odd idea, that it can be got rid of
by merely writing the propositions in a different order, putting the
conclusion first. One might almost imagine that a little irony had been
intended here. Putting the conclusion first, certainly makes it
impossible any longer to say that the syllogism asserts in the
conclusion what has already been asserted in the premises; and if any
one is of opinion that the logical relation between premises and a
conclusion depends on the order in which they are pronounced, such an
objector, I must allow, is from this time silenced. But our author can
have meditated very little on the meaning of the objection of petitio
principii against the Syllogism, when he thought that such a device as
this would remove it. The difficulty, which that objection expresses,
lies in a region far below the depth to which such logic reaches; and he
was quite right in regarding the objection as unrefuted. Nor is its
refutation, I conceive, possible, on any theory but that which considers
the Syllogism not as a process of Inference, but as the mere
interpretation of the record of a previous process; the major premise as
simply a formula for making particular inferences; and the conclusions
of ratiocination as not inferences from the formula, but inferences
drawn according to the formula. This theory, and the grounds of it,
having been very fully stated in another work, need not be further
noticed here.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [417]


CHAPTER XXIV: Of Some Natural Prejudices Countenanced by Sir William Hamilton, and Some Fallacies Which He Considers Insoluble

we have concluded our review of Sir W. Hamilton as a teacher of Logic;
but there remain to be noticed a few points, not strictly belonging
either to Logic or to Psychology, but rather to what is inappropriately
termed the Philosophia Prima. It would be more properly called ultima,
since it consists of the widest generalizations respecting the laws of
Existence and Activity; generalizations which by an unfortunate, though
at first inevitable mistake, men fancied that they could reach uno
saltu, and therefore placed them at the beginning of science, though, if
they were ever legitimate, they could only be so as its tardy and final
result. Every physical science, up to the time of Bacon, consisted
mainly of such first principles as these: The ways of Nature are
perfect: Nature abhors a vacuum: Natura non habet saltum: Nothing can
come out of nothing: Like can only be produced by like: Things always
move towards their own place: Things can only be moved by something
which is itself moving; and so forth. And the Baconian revolution was
far indeed from expelling such doctrines from philosophy. On the
contrary, the Cartesian movement, which went on for a full century
simultaneously with the Baconian, threw up many more of these imaginary
axioms concerning things in general, which took a deep root in
Continental philosophy, found their way into English, and are by no
means, even now, discredited as they deserve to be. Most of these were
fully believed by the philosophers who maintained them, to be
intuitively evident truths—revelations of Nature in the depths of human
consciousness, and recognisable by the light of reason alone: while all
the time they were merely bad generalizations of the vulgarest outward
experience; rough interpretations of the appearances most familiar to
sense, and which therefore had grown into the strongest associations in
thought; never tested by the conditions of legitimate induction, not
only because those conditions were still unknown, but because these
wretched first attempts at generalization were deemed to have a higher
than inductive origin, and were erected into Edition: current; Page:
[418] general laws from which the order of the universe might be
deduced, and to which every scientific theory for the explanation of
phenomena must be required to conform. It is a material point in the
estimation of a philosopher and of his doctrines, whether he has taken
his side for or against this mode of philosophizing; whether he has
countenanced any of these spurious axioms by his adhesion. Sir W.
Hamilton cannot be acquitted of having done so, in more than one
instance.

In treating of the problem of Causality, Sir W. Hamilton had occasion to
argue, that we ought not to postulate a special mental law in order to
explain the belief that everything must have a cause, since that belief
is sufficiently accounted for by the “Law of the Conditioned,” which
makes it impossible for us to conceive an absolute commencement of
anything.[*] I do not mean to return to the discussion of this theory of
Causality; but let us ask ourselves why we are interdicted from assuming
a special law, in order to account for that which is already
sufficiently accounted for by a general one. The real ground of the
prohibition is what our author terms the Law of Parcimony; a principle
identical with the famous maxim of the Nominalists, known as Occam’s
Razor—Entia non sunt multiplicanda præter necessitatem;[†] understanding
by Entia, not merely substances but also Powers. Sir W. Hamilton,
instead of resting it on this logical injunction, grounds it on an
ontological theory. His reason is, “Nature never works by more and more
complex instruments than are necessary.”* He cites, with approbation,
the maxims of Aristotle, “that God and Nature never operate without
effect (οὐδὲν μάτην, οὐδὲν έλλειπῶς, ποιοῦσι); they never operate
superfluously (μηδὲν περίεργον—περιττῶς—ἀργῶς); but always through one
rather than through a plurality of means (καθ’ ἔν, μᾶλλον ἢ κατὰ
πολλὰ):”† thus borrowing a general theory of the very kind which Bacon
exploded, to support a rule which can stand perfectly well without it.
Have we authority to declare that there is anything which God and Nature
never do? Do we know all Nature’s combinations? Were we called into
counsel in fixing its limits? By what canons of induction has this
theory ever been tried? By Edition: current; Page: [419] what
observations has it been verified? We know well that Nature, in many of
its operations, works by means which are of a complexity so extreme, as
to be an almost insuperable obstacle to our investigations. On what
evidence do we presume to say that this complexity was necessary, and
that the effect could not have been produced in a simpler manner? If we
look into the meaning of words, of what kind is the necessity which is
supposed to be binding on God and Nature—the pressure they are unable to
escape from? Is there any necessity in Nature which Nature did not make?
or if not, what did? What is this power superior to Nature and its
author, and to which Nature is compelled to adapt itself?

There is one supposition under which this doctrine has an intelligible
meaning—the hypothesis of the Two Principles. If the universe was
moulded into its present form by a Being who did not make it wholly, and
who was impeded by an obstacle which he could only partially
overcome—whether that obstacle was a rival intelligence, or, as Plato
thought, an inherent incapacity in Matter;[*] it is on that supposition
admissible, that the Demiourgos may have always worked by the simplest
possible means; the simplest, namely, which were permitted by the
opposition of the conflicting Power, or the intractableness of the
material. This is, in fact, the doctrine of Leibnitz’s Théodicée; his
famous theory that a world, made by God, must be the best of all
possible worlds, that is, the best world which could be made under the
conditions by which, as it would appear, Providence was restricted.[†]
This doctrine, commonly called Optimism, is really Manicheism, or, to
call it by aitsa more proper name, Sabæism. The word “possible” assumes
the existence of hindrances insurmountable by the divine power, and
Leibnitz was only wrong in calling a power limited by obstacles by the
name Omnipotence: for it is almost too obvious to be worth stating, that
real Omnipotence could have effected its ends totally without means, or
could have made any means sufficient. This Sabæan theory is the only one
by which the assertion, that Nature always works by the simplest means,
can be made consistent with known fact. Even so, it remains wholly
unproved; and, were it proved, would be but a speculative truth of
Theology, incapable of affording any practical guidance. We could never
be justified in rejecting an hypothesis for being too complicated; it
being beyond our power to set limits to the complication of the means
that might possibly be necessary, to evade the obstacles which Ahriman
or Matter may have perversely thrown in the Creator’s way.

Edition: current; Page: [420]
The “Law of Parcimony” needs no such support; it rests on no assumption
respecting the ways or proceedings of Nature. It is a purely logical
precept; a case of the broad practical principle, not to believe
anything of which there is no evidence. When we have no direct knowledge
of the matter of fact, and no reason for believing it except that it
would account for another matter of fact, all reason for admitting it is
at an end when the fact requiring explanation can be explained from
known causes. The assumption of a superfluous cause, is a belief without
evidence; as if we were to suppose that a man who was killed by falling
over a precipice, must have taken poison as well. The same principle
which forbids the assumption of a superfluous fact, forbids that of a
superfluous law. When Newton had shown that the same theorem would
express the conditions of the planetary motions and the conditions of
the fall of bodies to the earth, it would have been illogical to
recognise two distinct laws of nature, one for heavenly and the other
for earthly attraction; since both these laws, when stripped of the
circumstances ascertained to be irrelevant to the effect, would have had
to be expressed in the very same words. The reduction of each of the two
generalizations to the expression of only those circumstances which
influence the result, reduces both of them to the same proposition; and
to decline to do so, would be to make an assumption of difference
between the cases, for which none of the observations afforded the
smallest ground. The rule of Parcimony, therefore, whether applied to
facts or to theories, implies no theory concerning the propensities or
proceedings of Nature. If Nature’s ways and inclinations were the
reverse of what they are supposed to be, it would have been as
illegitimate as it is now, to assume a fact of Nature without any
evidence for it, or to consider the same property as two different
properties, because found in two different kinds of objects.

In another place, Sir W. Hamilton says that the Law of Parcimony, which
he terms “the most important maxim in regulation of philosophical
procedure when it is necessary to resort to an hypothesis,” has “never,
perhaps, been adequately expressed;” and he proposes the following
expression for it: “Neither more nor more onerous causes are to be
assumed, than are necessary to account for the phænomena.”* This
conception of some causes as “more onerous” to the general scheme of
things than others, is a distinction greatly requiring what our author
says it has never yet had—to be “articulately expressed.” He does not,
however, articulate it in general terms, but only in its application to
the particular question of Causality. From this we may collect,—1st.
That a “positive power” is a more onerous hypothesis than a “negative
impotence.” 2nd. That a special hypothesis, which serves to explain only
one phænomenon, is more onerous Edition: current; Page: [421] than a
general one which will explain many. 3rd. That the explanation of an
effect by a cause of which the very existence is hypothetical, is more
onerous than its hypothetical explanation by a cause otherwise known to
exist. The last two of these three canons are but particular cases of
the general rule, that we should not assume an hypothetical cause of a
phænomenon which admits of being accounted for by a cause of which there
is other evidence.* The remaining canon, that we should prefer the
hypothesis of an incapacity to that of a power, is, I apprehend, only
valid when its infringement would be a violation of one of the other two
rules.

The time-honoured, but gratuitous, assumption, respecting Nature, on
which I have now commented, is not the only generality of the
pre-Baconian type which Sir W. Hamilton has countenanced. He gives his
sanction to the old doctrine that “a thing can act only where it is.”
The dictum appears in this direct form in one of the very latest of his
writings, the notes for an intended memoir of Professor Dugald Stewart.†
He has so much faith in it as to make it the foundation of two of his
favourite theories. One is, that

the thing perceived, and the percipient organ, must meet in place, must
be contiguous. The consequence of this doctrine is a complete
simplification of the theory of perception, and a return to the most
ancient speculation on the point. All sensible cognition is, in a
certain acceptation, reduced to Touch, and this is the very conclusion
maintained by the venerable authority of Democritus. According to this
doctrine, it is erroneous to affirm that we are percipient of distant
objects.‡

Conformably to this, we have seen him not only maintaining, in
opposition to Reid,[*] that we do not see the sun—that we see only an
image of it in our eye—but also, that we directly perceive Extension,
whether by sight or touch, only in our own bodily organs: thus
preferring the à priori axiom, that a thing can only act where it is, to
the authority of those “natural beliefs” which he, in other cases, so
strenuously asserts against impugners, Edition: current; Page: [422] and
so often affirms that we ought either to accept as a whole, or never
appeal to at all.

The other theory which our author maintains on the authority of the same
dictum, is that the mind acts directly throughout the whole body, and
not through the brain only.

There is no good ground to suppose that the mind is situate solely in
the brain, or exclusively in any part of the body. On the contrary, the
supposition that it is really present wherever we are conscious that it
acts,—in a word, the Peripatetic aphorism, The soul is all in the whole,
and all in every part,—is more philosophical, and consequently, more
probable than any other opinion. . . . Even if we admit that the nervous
system is the part to which it is proximately united, still the nervous
system is itself universally ramified throughout the body; and we have
no more right to deny that the mind feels at the finger-points, as
consciousness assures us, than to assert that it thinks exclusively in
the brain.*

Sir W. Hamilton should at least have shown how this hypothesis can be
reconciled with the fact, that a slight pressure on the nerve at a place
intermediate between the finger and the brain, takes away the mind’s
power of feeling in the finger, while at any point above the ligature
the feeling is the same as before. cIf he object that the mode in which
the pressure impedes sensation need not be by interrupting the
communication between the finger and the brain, but may be by disturbing
the functions of the nerve itself, we may ask, why is this disturbance
confined to the part of the nerve which is below the point of pressure,
while above that point the functions remain unimpaired? Many other
objections might be brought against Sir W. Hamilton’s theory, if my
object were to discuss the physiological question; but my object is
onlyc to show the amount of evidence which Sir W. Hamilton will
disregard, rather than admit that one thing can act directly upon
another without immediate contact.† What he would have thought of the
application of his doctrine to the solar system, he has not told us
d(the recent developments of the doctrine of the Unity of Force being
posterior to his time)d: but it commits him to the opinion, that
gravitation acts through an intervening medium, which he must postulate,
first as existing, and secondly, as possessed of inscrutable properties;
in palpable repugnance to his own Law of Parcimony, and to all the
canons grounded thereon. Descartes postulated his vortices in obedience
to the same axiom.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [423]
What, however, is the worth of this doctrine, that things can only act
upon one another by direct contact? Mr. Carlyle says, “a thing can only
act where it is; with all my heart; only where is it?”[*] In one sense
of the word, a thing is wherever its action is: its power is there,
though not its corporeal presence. But to say that a thing can only act
where its power is, would be the idlest of mere identical propositions.
And where is the warrant for asserting that a thing cannot act when it
is not locally contiguous to the thing it acts upon? Shall we be told
that such action is inconceivable? Even if it was, this, according to
Sir W. Hamilton’s philosophy, is no evidence of impossibility. But that
it is conceivable, is shown by every fairy tale, as well as by every
religion. Then, again, what is the meaning of contiguity? According to
the best physical knowledge we possess, things are never actually
contiguous: what we term contact between particles, only means that they
are in the degree of proximity at which their mutual repulsions are in
equilibrium with their attractions. If so, instead of never, things
always act on one another at some, though it may be a very small
distance. The belief that a thing can only act where it is, is a common
case of inseparable, though not ultimately indissoluble, association. It
is an unconscious generalization, of the roughest possible description,
from the most familiar cases of the mutual action of bodies,
superficially considered. The temporary difficulty found in apprehending
any action of body upon body unlike what people were accustomed to,
created a Natural Prejudice, which was long a serious impediment to the
reception of the Newtonian theory: but it was hoped that the final
triumph of that theory had extinguished it; that all educated persons
were now aware that action at a distance is intrinsically quite as
credible as action in contact, and that there is no reason, apart from
specific experience, to regard the one as in any respect less probable
than the other. That Sir W. Hamilton should be an instance to the
contrary, is an example of the obstinate vitality of these idola
tribûs,[†] and shows that we are never safe against the rejuvenescence
of the most superannuated error, if in throwing it off we have not
reformed the bad habit of thought, the wrong and unscientific tendency
of the intellect, from which the error took its rise.*

Edition: current; Page: [424]
Though but remotely connected with the preceding considerations, yet as
belonging in common with them to the subject of Fallacies, I will notice
in this place the curious partiality which our author shows to a
particular group of sophisms, the Eleatic arguments for the
impossibility of motion. He fdeemedf these arguments, though leading to
a false conclusion, to be irrefutable; as Brown thought concerning
Berkeley’s argument against the existence of matter—that as a mere play
of reasoning it was unanswerable, while it was impossible for the human
mind to admit the conclusion;[*] forgetting that if this were so it
would be a reductio ad absurdum of the reasoning faculty. There is no
philosopher to whom, I imagine, Sir W. Hamilton would have less liked to
be assimilated, than Brown; and he would probably have defended himself
against the imputation, by saying that the Eleatic arguments do not
prove motion to be impossible, but only to be inconceivable by us. Yet
if a fact which we see and feel every minute of our lives, is not
conceivable by us, what is? Our author does not enter at any length into
the question, but expresses his opinion on several occasions
incidentally. “It is,” he says, “on the inability of the mind to
conceive either the ultimate indivisibility, or the endless divisibility
of space and time, that the arguments of the Eleatic Zeno against the
possibility of motion are founded; arguments which at least show, that
motion, however certain as a fact, cannot be conceived possible, as it
involves a contradiction.”* We have been told in very emphatic terms by
Sir W. Hamilton, that the Law of Contradiction is binding not on our
conceptions merely, but on Things.[†] If, then, motion involves a
contradiction, how is it possible? and if it is possible, and a fact, as
we know it to be, how can it involve a contradiction? The appearance of
contradiction must necessarily be fallacious, even were we unable to
point out the fallacy. Our author, apparently, has attempted to resolve
it, and failed. He calls the argument “an exposition of the
contradictions involved in our notion of motion,” and says that its
“fallacy has not yet been detected.”† And, again, “The Eleatic Zeno’s
demonstration of the Edition: current; Page: [425] impossibility of
motion is not more insoluble than could be framed a proof that the
Present has no reality: for however certain we may be of both, we can
positively think neither.”* It must, one would suppose, be a great
difficulty, which could appear insoluble to Sir W. Hamilton. The
“demonstration,” at all events, cannot yet have been refuted, and
superhuman ingenuity must be needed to refute it. Yet the fallacy in it
has been pointed out again and again; and the contradictions which Sir
W. Hamilton regards it as an exposure of, do not exist.

Zeno’s reasonings against motion, as handed down by Aristotle,[*]
consist of four arguments, which are stated and criticised with
considerable prolixity by Bayle.[†] Several of these are substantially
the same argument in different forms, and if we examine the two most
plausible of them it will suffice. The first is the ingenious fallacy of
Achilles and the Tortoise. If Achilles starts a thousand yards behind
the tortoise, and runs a hundred times as fast; still, while Achilles
runs those thousand yards, the tortoise will have got on ten; while
Achilles runs those ten, the tortoise will have run a tenth of a yard;
and as this process may be continued to infinity, Achilles will never
overtake the tortoise. In our author’s opinion, this argument is
logically correct, and evolves a contradiction in our idea of motion.
But it is neither logically correct, nor evolves a contradiction in
anything. It assumes, of course, the infinite divisibility of space. But
we have no need to entangle ourselves in the metaphysical discussion
whether this assumption is warrantable. Let it be granted or not, the
argument always remains gfallacious. The fallacy lies in the assertion
that “this process may be continued to infinity.” Infinity is here
ambiguous. The conclusion drawn is that the process may be continued for
an infinite duration of time. But the premise is only true in the sense,
that it may be continued for an infinite number of divisions of time.
The argument confounds infinity and infinite divisibility. Itg assumes
that to pass through an infinitely divisible space, requires an infinite
time. But the infinite divisibility of space means the infinite
divisibility of finite space: and it is only infinite space which cannot
be passed over in less than infinite time. What the argument proves is,
that to pass over the infinitely divisible space, requires an infinitely
divisible time: but an infinitely divisible time may itself be finite;
the smallest finite time is infinitely divisible; the argument,
therefore, is consistent with the Edition: current; Page: [426]
tortoise’s being overtaken in the smallest finite time. It is a sophism
of the type Ignoratio Elenchi, or, as Archbishop Whately terms it,
Irrelevant Conclusion;[*] an argument which proves a different
proposition from that which it pretends to prove, the difference of
meaning being disguised by han ambiguityh of language.

The other plausible form of Zeno’s argument is at first sight more
favourable to Sir W. Hamilton’s theory, being a real attempt to prove
that the fact of motion involves impossible conditions. The usual mode
of stating it is this. If a body moves, it must move either in the place
where it is, or in the place where it is not: but either of these is
impossible: therefore it cannot move. First of all, this argument, even
if we were unable to refute it, does not exhibit any contradiction in
our “notion” of motion. We do not conceive a body as moving either in
the place where it is, or in the place where it is not, but from the
former to the latter: in other words, we conceive the body as in the one
place and in the other at successive instants. Where is the
“contradiction” between being in one place at this moment, and in
another at the next? As for the fallacy itself, it is strange that when
everybody sees the answer to it, a practised logician should have any
difficulty in putting that answer into logical forms. It is not
necessary that motion should be in a place. iA bodyi must be in a place;
but motion is not ja bodyj—it is a change: and that a change of place
should be either in the old place or in the new, is a real contradiction
in terms. To put the thing in another way; Place may be understood in
two senses: it may either be a divisible, or an indivisible part of
space. If it be a divisible part, as a room, or a street, it is true
that in that sense, every motion is in a place, that is, within a
limited portion of space: but in this meaning of the term the dilemma
breaks down, for the body really moves in the place where it is; the
room, the field, or the house. If, on the contrary, we are to understand
by Place an indivisible minimum of space, the proposition that motion
must be in a place is evidently false; for motion cannot be in that
which has no parts; it can only be to or from it.

A parallel sophism might easily be invented, turning upon Time instead
of Space. It might be said that sunset is impossible, since if it be
possible, it must take place either while the sun is still up, or after
it is down. The answer is obvious: it is just the change from one to the
other which is sunset. And so it is the change from one position in
space to another which is motion. The parallelism between the two cases
was evidently seen by Sir W. Hamilton, and the sophism was too hard for
him in both: and this is what he must have meant by saying that we
cannot “positively think” the Edition: current; Page: [427] Present.
That he should have missed the solution of the fallacy is strange
enough: but, as a matter of fact, the assertion that we have no positive
perception, on the one hand of Motion, on the other, of present time,
deserves notice as one of the most curious deliverances of so earnest an
asserter of “our natural beliefs.”

These paralogisms are only part of a long list of puzzles concerning
infinity, which, though by no means hard to clear up, appear to our
author insoluble. I append in a note the entire list.* Many of them are
resolved by Edition: current; Page: [428] the observations already made
their difficulty being merely that of separating the two ideas of
Infinite and Infinitely Divisible. To our author’s thinking, infinite
divisibility and the Finite contradict one another. But even allowing
(which, as was seen in a former chapter, I do not) that infinite
divisibility is inconceivable, it does not therefore involve a
contradiction. The remaining puzzles mostly result from inability to
conceive that one infinity can be greater or less than another: a
conception familiar to all mathematicians. Our author refuses to
consider that a space or a time which is infinite in one direction and
bounded in another, is necessarily less than a space or a time which is
infinite in every direction. The space between two parallels, or between
two diverging lines or surfaces, extends to infinity, but it is
necessarily less than entire space, being a part of it. Not only is one
infinity greater than another, but one infinity may be infinitely
greater than another. Mathematicians habitually assume this, and reason
from it; and the kresultk always coming out true, the assumption is
justified. But mathematicians, I must admit, seldom know exactly what
they are about when they do this. As the results always prove right,
they know empirically that the process cannot be wrong—that the premises
must be true in a sense; but in what sense, it is beyond the ingenuity
of most of them to understand. The doctrine long remained a part of that
mathematical mysticism, so mercilessly shown up by Berkeley in his
Analyst, and Defence of Freethinking in Mathematics.[*] To clear it up
required a philosophical mathematician—one who should be both a
mathematician and a metaphysician: and it found one. To complete Sir W.
Hamilton’s discomfiture, this philosophic mathematician is his old
antagonist Mr. De Morgan, whom he described as too much of a
mathematician to be anything of a philosopher.* Mr. De Morgan, however,
has proved himself, as far as this subject is concerned, a far better
metaphysician than Sir W. Hamilton. He has let the light of reason into
all the logical obscurities and paradoxes of the infinitesimal calculus.
By merely following out, more thoroughly than had been done before, the
rational conception of infinitesimal division, as Edition: current;
Page: [429] synonymous with division into as many and as small parts as
we choose, lwithout any limit,l Mr. De Morgan, in his Algebra,[*] has
fully explained and justified the conception of successive orders of
differentials, each of them infinitely less than the differential of the
preceding, and infinitely greater than that of the succeeding order.
Whoever is acquainted with this masterly specimen of analysis, will find
his way through Sir W. Hamilton’s series of riddles respecting Infinity,
without ever being at a loss for their solution. I shall therefore
trouble the reader no further with them in this place.

Edition: current; Page: [430]


CHAPTER XXV: Sir William Hamilton’s Theory of Pleasure and Pain

i have now concluded my remarks on the principal department of Sir W.
Hamilton’s psychology, that which relates to the Cognitive Faculties.
The remaining two of the three portions into which he divides the
subject, are the Feelings, and what he terms the Conative Faculties,
meaning those which tend to Action. On the Conative Faculties, however,
he barely touches, in the concluding part of his last lecture; and of
the Feelings he does not treat at any length. What he propounds on the
subject, chiefly consists of a general theory of Pleasure and Pain. Not
a theory of what they are in themselves, for he is not so much the dupe
of words as to suppose that they are anything but what we feel them to
be. The speculation with which he has presented us, does not relate to
their essence, but to the causes they depend on; “the general conditions
which determine the existence of Pleasure and Pain . . . the fundamental
law by which these phænomena are governed in all their manifestations.”*

The inquiry is scientifically legitimate, and of great interest; but we
must not be very confident that it is a practicable one, or can lead to
any positive result. It is quite possible that in seeking for the law of
pleasure and pain, like Bacon in seeking for the laws of the sensible
properties of bodies, we may be looking for unity of cause, where there
is a plurality, perhaps a multitude, of different causes. Such attempts,
however, even if unsuccessful, are far from being entirely useless. They
often lead to a more careful study of the phænomenon in some of its
aspects, and to the discovery of relations between them, not previously
understood, which though not adequate to the formation of an universal
theory of the phænomenon, afford a clearer insight into some of its
forms and varieties. This merit must be allowed to Sir W. Hamilton’s
theory, in common with several others which preceded it on the same
subject. But, regarded as a theorem of the universal conditions which
are present whenever pleasure (or pain) is present, and absent whenever
it is absent, the doctrine will hardly bear Edition: current; Page:
[431] investigation. The simplest and most familiar cases are exactly
those which obstinately refuse to be reduced within it.

I shall, as usual, state Sir W. Hamilton’s theory in his own words,
though in the present case it is a questionable advantage, the terms
being so general and abstract that they are scarcely capable of being
understood, apart from the illustrations. “Pleasure,” he says, “is a
reflex of the spontaneous and unimpeded exertion of a power, of whose
energy we are conscious. Pain, a reflex of the overstrained or repressed
exertion of such a power.”* By a “reflex” he has shortly before said
that he means merely a “concomitant;”† but I think it will appear that
he means at least an effect. At all events, these are what he regards as
the ultimate conditions of pleasure and pain; the most general
expression of the circumstances in which they occur.

This theory was of course suggested by the pleasures and pains of
intellectual or physical exertion, or, as it is otherwise termed,
exercise. These are the phænomena which principally afford to it such
foundation of fact, and such plausibility in speculation, as it
possesses. As we all know, moderate exertion, either of body or mind, is
pleasurable; a greater amount is painful, except when set in motion by
an impulse which renders it, in our author’s meaning of the word,
“spontaneous:” and a felt impediment to any kind of active exertion,
when there is an impulse towards it, is painful. It at first appears as
if Sir W. Hamilton had overlooked the pains and pleasures in which the
mind and body are passive, as in most of the organic, and a large
proportion of the emotional pleasures and pains. He claims, however, to
include all these in his formula. The “powers” and “energies” whose free
action he holds to be the condition of pleasure, and their impeded or
overstrained action, of pain, include our passive susceptibilities as
well as our active energies. Accordingly he suggests a correction of his
own language, saying that “occupation” or “exercise” would perhaps be
fitter expressions than “energy.”‡

The term energy, which is equivalent to act, activity, or operation, is
here used to comprehend also all the mixed states of action and passion
of which we are conscious; for, inasmuch as we are conscious of any
modification of mind, there is necessarily more than a mere passivity of
the subject; consciousness itself implying at least a reaction. [What
has become of his doctrine that to be conscious of a feeling is only
another phrase for having the feeling?] Be this, however, as it may, the
nouns energy, act, activity, operation, with the correspondent verbs,
are to be understood to denote, indifferently and in general, all the
processes of our higher and our lower life of which we are conscious.§

Understanding the theory in this enlarged sense, let us test it by
application Edition: current; Page: [432] to one of the simplest of our
organic feelings, the pleasure of a sweet taste. This pleasure,
according to the theory, arises from the free exercise, without either
restraint or excess, of one of our powers or capacities: what capacity
shall we call it? That of tasting sweetness? This will not do; for if
the capacity of having the sensation of sweet is called into play in any
degree, great or small, the effect is a sweet taste, which is a
pleasure. Besides, instead of a sweet taste, let us suppose an acrid
taste. In this taste the capacity exercised is that of tasting acridity.
But the result of the exercise of this capacity, neither repressed nor
overstrained, which therefore, according to the theory, should be a
pleasure, is an acrid taste, which is a pain. It must, therefore, be
meant that the capacity which when freely exercised causes pleasure, and
when repressed or overstrained, pain, is some more general capacity than
that of sweet or acrid taste—say the power of taste in the abstract:
that the power of taste, the organic action of the gustatory nerves, by
its spontaneous exercise, yields pleasure, and by its repression, or its
strained exercise, produces pain. The theory thus entirely turns upon
what is meant by spontaneous; as is shown still more clearly by our
author’s comments. “It has been stated,” he observes in a recapitulation
of his doctrine,

that a feeling of pleasure is experienced, when any power is consciously
exercised in a suitable manner; that is, when we are neither, on the one
hand, conscious of any restraint upon the energy which it is disposed
spontaneously to put forth, nor, on the other, conscious of any effort
in it to put forth an amount of energy greater either in degree or in
continuance, than what it is disposed freely to exert. In other words,
we feel positive pleasure, in proportion as our powers are exercised,
but not over-exercised; we feel positive pain, in proportion as they are
compelled either not to operate, or to operate too much. All pleasure,
thus, arises from the free play of our faculties and capacities; all
pain from their compulsory repression or compulsory activity.*

All, therefore, depends upon what is meant by “free” or “spontaneous,”
and what by “compulsory,” activity. The difference cannot be that which
the words suggest, the presence or absence of will. It cannot be meant,
that pleasure accompanies the process when wholly involuntary, and that
pain begins when a voluntary element enters into the exercise of the
sensitive faculty. There is nothing voluntary in the agonies of the
rack, or of an excruciating bodily disease: while, in the case of a
pleasure, the exercise of will, in the only mode in which it can be
exercised on a feeling, namely, by voluntarily attending to it, instead
of converting it from a pleasure into a pain, often greatly heightens
the pleasure. This doctrine, therefore, would be absurd, nor is Sir W.
Hamilton chargeable with it. What he means by Edition: current; Page:
[433] “spontaneous” as applied to the exercise of our capacities of
feeling, we gather from the following passage, and others similar to it.

Every power, all conditions being supplied, and all impediments being
removed, tends, of its proper nature and without effort, to put forth a
certain determinate maximum, intensive and protensive, of free energy.
This determinate maximum of free energy, it, therefore, exerts
spontaneously: if a less amount than this be actually put forth, a
certain quantity of tendency has been forcibly repressed: whereas, if a
greater than this has been actually exerted, a certain amount of nisus
has been forcibly stimulated in the power. The term spontaneously,
therefore, provides that the exertion of the power has not been
constrained beyond the proper limit,—the natural maximum, to which, if
left to itself, it freely springs.—Again, in regard to the term
unimpeded,—this stipulates that the conditions requisite to allow this
spring have been supplied, and that all impediments to it have been
removed. This postulates, of course, the presence of an object.*

The spontaneous and unimpeded exercise of a capacity means, therefore,
it would appear, the exercise which takes place when “all conditions”
are “supplied,” and “all impediments removed.” Let us apply this to a
particular case. I taste, at different instants, two different objects;
an orange, and rhubarb. In both cases, all conditions are supplied; the
object is present and in contact with my organs; and in both cases, all
impediments are removed to the unstrained and natural action of the
object upon my gustatory organs. Yet the result is in one case a
pleasure, in the other a sensation of nauseousness. On Sir W. Hamilton’s
theory, it ought, in both cases, to have been pleasure: for in neither
does anything interfere with the free action of my sense of taste.

Sir W. Hamilton can scarcely have overlooked this objection, and the
answer which he may be supposed to make, is that in the case of the
rhubarb, the object itself was of a nature to disturb the gustative
faculty, and exact from it a greater degree of action (or less, for I
would not undertake to say which) than is exacted by the orange. But
where is the proof of this? and what, even, does the assertion mean? A
greater degree of what action? Of the action of tasting? If so, a pain
should differ from a pleasure only by being more (or perhaps less)
intense. Is the action that is meant, some occult process in the organ?
But what ground is there for affirming that there is more action of any
kind, on the part of the organ or the sense of taste, in a disagreeable
savour than in an agreeable one? It is perhaps true that more than a
certain quantity of action is always painful: every sensation
intensified beyond a certain degree may become a pain. But the converse
proposition, that wherever there is a pain there is an excess of action
(or a deficiency, for we are offered that alternative), I know of no
reason for believing. Moreover, if admitted, it would seem to involve
Edition: current; Page: [434] the consequence, that in every case of
pain, a less or a greater degree of the cause which produces it is
pleasurablea, which is certainly not true, however true it may be that
in many cases of organic pleasure (especially tastes and smells) a less
or a greater quantity of the substance which produces the pleasure is
either insipid or positively disagreeablea.

Our author is more than half aware that his theory bbreaks down when
applied to pleasures or pains that are heterogeneous to one anotherb;
for he says, “When it is required of us to explain particularly and in
detail, why the rose, for example, produces this sensation of smell,
assafœtida that other, and so forth, and to say in what peculiar action
does the perfect or pleasurable, and the imperfect or painful, activity
of an organ consist, we must at once profess our ignorance.” He lays the
responsibility of the failure, not upon his theory, but upon the general
inexplicability of ultimate facts. “But it is the same with all our
attempts at explaining any of the ultimate phænomena of creation. In
general, we may account for much; in detail, we can rarely account for
anything: for we soon remount to facts which lie beyond our powers of
analysis and observation.”*

This appears to me a great misconception, on our author’s part, of what
may rightfully be demanded from a theorist. He is not entitled to frame
a theory from one class of phænomena, extend it to another class which
it does not fit, and excuse himself by saying that if we cannot make it
fit, it is because ultimate facts are inexplicable. Newton did not
proceed in this manner with the theory of gravitation. He made it an
absolute condition of adopting the theory, that it should fit; and when,
owing to incorrect data, he could not make it fit perfectly, he
abandoned the speculation for many years. If the smell of a rose and the
smell of assafœtida are ultimate facts, be it so: but in that case, it
is useless setting up a theory to explain them. If we do propound a
theory, we are bound to prove all it asserts: and this, in the present
case, is, that in smelling a rose the organ is in “perfect” activity,
but when smelling assafœtida, in “imperfect,” which is either greater or
less than perfect. It is not philosophical to assert this, and fall back
upon the incomprehensibility of the subject as a dispensation from
proving it. What is a hindrance to proving a theory, ought to be a
hindrance to affirming it.

What meaning, in fact, can be attached to perfect and imperfect
activity, as the phrases are here used? Perfection or imperfection is
treated as a question of quantity; activity is called perfect when there
is exactly the right quantity, imperfect when there is either more or
less. But what is the test of right or wrong quantity, except the
pleasure or pain attending it? The Edition: current; Page: [435] theory
amounts to this, that pleasure or pain is felt, according as the
activity is of the amount fitted to produce the one or the other. In
this futile mode of explaining the phænomena our author had been
preceded by Aristotle, one of the greatest of recorded thinkers, but who
must have been more than human if, in the state of knowledge and
scientific cultivation in his time, he had avoided slips which hardly
any one, even now, is able completely to guard against. Aristotle’s
theory, which, as understood by our author, differs little from his own,
is presented by Sir W. Hamilton in the following words:

When a sense, for example, is in perfect health, and it is presented
with a suitable object of the most perfect kind, there is elicited the
most perfect energy, which, at every instant of its continuance, is
accompanied with pleasure. The same holds good with the function of
Imagination, Thought, &c. Pleasure is the concomitant in every case
where powers and objects are in themselves perfect, and between which
there subsists a suitable relation.*

The conditions whereon, upon this showing, pleasure depends, are the
healthiness of the sense, and the perfection of the object presented to
it. This is simply making the fact its own theory. When is a sense in
perfect health, and its object perfect? The function of a sense is
twofold; as a source of cognition, and of feeling. If the perfection
meant be in the function of cognition, the doctrine that pleasure
depends on this is manifestly erroneous: according to Sir W. Hamilton,
it is even the reverse of the truth, for he holds that the knowledge
given by an act of sense, and the feeling accompanying it, are in an
inverse proportion to one another. cThere remainsc the supposition that
the perfection, of which Aristotle spoke, was perfection not in respect
of cognition but of feeling. It cannot, however, consist in acuteness of
feeling, for our acutest feelings are pains. What then constitutes it?
Pleasurableness of feeling: and the theory only tells us, that pleasure
is the result of a pleasurable state of the sense, and a pleasure-giving
quality in the object presented to it. Aristotle and Sir W. Hamilton did
not, certainly, state the doctrine to themselves in this manner; but
they reduced it to this, by affirming pleasure or pain to depend on the
perfect or imperfect action of the sense, when there was no criterion of
imperfect or perfect action except that it produced pain or pleasure.

The theory of our author, considered as a résumé of the universal
conditions of pleasure and pain, being so manifestly inadequate, this is
not the place for sifting out the detached fragments of valuable thought
which are disseminated through it. Such stray truths may be gleaned from
every excursion through the phænomena of human nature by a person of
ability. Edition: current; Page: [436] What Sir W. Hamilton says of the
different classes of mental pleasures and pains, though brief, is very
suggestive of thought. To make a proper use of the hints he throws out
towards an explanation of the pleasures derived from sublimity and
beauty, would require much study, and a wide survey of the subject, as
well as of the speculations of other thinkers regarding it. The question
has no direct connexion with any other of those discussed in the present
volume, and but a slight one with Sir W. Hamilton’s merits as a
philosopher; since the brevity with which he treats it, gives ground for
believing that he had not bestowed on it the amount of thought which
would enable his opinion to claim the rank of a philosophic theory.

Edition: current; Page: [437]


CHAPTER XXVI: On the Freedom of the Will

the last of the three classes of mental phænomena, that of Conation, in
other words, of Desire and Will, is barely commenced upon in the last
pages of Sir W. Hamilton’s last lecture:[*] whether it be that in the
many years during which he taught the class, he never got beyond this
point, or that his teaching in the concluding part of the course was
purely oral, and has not been preserved. Nor has he, in any of his
writings, treated ex professo of this subject; though doubtless he would
have done so, had his health permitted him to complete the
“Dissertations on Reid.” We consequently know little of what his
sentiments were on any of the topics comprised in this branch of
Psychology, except the vexata quæstio of the Freedom of the Will; on
which he could not help giving indications, in various parts of his
works, both of his opinion and of the reasons on which he grounded it.
The doctrine of Free-will was indeed so fundamental with him, that it
may be regarded as the central idea of his system—the determining cause
of most of his philosophical opinions; and, in a peculiar manner, of the
two which are most completely emanations from his own mind, the Law of
the Conditioned, and his singular theory of Causation. He breaks ground
on the subject at the very opening of his Lectures, in his introductory
remarks on the utility of the study of Metaphysics. He puts in a claim
for metaphysics, grounded on the free-will doctrine, of being the only
medium “through which our unassisted reason can ascend to the knowledge
of a God.” He supports this position by a line of argument which, I
think, must be startling to the majority of believers.

“The Deity,” he says,

is not an object of immediate contemplation; as existing and in himself,
he is beyond our reach; we can know him only mediately through his
works, and are only warranted in assuming his existence as a certain
kind of cause necessary to account for a certain state of things, of
whose reality our faculties are supposed to inform us. The affirmation
of a God being thus a regressive inference, from the existence of a
special class of effects to the existence of a special character of
cause, it is evident, that the whole argument hinges on the fact,—Does a
state of things really exist, such as is only possible through the
agency of a Divine Cause? For if it can be shown Edition: current; Page:
[438] that such a state of things does not really exist, then, our
inference to the kind of cause requisite to account for it, is
necessarily null.

This being understood, I now proceed to show you that the class of
phænomena which requires that kind of cause we denominate a Deity, is
exclusively given in the phænomena of mind,—that the phænomena of
matter, taken by themselves (you will observe the qualification, taken
by themselves) so far from warranting any inference to the existence of
a God, would, on the contrary, ground even an argument to his negation;
that the study of the external world, taken with, and in subordination
to, that of the internal, not only loses its atheistic tendency, but,
under such subservience, may be rendered conducive to the great
conclusion from which, if left to itself, it would dissuade us.*

The reasoning by which he thinks that he establishes this position runs
as follows. A God is only an inference from Nature; a cause assumed, as
necessary to account for phænomena. Now, fate or necessity, without a
God, might account for the phænomena of matter. It is only as man is a
free intelligence, that to account for his existence requires the
hypothesis of a Creator who is a free intelligence. If our feeling of
liberty is an illusion; if our intelligence is only a result of material
organization; we are entitled to conclude that in the universe also, the
phænomena of intelligence and design are, in the last analysis, the
products of brute necessity. Existence in itself being unknown to us, we
can only infer its character from the particular order presented to us
within the sphere of our experience, which in the case under
consideration means observation of our own minds. If, therefore, our
intelligence is produced and bounded by a blind fate, the like may be
concluded to be true of the Divine Intelligence. If, on the contrary,
intelligence in man is a free power, independent of matter, we may
legitimately conclude the same thing of the intelligence manifested in
the universe. Again, there is properly no God at all unless there is a
moral Governor of the world.

Now, it is self-evident, in the first place, that if there be no moral
world, there can be no moral governor of such a world; and in the
second, that we have, and can have, no ground on which to believe in the
reality of a moral world, except in so far as we ourselves are moral
agents. . . . But in what does the character of man as a moral agent
consist? Man is a moral agent only as he is accountable for his
actions,—in other words, as he is the object of praise or blame; and
this he is, only inasmuch as he has prescribed to him a rule of duty,
and as he is able to act, or not to act, in conformity with its
precepts. The possibility of morality thus depends on the possibility of
liberty; for if man be not a free agent, he is not the author of his
actions, and has, therefore, no responsibility,—no moral personality at
all.†

Fully to develop all the just criticisms which might be made on this
single thesis, would require a long chapter. In the first place, the
practice of Edition: current; Page: [439] bribing the pupil to accept a
metaphysical dogma, by the promise or threat that it affords the only
valid argument for a foregone conclusion—however transcendently
important that conclusion may be thought to be—is not only repugnant to
all the rules of philosophizing, but a grave offence against the
morality of philosophic enquiry. The eager attempts of almost every
metaphysical writer to create a religious prejudice in favour of the
theory he patronizes, are a very serious grievance in philosophy. If I
could permit myself, even by way of retort, to follow so bad an example,
I might warn the defenders of religion, of the danger of sacrificing, in
turn, every one of its evidences to some other. It has been remarked,
with truth, that there is not one of the received arguments in support
either of natural religion or of revelation, a formal condemnation of
which might not be extracted from the writings of sincerely religious
thinkers. I am far from imputing this to them as matter of blame: the
rejection of what they deem bad arguments in a good cause must always be
honourable to them, when led to it by honestly following the promptings
of their reason, and not by an egotistic preference for their own
special modes of proof. But, looking at the question as one of prudence,
it would be wise in them, whatever else they give up, not to part
company with the Design argument. For, in the first place, it is the
best; and besides, it is by far the most persuasive. It would be
difficult to find a stronger argument in favour of Theism, than that the
eye must have been made by one who sees, and the ear by one who
hears.[*] If, after this, it pleases Sir W. Hamilton or any other person
to say that unless we believe in free will, the Being who by hypothesis
made the ear and the eye is no God; or that to regard the goodness of
God as the result of a necessity, which, from the very meaning of a
First Cause, can only be a necessity of his own nature, a love of Good
which is part of himself and inseparable from him, is denying him to be
a moral being; there is really nothing left for us but, with equal
positiveness, to aver the contrary: for the two parties will never be
able to agree about the meaning of terms.

This is but one specimen among many of the bad logic which pervades Sir
W. Hamilton’s attempt to show that Theism depends on the reception of
his favourite doctrine. He proceeds, throughout, on the assumption that
the falsely called Doctrine of Necessity* is the same thing with
Materialism. Edition: current; Page: [440] He treats those opinions as
precisely equivalent.* Yet no two doctrines can be more distinct. Reid,
an enemy of both, affirms that Necessity, “far from being a direct
inference,” “can receive no support from” Materialism.† It may be true,
nevertheless, that Materialists are always or generally Necessitarians;
and it is not denied that many Necessitarians are Materialists: but
nearly all the theologians of the Reformation, beginning with Luther,
and the entire series of Calvinistic divines represented by Jonathan
Edwards, are proofs that the most sincere Spiritualists may consistently
hold the doctrine of so-called Necessity. Of such Spiritualists there is
an illustrious example in Leibnitz, to say nothing of Condillac‡ or
Brown. They believe man to be a spiritual being, not dependent on
Matter, but yet, in respect of his actions as in all other respects,
subject to the law of Causation: his volitions not being self-caused,
but determined by spiritual antecedents (e.g. desires, associations of
ideas, &c., all of which are spiritual if the mind is spiritual) in such
sort that when the antecedents are the same, the volitions will always
be the same. But to confound Necessity with Materialism, though an
historical and psychological error, is indispensable to Sir W.
Hamilton’s argument, which depends for all its plausibility on the
picture he draws of a God subject to a “brute necessity” of a purely
material character.[*] For if the necessity predicated of human actions
is not a material, but a spiritual necessity; if the assertion that the
virtuous man is virtuous necessarily, only means that he is so because
he dreads a departure from virtue more than he dreads any personal
consequence; there is nothing absurd or invidious in taking a similar
view of the Deity, and believing that he is necessitated to will what is
good, by the love of good and detestation of evil which are in his own
nature.

There is also at the root of our author’s argument another logical
error—that of inferring that whatever is given by observation and
analysis as a law of human intelligence, must be supposed to be an
absolute law extending to the Divine. He says, truly, that the Divine
Intelligence is but an assumption, to account for the phænomena of the
universe; and that we can only be warranted in referring the origin of
those phænomena to an Intelligence, by Edition: current; Page: [441]
analogy to the effects of human intellect. But can this analogy be
carried up to complete identity in conditions and modes of action
between the human and the Divine intelligence? Does Sir W. Hamilton draw
this inference in any other case? On the contrary, he holds us bound to
believe that the Deity, whether as Will or as Intelligence, is
Absolute—unrestricted by any conditions; though, as such, neither
knowable nor conceivable by us. And though I do not acknowledge the
obligation of believing what can neither be known nor conceived, as
little can it be admitted, that the Divine Will cannot be free unless
ours is so; any more than that the Divine Intelligence cannot know the
truths of geometry by direct intuition, because we are obliged to mount
laboriously up to them through the twelve books of Euclid.

So much for Sir W. Hamilton’s attempt to prove that one who disbelieves
free-will, has no business to believe in a God. Let us now consider his
view of the doctrine itself, and of the evidence for it.

His view of the controversy is peculiar, but harmonizes with his
Philosophy of the Conditioned, which seems indeed to have been
principally suggested to him by the supposed requirements of this
question. He is of opinion that Free-will and Necessity are both
inconceivable. Free-will, because it supposes volitions to originate
without cause;* because it affirms an absolute commencement, which, as
we are aware, our author deems it impossible for the human mind to
conceive. On the other hand, the mind is equally unable to conceive an
infinite regress; a chain of causation going back to all eternity. Both
the one and the other theory thus involve difficulties insurmountable by
the human faculties. But, as Sir W. Hamilton has so often told us, the
inconceivability of a thing by us, is no proof that it is objectively
impossible by the laws of the universe; on the contrary, it often
happens that both sides of an alternative are alike incomprehensible to
us, Edition: current; Page: [442] while from their nature we are certain
that the one or the other must be true. Such an alternative, according
to Sir W. Hamilton, exists between the conflicting doctrines of
Free-will and Necessity. By the law of Excluded Middle, one or other of
them must be true; and inconceivability, as common to both, not
operating more against one than against the other, does not operate
against either. The balance, therefore, must turn in favour of the side
for which there is positive evidence. In favour of Free-will we have the
distinct testimony of consciousness; perhaps directly, though of this he
speaks with some appearance of doubt;* but at all events, indirectly,
freedom being implied in the consciousness of moral responsibility. As
there is no corresponding evidence in favour of the other theory, the
Free-will doctrine must prevail.

How the will can possibly be free must remain to us, under the present
limitation of our faculties, wholly incomprehensible. We cannot conceive
absolute commencement; we cannot, therefore, conceive a free volition.
But as little can we conceive the alternative on which liberty is
denied, on which necessity is affirmed. And in favour of our moral
nature, the fact that we are free is given us in the consciousness of an
uncompromising law of Duty, in the consciousness of our moral
accountability; and this fact of liberty cannot be redargued on the
ground that it is incomprehensible, for the doctrine of the Conditioned
proves, against the necessitarian, that something may, nay must, be
true, of which the mind is wholly unable to construe to itself the
possibility, whilst it shows that the objection of incomprehensibility
applies no less to the doctrine of fatalism than to the doctrine of
moral freedom.†

The inconceivability of the Free-will doctrine is maintained by our
author, not only on the general ground just stated, of our incapacity to
conceive an absolute commencement, but on the further and special
ground, that the will is determined by motives. In rewriting the
preceding passage for the Appendix to his Discussions, he made the
following addition to it:

A determination by motives cannot, to our understanding, escape from
necessitation. Nay, were we even to admit as true, what we cannot think
as possible, still the doctrine of a motiveless volition would be only
casualism; and the free acts of an indifferent, are, morally and
rationally, as worthless as the pre-ordered passions of a determined
will.‡ How, therefore, I repeat, moral liberty is possible in man or
Edition: current; Page: [443] God, we are utterly unable speculatively
to understand. But . . . the scheme of freedom is not more inconceivable
than the scheme of necessity. For whilst fatalism is a recoil from the
more obtrusive inconceivability of an absolute commencement, on the fact
of which commencement the doctrine of liberty proceeds; the fatalist is
shown to overlook the equal, but less obtrusive, inconceivability of an
infinite non-commencement, on the assertion of which non-commencement
his own doctrine of necessity must ultimately rest.*

It rests on no such thing, if he believes in a First Cause, which a
Necessitarian may. What is more, even if he does not believe in a First
Cause, he makes no “assertion of non-commencement;” he only declines to
make an assertion of commencement; band, therefore, is not in the
position of asserting what is inconceivable: which, however, as Sir W.
Hamilton is perpetually declaring, is a position perfectly tenable, and
the position he avowedly chooses for himself on this very subjectb. But
to resume the quotation: “As equally unthinkable, the two counter, the
two one-sided, schemes are thus theoretically balanced. But,
practically, our consciousness of the moral law, which, without a moral
liberty in man, would be a mendacious imperative, gives a decisive
preponderance to the doctrine of freedom over the doctrine of fate. We
are free in act, if we are accountable for our actions.”

Sir W. Hamilton is of opinion that both sides are alike unsuccessful in
repelling each other’s attacks. The arguments against both are, he
thinks, to the human faculties, irrefutable.

The champions of the opposite doctrines are at once resistless in
assault and impotent in defence. Each is hewn down, and appears to die
under the home thrusts of his adversary; but each again recovers life
from the very death of his antagonist, and, to borrow a simile, both are
like the heroes in Valhalla, ready in a moment to amuse themselves anew
in the same bloodless and interminable conflict. The doctrine of Moral
Liberty cannot be made conceivable, for we can only conceive the
determined and the relative. As already stated, all that can be done is
to show, 1°. That, for the fact of Liberty, we have immediately or
mediately, the evidence of Consciousness; and 2°. That there are among
the phænomena of mind, many facts which we must admit as actual, but of
whose possibility we are wholly unable to form any notion. I may merely
observe that the fact of Motion can be shown to be impossible, on
grounds not less strong than those on which it is attempted to disprove
the fact of Liberty.†

These “grounds no less strong” are the mere paralogisms which we
examined in a recent chapter,[*] and with regard to which our author
Edition: current; Page: [444] showed so surprising a deficiency in the
acuteness and subtlety to be expected from the general quality of his
mind.

Conformably to these views, Sir W. Hamilton, in his foot-notes on Reid,
promptly puts an extinguisher on several of that philosopher’s arguments
against the doctrine of so-called Necessity. When Reid affirms that
Motives are not causes—that they may influence to action, but do not
act, Sir W. Hamilton observes: “If Motives influence to action, they
must co-operate in producing a certain effect upon the agent; and the
determination to act, and to act in a certain manner, is that effect.
They are thus, on Reid’s own view, in this relation, causes, and
efficient causes. It is of no consequence in the argument whether
motives be said to determine a man to act, or to influence (that is, to
determine) him to determine himself to act.”* This is one of the neatest
specimens in our author’s writings of a fallacy cut clean through by a
single stroke.

Again, when Reid says that acts are often done without any motive, or
when there is no motive for preferring the means used, rather than
others by which the same end might have been attained, Sir W. Hamilton
asks, “Can we conceive any act of which there was not a sufficient cause
or concourse of causes why the man performed it and no other? If not,
call this cause, or these concauses, the motive, and there is no longer
a dispute.”†

Reid asks, “Is there no such thing as wilfulness, caprice, or obstinacy
among mankind?”[*] Sir W. Hamilton, e contra: “But are not these all
tendencies, and fatal tendencies, to act or not to act? By
contradistinguishing such tendencies from motives strictly so called, or
rational impulses, we do not advance a single step towards rendering
liberty comprehensible.”‡

According to Reid, the determination is made by the man, and not by the
motive. “But,” asks Sir W. Hamilton,

was the man determined by no motive to that determination? Was his
specific volition to this or to that without a cause? On the supposition
that the sum of influences (motives, dispositions, and tendencies) to
volition A, is equal to 12, and the sum of influences to
counter-volition B equal to 8—can we conceive that the determination of
volition A should not be necessary?—We can only conceive the volition B
to be determined by supposing that the man creates (calls from
non-existence into existence) a certain supplement of influences. But
this creation as actual, or in itself, is inconceivable, and even to
conceive the possibility of this inconceivable act, we must suppose some
cause by which the man is determined to exert it. We thus, in thought,
never escape determination and necessity. It will be observed that I do
not consider this inability to the notion, any disproof of the fact of
Free-will.§

Edition: current; Page: [445]
Nor is it: but if, as our author so strongly inculcates, “every effort
to bring the fact of liberty within the compass of our conceptions only
results in the substitution in its place of some more or less disguised
form of necessity,”* it is a strong indication that some form of
necessity is the opinion naturally suggested by our collective
experience of life.†

Sir W. Hamilton having thus, as is often the case (and it is one of the
best things he does), saved his opponents the trouble of answering his
friends, his doctrine is left resting exclusively on the supports which
he has himself provided for it. In examining them, let us place
ourselves, in the first instance, completely at his point of view, and
concede to him the coequal inconceivability of the conflicting
hypotheses, an uncaused commencement, and an infinite regress. But this
choice of inconceivabilities is not offered to us in the case of
volitions only. We are held, as he not only admits but contends, to the
same alternative in all cases of causation whatsoever. But we find our
way out of the difficulty, in other cases, in quite a different manner.
In the case of every other kind of fact, we do not elect the hypothesis
that the event took place without a cause: we accept the other
supposition, that of a regress, not indeed to infinity, but either
generally into the region of the Unknowable, or back to an Universal
Cause, regarding which, as we are only concerned with it in crespect of
attributes bearingc relation to what it preceded, and not as itself
preceded by anything, we can afford to dconsider this reference as
ultimated.

Now, what is the reason, which, in the case of all things within the
range of our knowledge except volitions, makes us choose this side of
the alternative? Why do we, without scruple, register all of them as
depending on causes, by which (to use our author’s language) they are
determined necessarily, though, in believing this, we, according to Sir
W. Hamilton, believe as utter an inconceivability as if we supposed them
to take place without a cause? Apparently it is because the causation
hypothesis, inconceivable as he may think it, possesses the advantage of
having experience on its side. And how or by what evidence does
experience testify to it? Not by disclosing any nexus between the cause
and the effect, any Sufficient Reason in the cause itself why the effect
should follow it. No philosopher Edition: current; Page: [446] now makes
this supposition, and Sir W. Hamilton positively disclaims it. What
experience makes known, is the fact of an invariable sequence between
every event and some special combination of antecedent conditions, in
such sort that wherever and whenever that union of antecedents exists,
the event does not fail to occur. Any must in the case, any necessity,
other than the unconditional universality of the fact, we know nothing
of. Still, this à posteriori “does,” though not confirmed by an à priori
“must,” decides our choice between the two inconceivables, and leads us
to the belief that every event within the phænomenal universe, except
human volitions, is determined to take place by a cause. Now, the
so-called Necessitarians demand the application of the same rule of
judgment to our volitions. They maintain that there is the same evidence
for it. They affirm, as a truth of experience, that volitions do, in
point of fact, follow determinate moral antecedents with the same
uniformity, and (when we have sufficient knowledge of the circumstances)
with the same certainty, as physical effects follow their physical
causes. These moral antecedents are desires, aversions, habits, and
dispositions, combined with outward circumstances suited to call those
internal incentives into action. All these again are effects of causes,
those of them which are mental being consequences of education, and of
other moral and physical influences. This is what Necessitarians affirm:
and they court every possible mode in which its truth can be verified.
They test it by each person’s observation of his own volitions. They
test it by each person’s observation of the voluntary actions of those
with whom he comes into contact; and by the power which every one has of
foreseeing actions, with a degree of exactness proportioned to his
previous experience and knowledge of the agents, and with a certainty
often quite equal to that with which we predict the commonest physical
events. They test it further, by the statistical results of the
observation of human beings acting in numbers sufficient to eliminate
the influences which operate only on a few, and which on a large scale
neutralize one another, leaving the total result about the same as if
the volitions of the whole mass had been affected by such only of the
determining causes as were common to them all. In cases of this
description the results are as uniform, and may be as accurately
foretold, as in any physical enquiries in which the effect depends upon
a multiplicity of causes. The cases in which volitions seem too
uncertain to admit of being confidently predicted, are those in which
our knowledge of the influences antecedently in operation is so
incomplete, that with equally imperfect data there would be the same
uncertainty in the predictions of the astronomer and the chemist. On
these grounds it is contended that our choice between the conflicting
inconceivables should be the same in the case of volitions as of all
other phænomena; we must reject equally in both cases the hypothesis of
spontaneousness, and consider them all as caused. A volition is a moral
effect, which follows the Edition: current; Page: [447] corresponding
moral causes as certainly and invariably as physical effects follow
their physical causes. Whether it must do so, I acknowledge myself to be
entirely ignorant, be the phænomenon moral or physical; and I condemn,
accordingly, the word Necessity as applied to either case. All I know
is, that it always does.*

This argument from experience Sir W. Hamilton passes unnoticed, but
urges, on the opposite side of the question, the argument from
Consciousness. We are conscious, he affirms, either of our freedom, or
at all events (it is odd that, on his theory, there should be any doubt)
of something which implies freedom. If this is true, our internal
consciousness tells us fthat we have a power, whichf the whole outward
experience of the human race tells gus that we never useg. This is
surely a very unfortunate predicament we are in, and a sore trial to the
puzzled metaphysician. Philosophy is far from having so easy a business
before her as our author thinks: the arbiter Consciousness is by no
means invoked to turn the scale between two equally balanced
difficulties; on the contrary, she has to sit in judgment between
herself and a complete induction from experience. Consciousness, it will
probably be said, is the best evidence; and so it would be, if we were
always certain what is Consciousness. But while there are so many
varying testimonies respecting this; when Sir W. Hamilton can himself
say, “many philosophers have attempted to establish, on the principles
of common sense, propositions which are not original data of
consciousness, while the original data of consciousness from which these
propositions were derived, and to which they owed all their necessity
and truth, these same philosophers were (strange to say) not disposed to
admit;”† when M. Cousin and nearly all Germany find the Infinite and the
Absolute in Consciousness, Sir W. Hamilton thinking them utterly
repugnant to it; when philosophers, for many generations, fancied that
they had Abstract Ideas—that they could conceive a triangle which was
neither equilateral, Edition: current; Page: [448] isosceles, nor
scalene,* which Sir W. Hamilton and all other people now consider to be
simply absurd; with all these conflicting opinions respecting the things
to which Consciousness testifies, what is the perplexed inquirer to
think? Does all philosophy end, as in our author’s opinion Hume believed
it to do, in a persistent contradiction between one of our mental
faculties and another?[*] We shall find, there is a solution, which
relieves the human mind from this embarrassment: namely, that the
question to which experience says yes, and that to which consciousness
says no, are different questions.

Let us cross-examine the alleged testimony of consciousness. And, first,
it is left in some uncertainty by Sir W. Hamilton whether Consciousness
makes only one deliverance on the subject, or two: whether we are
conscious only of moral responsibility, in which free-will is implied,
or are directly conscious of free-will. In his Lectures, Sir W. Hamilton
speaks only of the first. In the notes on Reid, which were written
subsequently, he seems to affirm both, but the latter of the two in a
doubtful and hesitating manner:[†] so difficult, in reality, does he
find it to ascertain with certainty what it is that Consciousness
certifies. But as there are many who maintain with a confidence far
greater than his, that we are directly conscious of free-will,† it is
necessary to examine that question.

Edition: current; Page: [449]
To be conscious of free-will, must mean, to be conscious, before I have
decided, that I am able to decide either way. Exception may be taken in
limine to the use of the word consciousness in such an application.
Consciousness tells me what I do or feel. But what I am able to do, is
not a subject of consciousness. Consciousness is not prophetic; we are
conscious of what is, not of what will or can be. We never know that we
are able to do a thing, except from having done it, or something equal
and similar to it. We should not know that we were capable of action at
all, if we had never acted. Having acted, we know, as far as that
experience reaches, how we are able to act; and this knowledge, when it
has become familiar, is often confounded with, and called by the name
of, consciousness. But it does not derive any increase of authority from
being misnamed; its truth is not supreme over, but depends on,
experience. If our so-called consciousness of what we are able to do is
not borne out by experience, it is a delusion. It has no title to
credence but as an interpretation of experience, and if it is a false
interpretation, it must give way.*

Edition: current; Page: [450]
But this conviction, whether termed consciousness or only belief, that
our will is free—what is it? Of what are we convinced? I am told that
whether I decide to do or to abstain, I feel that I could have decided
the other way. I ask my consciousness what I do feel, and I find,
indeed, that I feel (or am convinced) that I couldh, and even should,h
have chosen the other course iif I had preferred it, that is, if I had
liked it betteri; but not that I could have chosen one course while I
preferred the other. When I say Edition: current; Page: [451] preferred,
I of course include with the thing itself, all that accompanies it. I
know that I can, because I know that I often do, elect to do one thing,
when I should have preferred another in itself, apart from its
consequences, or from a moral law which it violates. And this preference
for a thing in itself, abstractedly from its accompaniments, is often
loosely described as preference for the thing. It is this unprecise mode
of speech which makes it not seem absurd to say that I act in opposition
to my preference; that I do one thing when I would rather do another;
that my conscience prevails over my desires—as if conscience were not
itself a desire—the desire to do right. Take any alternative: say to
murder or not to murder. I am told, that if I elect to murder, I am
conscious that I could have elected to abstain: but am I conscious that
I could have abstained if my aversion to the crime, and my dread of its
consequences, had been weaker than the temptation? If I elect to
abstain: in what sense am I conscious that I could have elected to
commit the crime? Only if I had desired to commit it with a desire
stronger than my horror of murder; not with one less strong. When we
think of ourselves hypothetically as having acted otherwise than we did,
we always suppose a difference in the antecedents: we picture ourselves
as having known something that we did not know, or not known something
that we did know; which is a difference in the external jinducementsj;
or as having desired something, or disliked something, more or less than
we did; which is a difference in the internal kinducementsk.*

lIn refutation of this it is said, that in resisting a desire, I am
conscious of making an effort; that after I have resisted, I have the
remembrance of having made an effort; that “if the temptation was long
continued, or if I have been resisting the strong will of another, I am
as sensibly exhausted by Edition: current; Page: [452] that effort, as
after any physical exertion I ever made:” and it is added, “If my
volition is wholly determined by the strongest present desire, it will
be decided without any effort. . . . When the greater weight goes down,
and the lesser up, no effort is needed on the part of the scales.”* It
is implied in this argument, that in a battle between contrary impulses,
the victory must always be decided in a moment; that the force which is
really the strongest, and prevails ultimately, must prevail
instantaneously. The fact is not quite thus even in inanimate nature:
the hurricane does not level the house or blow down the tree without
resistance; even the balance trembles, and the scales oscillate for a
short time, when the difference of the weights is not considerable. Far
less does victory come without a contest to the strongest of two moral,
or even two vital forces, whose nature it is to be never fixed, but
always flowing, quantities. In a struggle between passions, there is not
a single instant in which there does not pass across the mind some
thought, which adds strength to, or takes it from, one or the other of
the contending powers. Unless one of them was, from the beginning, out
of all proportion stronger than the other, some time must elapse before
the balance adjusts itself between forces neither of which is for any
two successive instants the same. During that interval the agent is in
the peculiar mental and physical state which we call a conflict of
feelings: and we all know that a conflict between strong feelings is, in
an extraordinary degree, exhaustive of the nervous energies.† The
consciousness of effort, which we are told of, is this state of
conflict. The author I am quoting considers what he calls, I think
improperly, an effort, to be only on one side, because he represents to
himself the conflict as taking place between me and some foreign power,
which I conquer, or by which I am overcome.[*] But it is obvious that
“I” am both parties in the contest; the conflict is between me and
myself; between (for instance) me desiring a pleasure, and me dreading
self-reproach. What causes Me, or, if you please, my Will, to be
identified with one side rather than with the other, is that one of the
Me’s represents a more permanent state of my feelings than the other
does. After the temptation has been yielded to, the desiring “I” will
come to an end, but the conscience-stricken “I” may endure to the end of
life.l

I therefore dispute altogether that we are conscious of being able to
act in Edition: current; Page: [453] opposition to the strongest present
desire or aversion. The difference between a bad and a good man is not
that the latter acts in opposition to his strongest desires; it is that
his desire to do right, and his aversion to doing wrong, are strong
enough to overcome, and in the case of perfect virtue, to silence, any
other desire or aversion which may conflict with them. It is because
this state of mind is possible to human nature, that human beings are
capable of moral government: and moral education consists in subjecting
them to the discipline which has most tendency to bring them into this
state. The object of moral education is to educate the will: but the
will can only be educated through the desires and aversions; by
eradicating or weakening such of them as are likeliest to lead to evil;
exalting to the highest pitch the desire of right conduct and the
aversion to wrong; cultivating all other desires and aversions of which
the ordinary operation is auxiliary to right, while discountenancing so
immoderate an indulgence of them, as might render them too powerful to
be overcome by the moral sentiment, when they chance to be in opposition
to it. The other requisites are, a clear intellectual standard of right
and wrong, that moral desire and aversion may act in the proper places,
and such general mental habits as shall prevent moral considerations
from being forgotten or overlooked, in cases to which they are rightly
applicable.

Rejecting, then, the figment of a direct consciousness of the freedom of
the will, in other words, our ability to will in opposition to our
strongest preference; it remains to consider whether, as affirmed by Sir
W. Hamilton, a freedom of this kind is implied in what is called our
consciousness of moral responsibility. There must be something very
plausible in this opinion, since it is shared even by Necessitarians.
Many of these—in particular Mr. Owen and his followers—from a
recognition of the fact that volitions are effects of causes, have been
led to deny human responsibility. I do not mean that they denied moral
distinctions. Few persons have had a stronger sense of right and wrong,
or been more devoted to the things they deemed right. What they denied
was the rightfulness of inflicting punishment. A man’s actions, they
said, are the result of his character, and he is not the author of his
own character. It is made for him, not by him. There is no justice in
punishing him for what he cannot help. We should try to convince or
persuade him that he had better act in a different manner; and should
educate all, especially the young, in the habits and dispositions which
lead to well-doing: though how this is to be effected without any use
whatever of punishment as a means of education, is a question they have
failed to resolve. The confusion of ideas, which makes the subjection of
human volitions to the law of Causation seem inconsistent with
accountability, must thus be very natural to the human mind; but this
may be said of a thousand errors, and even of some merely verbal
fallacies. In the present Edition: current; Page: [454] case there is
more than a verbal fallacy, but verbal fallacies also contribute their
part.

What is meant by moral responsibility? Responsibility means punishment.
When we are said to have the feeling of being morally responsible for
our actions, the idea of being punished for them is uppermost in the
speaker’s mind. But the feeling of liability to punishment is of two
kinds. It may mean, expectation that if we act in a certain manner,
punishment will actually be inflicted upon us, by our fellow creatures
or by a Supreme Power. Or it may only mean, mknowingm that we shall
deserve that infliction.

The first of these cannot, in any correct meaning of the term, be
designated as a consciousness. If we believe that we shall be punished
for doing wrong, it is because the belief has been taught to us by our
parents and tutors, or by our religion, or is generally held by those
who surround us, or because we have ourselves come to the conclusion, by
reasoning, or from the experience of life. This is not Consciousness.
And, by whatever name it is called, its evidence is not dependent on any
theory of the spontaneousness of volition. The punishment of guilt in
another world is believed with undoubting conviction by Turkish
fatalists, and by professed Christians who are not only Necessitarians,
but believe that the majority of mankind were divinely predestined from
all eternity to sin and to be punished for sinning. It is not,
therefore, the belief that we shall be made accountable, which can be
deemed to require or presuppose the free-will hypothesis; it is the
belief that we ought so to be; that we are justly accountable; that
guilt deserves punishment. It is here thatn issue is joined between the
two opinions.

In discussing it, there is no need to postulate any theory respecting
the nature or criterion of moral distinctions. It matters not, for this
purpose, whether the right and wrong of actions depends on the
consequences they tend to produce, or on an inherent quality of the
actions themselves. It is indifferent whether we are utilitarians or
anti-utilitarians; whether our ethics rest on intuition or on
experience. It is sufficient if we believe that there is a difference
between right and wrong, and a natural reason for preferring the former;
that people in general, unless when they expect personal benefit from a
wrong, naturally and usually prefer what they think to be right: whether
because we are all dependent for what makes existence tolerable, upon
the right conduct of other people, while their wrong conduct is a
standing menace to our security, or for some more mystical and
transcendental reason. Whatever be the cause, we are entitled to assume
Edition: current; Page: [455] the fact: and its consequence is, that
whoever cultivates a disposition to wrong, places his mind out of
sympathy with the rest of his fellow creatures, and if they are aware of
his disposition, becomes a natural object of their active dislike. He
not only forfeits the pleasure of their good will, and the benefit of
their good offices, except when compassion for the human being is
stronger than distaste towards the wrongdoer; but he also renders
himself liable to whatever they may think it necessary to do in order to
protect themselves against him; which may probably include punishment,
as such, and will certainly involve much that is equivalent in its
operation on himself. In this way he is certain to be made accountable,
at least to his fellow creatures, through the normal action of their
natural sentiments. And it is well worth consideration, whether the
practical expectation of being thus called to account, has not a great
deal to do with the internal feeling of being accountable; a feeling,
assuredly, which is seldom found existing in any strength in the absence
of that practical expectation. It is not usually found that Oriental
despots, who cannot be called to account by anybody, have much
consciousness of being morally accountable. And (what is still more
significant) in societies in which caste or class distinctions are
really strong—a state so strange to us now, that we seldom realize it in
its full force—it is a matter of daily experience that persons may show
the strongest sense of moral accountability as regards their equals, who
can make them accountable, and not the smallest vestige of a similar
feeling towards their inferiors who cannot.

oThis does not imply that the feeling of accountability, even when
proportioned very exactly to the chance of being called to account, is a
mere interested calculation, having nothing more in it than an
expectation and dread of external punishment. When pain has long been
thought of as a consequence of a given fact, the fact becomes wrapt up
in associations which make it painful in itself, and cause the mind to
shrink from it even when, in the particular case, no painful
consequences are apprehended: just as the dislike to spending money,
which grows up while money can ill be spared, may be an absorbing
passion after the possessor has grown so rich that the expenditure would
not really cause him the most trifling inconvenience. On this familiar
principle of association it is abundantly certain that even if wrong
meant merely what is forbidden, a disinterested detestation of doing
wrong would naturally grow up, and might become, in its strength and
promptitude, and in the immediateness of its action, without reflection
or ulterior purpose, undistinguishable from any of our instincts or
natural passions.o

Another fact, which it is of importance to keep in view, is, that the
Edition: current; Page: [456] highest and strongest sense of the worth
of goodness, and the odiousness of its opposite, is perfectly compatible
with even the most exaggerated form of Fatalism. Suppose that there were
two peculiar breeds of human beings,—one of them so constituted from the
beginning, that however educated or treated, nothing could prevent them
from always feeling and acting so as to be a blessing to all whom they
approached; another, of such original perversity of nature that neither
education nor punishment could inspire them with a feeling of duty, or
prevent them from being active in evil doing. Neither of these races of
human beings would have free-will; yet the former would be honoured as
demigods, while the latter would be regarded and treated as noxious
beasts: not punished perhaps, since punishment would have no effect on
them, and it might be thought wrong to indulge the mere instinct of
vengeance: but kept carefully at a distance, and killed like other
dangerous creatures when there was no other convenient way of being rid
of them. We thus see that even under the utmost possible exaggeration of
the doctrine of Necessity, the distinction between moral good and evil
in conduct would not only subsist, but would stand out in a more marked
manner than now, when the good and the wicked, however unlike, are still
regarded as of one common nature.

pAn opponent may say, this is not a distinction between moral good and
evil; and I am far from intending to beg the question against him. But
neither can he be permitted to beg the question, by assuming that the
distinction is not moral because it does not imply free-will. The
reality of moral distinctions, and the freedom of our volitions, are
questions independent of one another. My position is, that a human being
who loves, disinterestedly and consistently, his fellow creatures and
whatever tends to their good, who hates with a vigorous hatred what
causes them evil, and whose actions correspond in character with these
feelings, is naturally, necessarily, and reasonably an object to be
loved, admired, sympathized with, and in all ways cherished and
encouraged by mankind; while a person who has none of these qualities,
or so little, that his actions continually jar and conflict with the
good of others, and that for purposes of his own he is ready to inflict
on them a great amount of evil, is a natural and legitimate object of
their fixed aversion, and of conduct conformable thereto: and this
whether the will be free or not, and even independently of any theory of
the difference between right and wrong; whether right means productive
of happiness, and wrong productive of misery, or right and wrong are
intrinsic qualities of the actions themselves, provided only we
recognise that there is a difference, and that the difference is highly
important. What I maintain is, that this is a sufficient distinction
between moral good and evil: sufficient for the ends of society and
sufficient for the individual conscience:—that Edition: current; Page:
[457] we need no other distinction; that if there be any other
distinction, we can dispense with it; and that, supposing acts in
themselves good or evil to be as unconditionally determined from the
beginning of things as if they were phænomena of dead matter, still, if
the determination from the beginning of things has been that they shall
take place through my love of good and hatred of evil, I am a proper
object of esteem and affection, and if that they shall take place
through my love of self and indifference to good, I am a fit object of
aversion which may rise to abhorrence. And no competently informed
person will deny that, as a matter of fact, those who have held this
creed have had as strong a feeling, both emotional and practical, of
moral distinctions, as any other people.*p

Edition: current; Page: [458]
But these considerations, qhoweverq pertinent to the subject, do not
touch the root of the difficulty. The real question is one of
justice—the legitimacy of retribution, or punishment. On the theory of
Necessity (we are told) rar man cannot help acting as he does; and it
cannot be just that he should be punished for what he cannot help.

Not if the expectation of punishment enables him to help it, and is the
only means by which he can be enabled to help it?

To say that he cannot help it, is true or false, according to the
qualification with which the assertion is accompanied. Supposing him to
be of a vicious disposition, he cannot help doing the criminal act, if
he is allowed to believe that he will be able to commit it unpunished.
If, on the contrary, the impression is strong in his mind that a heavy
punishment will follow, he can, and in most cases does, help it.

The question deemed to be so puzzling is, how punishment can be
justified, if men’s actions are determined by motives, among which
motives punishment is one. A more difficult question would be, how it
can be justified if they are not so determined. Punishment proceeds on
the assumption that the will is governed by motives. If punishment had
no power of acting on the will, it would be illegitimate, however
natural might be the inclination to inflict it. Just so far as the will
is supposed free, that is, capable of acting against motives, punishment
is disappointed of its object, and deprived of its justification.

There are two ends which, on the Necessitarian theory, are sufficient to
justify punishment: the benefit of the offender himself, and the
protection of others. The first justifies it, because to benefit a
person cannot be to do him an injury. To punish him for his own good,
provided the inflictor has any proper title to constitute himself a
judge, is no more unjust than to administer medicine. As far, indeed, as
respects the criminal himself, the theory of punishment is, that by
counterbalancing the influence of present temptations, or acquired bad
habits, it restores the mind to that normal preponderance of the love of
right, which smanys moralists and theologians consider to constitute the
true definition of our freedom.* In its other Edition: current; Page:
[459] aspect, punishment is a precaution taken by society in
self-defence. To make this just, the only condition required is, that
the end which society is attempting to enforce by punishment, should be
a just one. Used as a means of aggression by society on the just rights
of the individual, punishment is unjust. Used to protect the just rights
of others against unjust aggression by Edition: current; Page: [460] the
offender, it is just. If it is possible to have just rights, u(which is
the same thing as to have rights at all)u it cannot be unjust to defend
them. Free-will or no free-will, it is just to punish so far as is
necessary for this purpose,v as it is just to put a wild beast to death
(without unnecessary suffering) for the same object.

Edition: current; Page: [461]
Now, the primitive consciousness we are said to have, that we are
accountable for our actions, and that if we violate the rule of right we
shall deserve punishment, I contend is nothing else than our knowledge
that punishment will be just: that by such conduct we shall place
ourselves in the position in which our fellow creatures, or the Deity,
or both, will naturally, and may justly, inflict punishment upon us. By
using the word justly, I am not assuming, in the explanation, the thing
I profess to explain. As before observed, I am entitled to postulate the
reality, and the knowledge and feeling, of moral distinctions. These, it
is both evident metaphysically and notorious historically, are
independent of any theory concerning the will. We are supposed capable
of understanding that other people have rights, and all that follows
from this. The mind which possesses this idea, if capable of placing
itself at the point of view of another person, must recognise it as wnot
unjustw that others should protect themselves against any disposition on
his part to infringe their rights; and he will do so the more readily,
because he also has rights, and his rights continually require the same
protection. This, I maintain, is our feeling of accountability, in so
far as it can be separated from xthe associations engendered byx the
prospect of being actually called to account. No one who understands the
power of the principle of association, can doubt its sufficiency to
create out of these elements the whole of the feeling of which we are
conscious. To rebut this view of the case would require positive
evidence; as, for example, if it could be proved that the feeling of
accountability precedes, in the order of development, all experience of
punishment. No such evidence has been produced, or is producible. Owing
to the limited accessibility to observation of the mental processes of
infancy, direct proof can as little be produced on the other side: but
if there is any validity in Sir W. Hamilton’s Law of Parcimony, we ought
not to assume any mental phænomenon as an ultimate fact, which can be
accounted for by other known properties of our mental nature.

I ask any one who thinks that the justice of punishment is not
sufficiently vindicated by its being for the protection of just rights,
how he reconciles his sense of justice to the punishment of crimes
committed in obedience to a perverted conscience? Ravaillac, and
Balthasar Gérard, did not regard themselves as criminals, but as heroic
martyrs. If they were justly put to death, the justice of punishment has
nothing to do with the state of mind of the offender, further than as
this may affect the efficacy of punishment as a means to its end. It is
impossible to assert the justice of punishment for crimes of fanaticism,
on any other ground than its necessity for the attainment Edition:
current; Page: [462] of a just end. If that is not a justification,
there is no justification. All other imaginary justifications break down
in their application to this case.*

If, indeed, punishment is inflicted for any other reason than in order
to operate on the will; if its purpose be other than that of improving
the culprit himself, or securing the just rights of others against
unjust violation, then, I admit, the case is totally altered. If any one
thinks that there is justice in the infliction of purposeless suffering;
that there is a natural affinity between the two ideas of guilt and
punishment, which makes it intrinsically fitting that wherever there has
been guilt, pain should be inflicted by way of retribution; I
acknowledge that I can find no argument to justify punishment inflicted
on this principle. As a legitimate satisfaction to feelings of
indignation and resentment which are on the whole salutary and worthy of
cultivation, I can in certain cases admit it; but here it is still a
means to an end. The merely retributive view of punishment derives no
justification from the doctrine I support. But it derives quite as
little from the free-will doctrine. Suppose it true that the will of a
malefactor, when he committed an offence, was free, or in other words,
that he acted badly, not because he was of a bad disposition, but yfrom
no causey in particular: it is not easy to Edition: current; Page: [463]
deduce from this the conclusion that it is just to punish him. That his
acts were beyond the command of motives might be a good reason for
keeping out of his way, or placing him under bodily restraint; but no
reason for inflicting pain upon him, when that pain, by supposition,
could not operate as a deterring motive.*

While the doctrine I advocate does not support the idea that punishment
in mere retaliation is justifiable, it at the same time fully accounts
for the general and natural sentiment of its being so. From our earliest
childhood, the aidea of doing wrong (that is, of doing what is
forbidden, or what is injurious to others) and the ideaa of punishment
are presented to our mind together, and the intense character of the
impressions causes the association between them to attain the highest
degree of closeness and intimacy. Is it strange, or unlike the usual
processes of the human mind, that in these circumstances we should
retain the feeling, and forget the reason on which it is grounded? But
why do I speak of forgetting? In most cases the reason has never, in our
early education, been presented to the mind. The only ideas presented
have been those of wrong and punishment, and an inseparable association
has been created between these directly, without the help of any
intervening idea. This is quite enough to make the spontaneous feelings
of mankind regard punishment and a wrongdoer as naturally fitted
Edition: current; Page: [464] to each other—as a conjunction appropriate
in itself, independently of any consequences. Even Sir W. Hamilton
recognises as one of the common sources of error, that “the associations
of thought are mistaken for the connexions of existence.”* If this is
true anywhere, it is truest of all in the associations into which
emotions enter. A strong feeling, directly excited by an object, is felt
(except when contradicted by the feelings of other people) as its own
sufficient justification—no more requiring the support of a reason than
the fact that ginger is hot in the mouth:[*] and it almost requires a
philosopher to recognise the need of a reason for his feelings, unless
he has been under the practical necessity of justifying them to persons
by whom they are not shared.

That a person holding what is called the Necessitarian doctrine should
on that account feel that it would be unjust to punish him for his wrong
actions, seems to me the veriest of chimeras. Yes, if he really “could
not help” acting as he did, that is, if bit did not depend on his willb;
if he was under physical constraint, or ceven if he wasc under the
action of such a violent motive that no fear of punishment could have
any effect; which, if capable of being ascertained, is a just ground of
exemption, and is the reason why by the laws of most countries people
are not punished for what they were compelled to do by immediate danger
of death. But if the criminal was in a state capable of being operated
upon by the fear of punishment, no metaphysical objection, I believe,
will make him feel his punishment unjust. Neither will he feel that
because his act was the consequence of motives, operating upon a certain
mental disposition, it was not his own fault. For, first, it was at all
events his own defect or infirmity, for which the expectation of
punishment is the appropriate cure. And secondly, the word fault, so far
from being inapplicable, is the specific name for the kind of defect or
infirmity which he has displayed—insufficient love of dgoodd and
aversion to eevile. The weakness of these feelings or their strength is
in every one’s mind the standard of fault or merit, or degrees of fault
and degrees of merit. Whether we are judging of particular actions, or
of the character of a person, we are wholly guided by the indications
afforded of the energy of these influences. If the desire of right and
aversion to wrong have yielded to a small temptation, we judge them to
be weak, and our disapprobation is strong. If the temptation to which
they have yielded is so great that even strong feelings of virtue might
have succumbed to it, our moral reprobation Edition: current; Page:
[465] is less intense. If, again, the moral desires and aversions have
prevailed, but not over a very strong force, we hold that the action was
good, but that there was little merit in it; and our estimate of the
merit rises, in exact proportion to the greatness of the obstacle which
the moral feeling proved strong enough to overcome.

Mr. Mansel* has furnished what he thinks a refutation of the
Necessitarian argument, of which it isf well to take notice, the more
so, perhaps, as it is directed against some remarks on the subject by
the present writer in a former work:† remarks which were not intended as
an argument for so-called Necessity, but only to place the nature and
meaning of that ill-understood doctrine in a truer light. With this
purpose in view, it was remarked that “by saying that a man’s actions
necessarily follow from his character, all that is really meant (for no
more is meant in any case whatever of causation) is that he invariably
does act in conformity to his character, and that any one who thoroughly
knew his character, could certainly predict how he would act in any
supposable case. No more than this is contended for by any one but an
Asiatic fatalist.”[*] “And no more than this,” observes Mr. Mansel, “is
needed to construct a system of fatalism as rigid as any Asiatic can
desire.”[†]

Mr. Mansel is mistaken in thinking that the doctrine of the causation of
human actions is fatalism at all, or resembles fatalism in any of its
moral or intellectual effects. To call it by that name is to break down
a fundamental distinction. Real fatalism is of two kinds. Pure, or
Asiatic fatalism,—the fatalism of the Œdipus,[‡]—holds that our actions
do not depend upon our desires. Whatever our wishes may be, a superior
power, or an abstract destiny, will overrule them, and compel us to act,
not as we desire, but in the manner predestined. Our love of good and
hatred of evil are of no efficacy, and though in themselves they may be
virtuous, as far as conduct is concerned it is unavailing to cultivate
them. The other kind, Modified Fatalism I will call it, holds that our
actions are determined by our will, our will by our desires, and our
desires by the joint influence of the motives presented to us and of our
individual character; but that, our character having been made for us
and not by us, we are not responsible for it, nor for the actions it
leads to, and should in vain attempt to alter them. The true Edition:
current; Page: [466] doctrine of the Causation of human actions
maintains, in opposition to both, that not only our conduct, but our
character, is in part amenable to our will; that we can, by employing
the proper means, improve our character; and that if our character is
such that while it remains what it is, it necessitates us to do wrong,
it will be just to apply motives which will necessitate us to strive for
its improvement, and so emancipate ourselves from the other necessityg.
Ing other words, we are under a moral obligation to seek the improvement
of our moral character. We shall not indeed do so unless we desire our
improvement, and desire it more than we dislike the means which must be
employed for the purpose. But does Mr. Mansel, or any other of the
free-will philosophers, think that we can will the means if we do not
desire the end, or if our desire of the end is weaker than our aversion
to the means?*

Edition: current; Page: [467]
Mr. Mansel is more rigid in his ideas of what the free-will theory
requires, than one of the most eminent of the thinkers who have adopted
it. According to Mr. Mansel, the belief that whoever knew perfectly our
character and our circumstances could predict our actions, amounts to
Asiatic fatalism.[*] According to Kant, in his Metaphysics of Ethics,
such capability of prediction is quite compatible with the freedom of
the will.[†] This seems, at first sight, to be an admission of
everything which the rational supporters of the opposite theory could
desire. But Kant avoids this consequence, by changing (as lawyers would
say) the venue of free-will, from our actions generally, to the
formation of our character. It is in that, he thinks, we are free, and
he is almost willing to admit that while our character is what it is,
our actions are necessitated by it. In drawing this distinction, the
philosopher of Königsberg saves inconvenient facts at the expense of the
consistency of his theory. There cannot be one theory for one kind of
voluntary actions, and another theory for the other kinds. When we
voluntarily exert ourselves, as it is our duty to do, for the
improvement of our character, or when we act in a manner which (either
consciously on our part or unconsciously) deteriorates it, these, like
all other voluntary acts, presuppose that there was already something in
our character, or in that combined with our circumstances, which led us
to do so, and accounts for our doing so. The person, therefore, who is
supposed able to predict our actions from our character as it now is,
would, under the same conditions of perfect knowledge, be equally able
to predict what we should do to change our character: and if this be the
meaning of necessity, that part of our conduct is as necessary as all
the rest. If necessity means more than this abstract possibility of
being foreseen; if it means any mysterious compulsion, apart from simple
invariability of sequence, I deny it as strenuously as any one hin the
case of human volitions, but I deny it just as much of all other
phænomenah. To enforce this distinction was the principal object of the
remarks which Mr. Mansel has criticised.[‡] If an unessential
distinction from Mr. Mansel’s point of view, it is essential from mine,
and of supreme importance in a practical aspect.

The free-will metaphysicians have made little endeavour to prove that
Edition: current; Page: [468] we can will in opposition to our strongest
desire, but have strenuously maintained that we can will when we have no
strongest desire. With this view Dr. Reid formerly, and Mr. Mansel now,
have thrown in the teeth of Necessitarians the famous asinus
Buridani.[*] If, say they, the will were solely determined by motives,
the ass, between two bundles of hay, exactly alike, and equally distant
from him, would remain undecided until he died of hunger. From Sir W.
Hamilton’s notes on this chapter of Reid,* I infer that he did not
countenance this argument; and it is surprising that writers of talent
should have seen anything in it. I wave the objection that if it applies
at all, it proves that the ass also has free-will; for perhaps he has.
But the ass, it is affirmed, would starve before he decided. Yes,
possibly, if he remained all the time in a fixed attitude of
deliberation; if he never for an instant ceased to balance one against
another the rival attractions, and if they really were so exactly equal
that no dwelling on them could detect any difference. But this is not
the way in which things take place on our planet. From mere lassitude,
if from no other cause, he would intermit the process, and cease
thinking of the rival objects at all: until a moment arrived when he
would be seeing or thinking of one only, and that fact, combined with
the sensation of hunger, would determine him to a decision.

But the argument on which Mr. Mansel lays most stress (it is also one of
Reid’s)[†] is the following. Necessitarians say that the will is
governed by the strongest motive: “but I only know the strength of
motives in relation to the will by the test of ultimate prevalence; so
that this means no more than that the prevailing motive prevails.”[‡] I
have heretofore complimented Mr. Mansel on seeing farther, in some
things, than his master. In the present instance I am compelled to
remark, that he has not seen so far. Sir W. Hamilton was not the man to
neglect an argument like this, had there been no flaw in it. The fact is
that there are two. First, those who say that the will follows the
strongest motive, do not mean the motive which is strongest in relation
to the will, or in other words, that the will follows what it does
follow. They mean the motive which is strongest in relation to pain and
pleasure; since a motive, being a desire or aversion, is proportional to
the pleasantness, as conceived by us, of the thing desired, or the
painfulness of the thing shunned. And when what was at first a direct
impulse towards pleasure, or recoil from pain, has passed into a habit
or a fixed purpose, then the strength of the motive means the
completeness and promptitude of the association which has been formed
between an idea and an outward act. Edition: current; Page: [469] This
is the first answer to Mr. Mansel. The second is, that even supposing
there were no test of the strength of motives but their effect on the
will, the proposition that the will follows the strongest motive would
not, as Mr. Mansel supposes, be identical and unmeaning.[*] We say,
without absurdity, that if two weights are placed in opposite scales,
the heavier will lift the other up; yet we mean nothing by the heavier,
except the weight which will lift up the other. The proposition,
nevertheless, is not unmeaning, for it signifies that in many or most
cases there is a heavier, and that this is always the same one, not one
or the other as it may happen. In like manner, even if the strongest
motive meant only the motive which prevails, yet if there is a
prevailing motive—if, all other antecedents being the same, the motive
which prevails to-day will prevail to-morrow and every subsequent
day—Sir W. Hamilton was acute enough to see that the free-will theory is
not saved. I regret that I cannot, in this instance, credit Mr. Mansel
with the same acuteness.

Before leaving the subject, it is worth while to remark, that not only
the doctrine of Necessity, but Predestination in its coarsest form—the
belief that all our actions are divinely preordained—though, in my view,
inconsistent with ascribing any moral attributes whatever to the Deity,
yet if combined with the belief that God works according to general
laws, which have to be learnt from experience, has no tendency to make
us act in any respect otherwise than we should do if we thought our
actions really contingent. For if God acts according to general laws,
then, whatever he may have preordained, he has preordained that it shall
take place through the causes on which experience shows it to be
consequent: and if he has predestined that I shall attain my ends, he
has predestined that I shall do so by studying and putting in practice
the means which lead to their attainment. When the belief in
predestination has a paralysing effect on conduct, as is sometimes the
case with Mahomedans, it is because they fancy they can infer what God
has predestined, without waiting for the result. They think that either
by particular signs of some sort, or from the general aspect of things,
they can perceive the issue towards which God is working, and having
discovered this, naturally deem useless any attempt to defeat it.
Because something will certainly happen if nothing is done to prevent
it, they think it will certainly happen whatever may be done to prevent
it; in a word, they believe in Necessity in the only proper meaning of
the term—an issue unalterable by human efforts or desires.

Edition: current; Page: [470]


CHAPTER XXVII: Sir William Hamilton’s Opinions on the Study of Mathematics

no account of Sir W. Hamilton’s philosophy could be complete, which
omitted to notice his famous attack on the tendency of mathematical
studies:[*] for though there is no direct connexion between this and his
metaphysical opinions, it affords the most express evidence we have of
those fatal lacunæ in the circle of his knowledge, which unfitted him
for taking a comprehensive or even an accurate view of the processes of
the human mind in the establishment of truth. If there is any
pre-requisite which all must see to be indispensable in one who attempts
to give laws to human intellect, it is a thorough acquaintance with the
modes by which human intellect has proceeded, in the cases where, by
universal acknowledgment, grounded on subsequent direct verification, it
has succeeded in ascertaining the greatest number of important and
recondite truths. This requisite Sir W. Hamilton had not, in any
tolerable degree, fulfilled. Even of pure mathematics he apparently knew
little but the rudiments. Of mathematics as applied to investigating the
laws of physical nature; of the mode in which the properties of number,
extension, and figure, are made instrumental to the ascertainment of
truths other than arithmetical or geometrical—it is too much to say that
he had even a superficial knowledge: there is not a line in his works
which shows him to have had any knowledge at all. He had no conception
of what the process is. In this he differed greatly and
disadvantageously from his immediate predecessor in the same school of
metaphysical thought, Professor Dugald Stewart; whose works derive a
great part of their value from the foundation of sound and accurate
scientific knowledge laid by his mathematical and physical studies, and
which his subsequent metaphysical pursuits enabled him, quite
successfully to the length of his tether, to clarify and reduce to
principles.

If Sir W. Hamilton had contented himself with saying of mathematics,
that it is not, of itself alone, a sufficient education of the
intellectual Edition: current; Page: [471] faculties; that it cultivates
the mind only partially; that there are important kinds of intellectual
cultivation and discipline which it does not give, and to which,
therefore, if pursued to the exclusion of the studies which do give
them, it is unfavourable; he would have said something, not new indeed,
but true, not of mathematics alone, but of every limited and special
employment of the mental faculties; of every study in which the human
mind can engage, except the two or three highest, most difficult, and
most imperfect, which, requiring all the faculties in their greatest
attainable perfection, can never be recommended or thought of as
preparatory discipline, but are themselves the chief purpose for which
such preparation is required. Sir W. Hamilton, however, has asserted
much more than this. He undertakes to show that the study of mathematics
is not an useful intellectual discipline at all, except in one
comparatively humble particular, which it has in common with some of the
most despised pursuits; and that, if prosecuted far, it positively
unfits the mind for the useful employment of its faculties on any other
object. As might be expected from an attempt to maintain such a thesis
by one who, however acute on other matters, had no sufficient knowledge
of the subject he was writing about, this celebrated dissertation is one
of the weakest parts of his works. He ignores not only the whole of his
adversary’s case, but the most important part of his own; and has made a
far less powerful attack on the tendencies of mathematical studies, than
could easily be made by one who understood the subject. He has, in fact,
missed the most considerable of the evil effects to the production of
which those studies have contributed; and has thrown no light on the
intellectual shortcomings of the common run of mathematicians, so
signally displayed in their wretched treatment of the generalities of
their own science. He finds hardly anything to say to their disadvantage
but things so trite and obvious, that the greatest zealot for
mathematics could afford to pass them by, insisting only on the
inestimable benefits which are to be set against them, and which alone
are really to the purpose; for it is no objection to a harrow that it is
not a plough, nor to a saw that it is not a chisel.

For instance, are we much the wiser for being once more told, at great
length, and with a cloud of witnesses[*] brought to back the assertion,
that mathematics, being concerned only with demonstrative evidence, does
not teach us, either by theory or practice, to estimate probabilities?
Did any mathematician, or eulogist of mathematics, ever pretend that it
did? Does the science to which Sir W. Hamilton assigns a place above all
others as an intellectual discipline—does Metaphysics enable us to judge
of probable evidence? If such a claim has ever been made in its behalf,
I am not aware of it; Sir W. Hamilton, certainly, was too well
acquainted with the subject to make any such pretension. Metaphysics,
like Mathematics, and all the rest Edition: current; Page: [472] of the
fundamental sciences, demands, not probable, but certain evidence. The
province of Probabilities in science is not the abstract, but what M.
Comte terms the concrete sciences; those which treat of the combinations
actually realized in Nature, as distinguished from the general laws
which would equally govern any other combinations of the same elements:
zoology and botany, for example, as contrasted with physiology; geology,
as opposed to thermology and chemistry.[*] In an abstract science a
probability is of no account; it is but a momentary halt on the road to
certainty, and a hint for fresh experiments.

Inasmuch as abstract science in general, and mathematics in particular,
afford no practice in the estimation of conflicting probabilities, which
is the kind of sagacity most required in the conduct of practical
affairs, it follows that, when made so exclusive an occupation as to
prevent the mind from obtaining enough of this necessary practice in
other ways, it does worse than not cultivate the faculty—it prevents it
from being acquired, and pro tanto unfits the person for the general
business of life. It is natural that people who are bad judges of
probability, should be, according to their temperament, unduly credulous
or unreasonably sceptical; both which charges our author, with great
earnestness and a heavy artillery of authorities, drives home against
the mathematicians. But he would have made little progress towards
proving his case, even by a much more complete catalogue of the
intellectual defects of a mathematician who is nothing but a
mathematician. A person may be keenly alive to these, and may hate them,
as M. Comte did, with a perfect hatred, while upholding mathematical
instruction as not only an useful but the indispensable first stage of
all scientific education worthy of the name.* Nor can any reasonable
view of the subject refuse to recognise, in the very faults which our
author imputes to mathematicians, the excesses of a most valuable
quality. Let us be assured that for the formation of a well-trained
intellect, it is no Edition: current; Page: [473] slight recommendation
of a study, that it is the means by which the mind is earliest and most
easily brought to maintain within itself a standard of complete proof. A
mind thus furnished, and not duly instructed on other subjects, may
commit the error of expecting in all proof too close an adherence to the
type with which it is familiar. That type may and ought to be widened by
greater variety of culture; but he who has never acquired it, has no
just sense of the difference between what is proved and what is not
proved: the first foundation of the scientific habit of mind has not
been laid. It has long been a complaint against mathematicians that they
are hard to convince: but it is a far greater disqualification both for
philosophy, and for the affairs of life, to be too easily convinced; to
have too low a standard of proof. The only sound intellects are those
which, in the first instance, set their standard of proof high. Practice
in concrete affairs soon teaches them to make the necessary abatement:
but they retain the consciousness, without which there is no sound
practical reasoning, that in accepting inferior evidence because there
is none better to be had, they do not by that acceptance raise it to
completeness. They remain aware of what is wanting to it.

Besides accustoming the student to demand complete proof, and to know
when he has not obtained it, mathematical studies are of immense benefit
to his education by habituating him to precision. It is one of the
peculiar excellences of mathematical discipline, that the mathematician
is never satisfied with an à peu près. He requires the exact truth.
Hardly any of the non-mathematical sciences, except chemistry, has this
advantage. One of the commonest modes of loose thought, and sources of
error both in opinion and in practice, is to overlook the importance of
quantities. Mathematicians and chemists are taught by the whole course
of their studies, that the most fundamental differences of quality
depend on some very slight difference in proportional quantity; and that
from the qualities of the influencing elements, without careful
attention to their quantities, false expectations would constantly be
formed as to the very nature and essential character of the result
produced. If Sir W. Hamilton’s mind had undergone this improving
discipline, we should not have found him employing the most precise
mathematical terms with the laxity which is habitual in his writings.
For instance; whenever he means that one of two things diminishes while
another increases, he says that they are in the inverse ratio of one
another. He affirms this of the Extension and Comprehension of a general
notion;* of the number of objects among which our attention is divided,
and the intensity with which it is applied to each;† of the
knowledge-giving and the sensation-giving properties of an impression of
Edition: current; Page: [474] sense;* and of the intensity and the
prolongation of an energy.† That an inverse ratio is the name of a
definite relation between quantities, seems never to have occurred to
him.

Neither is it a small advantage of mathematical studies, even in their
poorest and most meagre form, that they at least habituate the mind to
resolve a train of reasoning into steps, and make sure of each step
before advancing to another. If the practice of mathematical reasoning
gives nothing else, it gives wariness of mind; it accustoms us to demand
a sure footing; and though it leaves us no better judges of ultimate
premises than it found us (which is no more than may be said of almost
all metaphysics) at least it does not suffer us to let in, at any of the
joints in the reasoning, any assumption which we have not previously
faced in the shape of an axiom, postulate, or definition. This is a
merit which it has in common with Formal Logic, and is the chief ground
on which some have thought that it could perform the functions and
supply the place of that science; an opinion in which I by no means
agree.

That mathematics “do not cultivate the power of generalization,”‡ which
to our author appears so obvious a truth that he need not give himself
the trouble of proving it, will be admitted by no person of competent
knowledge, except in a very qualified sense. The generalizations of
mathematics, are, no doubt, a different thing from the generalizations
of physical science; but in the difficulty of seizing them, and the
mental tension they require, they are no contemptible preparation for
the most arduous efforts of the scientific mind. Even the fundamental
notions of the higher mathematics, from those of the differential
calculus upwards, are products of a very high abstraction. Merely to
master the idea of centrifugal force, or of the centre of gravity, are
efforts of mental analysis surpassed by few in our author’s metaphysics.
To perceive the mathematical law common to the results of many
mathematical operations, even in so simple a case as that of the
binomial theorem, involves a vigorous exercise of the same faculty which
gave us Kepler’s laws, and rose through those laws to the theory of
universal gravitation. Every process of what has been called Universal
Geometry—that great creation of Descartes and his successors, in which a
single train of reasoning solves whole classes of problems at once, and
demonstrates properties common to all curves or surfaces, and others
common to large groups of them—is a practical lesson in the management
of wide generalizations, and abstraction of the points of agreement from
those of difference among objects of great and confusing diversity, to
which the most purely inductive science cannot furnish many superior.
Even so Edition: current; Page: [475] elementary an operation as that of
abstracting from the particular configuration of the triangles or other
figures, and the relative situation of the particular lines or points,
in the diagram which aids the apprehension of a common geometrical
demonstration, is a very useful, and far from being always an easy,
exercise of the faculty of generalization so strangely imagined to have
no place or part in the processes of mathematics.

Sir W. Hamilton allows no efficacy to mathematical studies in the
cultivation of any valuable intellectual habit, except the single one of
continuous attention. “Are mathematics then,” he asks,

of no value as an instrument of mental culture? Nay, do they exercise
only to distort the mind? To this we answer: That their study, if
pursued in moderation and efficiently counteracted, may be beneficial in
the correction of a certain vice, and in the formation of its
corresponding virtue. The vice is the habit of mental distraction; the
virtue the habit of continuous attention. This is the single benefit, to
which the study of mathematics can justly pretend, in the cultivation of
the mind.*

He adds, truly enough, “But mathematics are not the only study which
cultivates the attention: neither is the kind and degree of attention
which they tend to induce, the kind and degree of attention which our
other and higher speculations require and exercise.”† So that, according
to him, there is no purpose answered by mathematics in general
education, but one which would be better fulfilled by something else.

Without stopping to express my amazement at the assertion that the
student of mathematics exercises no mental faculty but that of
continuous attention, I will avail myself of an admission which Sir W.
Hamilton cannot help making, but the full force of which he does not
perceive. “We are far,” he says, “from meaning hereby to disparage the
mathematical genius which invents new methods and formulæ, or new and
felicitous applications of the old. . . . Unlike their divergent
studies, the inventive talents of the mathematician and philosopher in
fact approximate.”‡ Was, then, Sir W. Hamilton so ill-acquainted with
everything deserving the name of mathematical tuition as to suppose that
the inventive powers which, in their higher degree, constitute
mathematical genius, are not called forth and fostered in the process of
teaching mathematics to the merest tyro? What sort of mathematical
instruction is it of which solving problems forms no part? We come,
within a page afterwards, to the following almost incredible
announcement: “Mathematical demonstration is solely occupied in deducing
conclusions; probable reasoning, principally concerned in looking out
for premises.”§ Sir W. Hamilton thinks he can never be severe enough
Edition: current; Page: [476] upon Cambridge for laying any stress on
mathematics as an instrument of mental instruction. Did he ever turn
over, I do not say a volume of Cambridge Problems,[*] for these, it may
be said, test the knowledge of the pupil rather than his inventive
powers, and may be an exercise chiefly of memory: but did he ever see
two such volumes as Bland’s Algebraical and Geometrical Problems?[†] Did
he really imagine that working these was not “looking out for premises?”
He seems actually to have thought that learning mathematics meant
cramming it; and apparently believed that a mathematical tutor resolves
all the equations himself, and merely asks his pupil to follow the
solutions. For in every problem which the pupil himself solves, or
theorem which he demonstrates, not having previously seen it solved or
demonstrated, the same faculties are exercised which, in their higher
degrees, produced the greatest discoveries in geometry. Mathematical
teaching, therefore, even as now carried on, trains the mind to
capacities, which, by our author’s admission, are of the closest kin to
those of the greatest metaphysician and philosopher. There is some
colour of truth for the opposite doctrine in the case of elementary
algebra. The resolution of a common equation can be reduced to almost as
mechanical a process as the working of a sum in arithmetic. The
reduction of the question to an equation, however, is no mechanical
operation, but one which, according to the degree of its difficulty,
requires nearly every possible grade of ingenuity: not to speak of the
new, and in the present state of science insoluble, equations, which
start up at every fresh step attempted in the application of mathematics
to other branches of knowledge. On all this, Sir W. Hamilton never
bestows a thought. It is hardly necessary to point out that any other
study, pursued in the manner in which he supposes mathematics to be,
would as little exercise any other faculty than that of “continuous
attention” as mathematics would. Next to metaphysics, the study he most
patronizes is that of languages; of which he has so lofty an opinion, as
to say that “to master, for example, the Minerva of Sanctius with its
commentators, is, I conceive, a far more profitable exercise of mind
than to conquer the Principia of Newton:”* we may at least say that he
was a better judge of the profit that might be derived from it. I, also,
rate very Edition: current; Page: [477] highly the value, as a
discipline to the mind, of the thorough grammatical study of any of the
more logically constructed languages: but if the study consisted in
learning the Minerva of Sanctius, or its commentators either, by rote, I
believe the benefit derived would be about the same with that which Sir
W. Hamilton considered to result from the exercise of “continuous
attention” in mathematics.

It is a characteristic fact, that when the paper “on the Study of
Mathematics” originally appeared as an article in the Edinburgh Review,
no mention was made in it of Mixed or Applied Mathematics: the little
which now appears on that subject being a subsequent addition, called
forth by Dr. Whewell’s reply.[*] Dr. Whewell must have looked down from
a considerable height upon an assault on the utility of Mathematics, in
which the part of it that, in the opinion of its rational defenders,
constitutes three-fourths of its utility, was silently overlooked. When
Sir W. Hamilton’s attention was called to what he had previously omitted
to think of, this is the way in which he disposes of it:

Mathematics can be applied to objects of experience only in so far as
these are measurable; that is, in so far as they come, or are supposed
to come, under the categories of extension and number. Applied
mathematics are, therefore, equally limited and equally unimproving as
pure. The sciences, indeed, with which mathematics are thus associated,
may afford a more profitable exercise of mind; but this is only in so
far as they supply the matter of observation, and of probable reasoning,
and therefore before this matter is hypothetically subjected to
mathematical demonstration or calculus.*

This passage amounts to proof that the writer simply did not know what
applied mathematics mean. The words are those of a person who had heard
that there was such a thing, but knew absolutely nothing about what it
was.

Applied mathematics is not the measurement of extension and number. It
is the measurement by means of extension and number, of other quantities
which extension and number are marks of; and the ascertainment by means
of quantities of all sorts, of those qualities of things which
quantities are marks of.

For the information of readers who are no better informed than Sir W.
Hamilton, and the reminding of those who are, I will illustrate this
general statement by bringing it down to particulars; which a person,
himself of Edition: current; Page: [478] very slender mathematical
acquirements, can do, provided he has studied the science as every
philosophical student ought to study it, but as Sir W. Hamilton has not
done, with especial reference to its Methods.

The first, and typical example of the application of mathematics to the
indirect investigation of truth, is within the limits of the pure
science itself; the application of algebra to geometry; the introduction
of which, far more than any of his metaphysical speculations, has
immortalized the name of Descartes, and constitutes the greatest single
step ever made in the progress of the exact sciences. Its rationale is
simple. It is grounded on the general truth, that the position of every
point, the direction of every line, and consequently the shape and
magnitude of every enclosed space, may be fixed by the length of
perpendiculars thrown down upon two astraight linesa, or (when the third
dimension of space is taken into account) upon three bplane surfacesb,
meeting one another at right angles in the same point. A consequence, or
rather a part, of this general truth, is that curve lines and surfaces
may be determined by their equations. If from any number of points in a
curve line or surface, perpendiculars are drawn to two crectangular
axes, or to three rectangular planesc, there exists between the lengths
of these perpendiculars a relation of quantity, which is always the same
for the same curve, or surface, and is expressed by an equation in which
these variable are combined with certain constant quantities. From this
relation, every other property of the curve or surface may always be
deduced. In this way, numbers become the means of ascertaining truths
not numerical. The periphery of an ellipse is not a number; but a
certain numerical relation between straight lines is a mark of an
ellipse, being proved to be an inseparable accompaniment of it. The
equation which expresses this characteristic mark of any curve, may be
handed over to algebraists, to deduce from it, through the properties of
numbers, any other numerical relation which depends on it; with the
certainty that when the conclusion is translated back again from symbols
into words, it will come out a real, and perhaps previously unknown,
geometrical property of the curve.

In such an example as this, the application of algebra to geometry
appears only in its most elementary form; but its extent is indefinite,
and its flights almost beyond the reach of measurement. Its general
scheme may be thus stated: In order to resolve any question, either of
quality or quantity, concerning a line or space, find something whose
magnitude, if known, would give the solution required, and which stands
in some known relation to the rectangular co-ordinates (for instance, in
the problem of Tangents, Edition: current; Page: [479] the length of the
subtangent). Express this known relation in an equation: if the equation
can be resolved, we have solved the geometrical problem. Or if the
question be the converse one—not what are the properties of a given line
or space, but what line or space is indicated by a given property; find
what relation between rectangular co-ordinates that property requires:
express it in an equation, and this equation, or some other deducible
from it, will be the equation of the curve or surface sought. If it be a
known curve or surface, this process will point it out; if not, we shall
have obtained the necessary starting point for its study.

This application of one branch of mathematics to another branch, ranks
as the first step in Applied Mathematics. The second is the application
to Mechanics. The object-matter of Mechanics is the general laws, or
theory, of Force in the abstract, that is, of forces, considered
independently of their origin. As an extension is not a number, though a
numerical fact may be a mark of an extension; so a force is neither a
number nor an extension. But a force is only cognisable through its
effects, and the effects by which forces are best known are effects in
extension. The measure of a force, is the space through which it will
carry a body of given magnitude in a given time. Quantities of force are
thus ascertained, through marks which are quantities of extension. The
other properties of forces are, their direction (a question of
extension, which has already been reduced to a numerical relation
between co-ordinates), and the nature of the motion which they generate,
either singly or in combination; which is a mixed question of direction
and of magnitude in extension. All questions of Force, therefore, can be
reduced to questions of direction and of magnitude: and as all questions
of direction or magnitude are capable of being reduced to equations
between numbers, every question which can be raised respecting Force
abstractedly from its origin, can be resolved if the corresponding
algebraical equation can.

While the laws of Number thus underlie the laws of Extension, and these
two underlie the laws of Force, so do the laws of Force underlie all the
other laws of the material universe. Nature, as it falls within our ken,
is composed of a multitude of forces, of which the origin (at least the
immediate origin) is different, and the effects of which on our senses
are extremely various. But all these forces agree in producing motions
in space; and even those of their effects which are not actual motions,
nevertheless travel; are propagated through spaces, in determinate
times: they are all, therefore, amenable to, and conform to, the laws of
extension and number. Often, indeed, we have no means of measuring these
spaces and times; nor, if we could, are the resources of mathematics
sufficient to enable us, in cases of great complexity, to arrive at the
quantities of things we cannot directly measure, through those which we
can. Fortunately, however, we can do this, sufficiently for Edition:
current; Page: [480] all practical purposes, in the case of the great
cosmic forces, gravitation and light, and to a less but still a
considerable extent, heat and electricity. And here the domain of
Applied Mathematics, for the present, ends. To it we are indebted, not
only for all we know of the laws of these great and universal agencies,
considered as connected bodies of truth, but also for the one complete
type and model of the investigation of Nature by deductive reasoning;
the ascertainment of the special laws of nature by means of the general.
I will not offer to the understanding of any one who knows what this
operation is, the affront of asking him if it is all performed “before”
the matter is “hypothetically subjected to mathematical demonstration or
calculus.”[*]

In being the great instrument of Deductive investigation, applied
mathematics comes to be also the source of our principal inductions,
which invariably depend on previous deductions. For where the
inaccessibility or unmanageableness of the phænomena precludes the
necessary experiments, mathematical deduction often supplies their
place, by making us acquainted with points of resemblance which could
not have been reached by direct observation. Phænomena apparently very
remote from one another, are found, in the mode of their accomplishment,
to follow the same or very similar numerical laws; and the mind,
grasping up seemingly heterogeneous natural agencies which have the same
equation, and classing them together, often lays a ground for the
recognition of them as having either a common, or an analogous, origin.
What were previously thought to be distinct powers in Nature, are
identified with each other, by ascertaining that they produce similar
effects according to the same mathematical laws. It was thus that the
force which governs the planetary motions was shown to be identical with
that by which bodies fall to the ground. Sir W. Hamilton would probably
have admitted that the original discovery of this truth required as
great a reach of intellect as has ever yet been displayed in abstract
speculation. But is no exercise of intellect needed to apprehend the
proof? Is it like an experiment in chemistry or an observation in
anatomy, which may require mind for its origination, but to recognise
which, when once made, requires only eyesight? Is “continuous
attention”[†] the only mental capacity required here? dTo think so would
require an ignorance of the subjectd greater than can be imputed to any
educated mind, not to speak of a philosopher.

In the achievements which still remain to be effected in the way of
scientific generalization, it is not probable that the direct employment
of Edition: current; Page: [481] mathematics will be to any great extent
available: the nature of the phænomena precludes such an employment for
a long time to come—perhaps for ever. But the process itself—the
deductive investigation of Nature; the application of elementary laws,
generalized from the more simple cases, to disentangle the phænomena of
complex cases—explaining as much of them as can be so explained, and
putting in evidence the nature and limits of the irreducible residuum,
so as to suggest fresh observations preparatory to recommencing the same
process with additional data: this is common to all science, moral and
metaphysical included; and the greater the difficulty, the more needful
is it that the enquirer should come prepared with an exact understanding
of the requisites of this mode of investigation, and a mental type of
its perfect realization. In the great problems of physical
generalization now occupying the higher scientific minds, chemistry
seems destined to an important and conspicuous participation, by
supplying, as mathematics did in the cosmic phænomena, many of the
premises of the deduction, as well as part of the preparatory
discipline. But this use of chemistry is as yet only in its dawn; while,
as a training in the deductive art, its utmost capacity can never
approach to that of mathematics: and in the great enquiries of the moral
and social sciences, to which neither of the two is directly applicable,
mathematics (I always mean Applied Mathematics) affords the only
sufficiently perfect type. Up to this time, I may venture to say that no
one ever knew what deduction is, as a means of investigating the laws of
nature, who had not learnt it from mathematics; nor can any one hope to
understand it thoroughly, who has not, at some time of his life, known
enough of mathematics to be familiar with the instrument at work. Had
Sir W. Hamilton been so, he would probably have cancelled the two
volumes of his Lectures on Logic, and begun again on a different system,
in which we should have heard less about Concepts and more about Things,
less about Forms of Thought, and more about grounds of Knowledge.

Nor is even this the whole of what the enquirer loses, who knows not
scientific Deduction in this its most perfect form. To have an
inadequate conception of one of the two instruments by which we acquire
our knowledge of nature, and consequently an imperfect comprehension
even of the other in its higher forms, is not all. He is almost
necessarily without any sufficient conception of human knowledge itself
as an organic whole. He can have no clear perception of science as a
system of truths flowing out of, and confirming and corroborating, one
another; in which one truth sums up a multitude of others, and explains
them, special truths being merely general ones modified by specialities
of circumstance. He can but imperfectly understand the absorption of
concrete truths into abstract, and the additional certainty given to
theorems drawn from specific experience, Edition: current; Page: [482]
when they can be affiliated as corollaries on general laws of nature—a
certainty more entire than any direct observation can give. Neither,
therefore, can he perceive how the larger inductions reflect an increase
of certainty even upon those narrower ones from which they were
themselves generalized, by reconciling superficial inconsistencies, and
converting apparent exceptions into real confirmations.* To see these
things requires more than a mere mathematician; but the ablest mind
which has never gone through a course of mathematics has small chance of
ever perceiving them.

In the face of such considerations, it is a very small achievement to
fill thirty octavo pages with the ill-natured things which persons of
the most miscellaneous character, through a series of ages, have said
about mathematicians, from a sneer of the Cynic Diogenes to a sarcasm of
Gibbon, or a colloquial platitude of Horace Walpole; without any
discrimination as to how many of the persons quoted were entitled to any
opinion at all on such a subject; and with such entire disregard of all
that gives weight to authority, as to include men who lived and died
before algebra was invented, before the conic sections had been defined
and studied by the mathematicians of Alexandria, or the first lines of
the theory of statics had been traced by the genius of Archimedes; men
whose whole mathematical knowledge consisted of a clumsy arithmetic, and
the mere elements of geometry.[*] Had there been twenty times as many of
these testimonies, what proportion of them would have been of any value?
Until quite recently, the professors of the different arts and sciences
have made it a considerable part of their occupation to cry down one
another’s pursuits; and men of the world and littérateurs have been, in
all ages, ready and eager to join with every set of them against the
rest: the man who dares to know what they neither know nor care for, and
to value himself on the knowledge, having always and everywhere been
regarded as the common enemy. Did Sir W. Hamilton suppose that a person
of half his reading Edition: current; Page: [483] would have any
difficulty in furnishing, at a few hours’ notice, an equally long list
of amenities on the subject of grammarians or of metaphysicians? When
our author does get hold of a witness who has a claim to a hearing, the
witness is pressed into the service without any sifting of what he
really says; it makes no difference whether he asserts that the study of
mathematics does harm, or only that it does not simply suffice for all
possible good. One of the authorities on whom most stress is laid is
that of Descartes. I extract the important part of the quotation as our
author gives it, partly from Descartes himself and partly from Baillet,
his biographer. The Italics are Sir W. Hamilton’s.

“It was now a long time, [says Baillet,] since he had been convinced of
the small utility of the mathematics, especially when studied on their
own account, and not applied to other things. There was nothing, in
truth, which appeared to him more futile than to occupy ourselves with
simple numbers and imaginary figures, as if it were proper to confine
ourselves to these trifles (bagatelles) without carrying our view
beyond. There even seemed to him in this something worse than useless.
His maxim was, that such application insensibly disaccustomed us to the
use of our reason, and made us run the danger of losing the path which
it traces.”[*] The words themselves of Descartes deserve quotation:
“Revera nihil inanius est, quam circa nudos numeros figurasque
imaginarias ita versari, ut velle videamur in talium nugarum cognitione
conquiescere, atque superficiariis istis demonstrationibus, quæ casu
sæpius quam arte inveniuntur, et magis ad oculos et imaginationem
pertinent, quam ad intellectum, sic incubare, ut quodammodo ipsa ratione
uti desuescamus; simulque nihil intricatius, quam tali probandi modo,
novas difficultates confusis numeris involutas expedire. . . .”[†]
Baillet goes on: “In a letter to Mersenne, written in 1630, M. Descartes
recalled to him that he had renounced the study of mathematics for many
years: and that he was anxious not to lose any more of his time in the
barren operations of geometry and arithmetic, studies which never lead
to anything important.”[‡] Finally, speaking of the general character of
the philosopher, Baillet adds:—“In regard to the rest of mathematics”
(he had just spoken of astronomy—which Descartes thought, “though he
dreamt in it himself, only a loss of time”)[§] “in regard to the rest of
mathematics, those who know the rank which he held above all
mathematicians, ancient and modern, will agree that he was the man in
the world best qualified to judge them. We have observed that, after
having studied these sciences to the bottom, he had renounced them as of
no use for the conduct of life and solace of mankind.”*

Whoever reads this passage as if it were all printed in Roman
characters, Edition: current; Page: [484] and declines to submit his
understanding to the italics which Sir W. Hamilton has introduced, will
perceive the following three things. First, that Descartes was not
speaking of the study of mathematics, but of its exclusive study. His
objection is to stopping there, without proceeding to anything ulterior:
conquiescere, incubare. Secondly, that he was speaking only of pure
mathematics, as distinguished from its applications, and under the
belief, how prodigiously erroneous we now know, that it did not admit of
applications of any importance. Finally, that his disparagement of the
pursuit, even as thus limited—his representation of it as “nugæ,” as “a
loss of time,” rested mainly on a ground which Sir W. Hamilton gave up,
the unimportance of its object-matter. It was a repetition of the
objection of Socrates, whom also our author thinks it worth while to
cite as an authority on such a question, and who “did not perceive of
what utility they [mathematical studies] could be, calculated as they
were to consume the life of a man, and to turn him away from many other
and important acquirements.”* Such an opinion, in the days of Socrates,
and from one whose glorious business it was to recal the minds of
speculative men to dialectics and morals, reflects no discredit on his
great mind. But the objection is one which Sir W. Hamilton, with every
thinker of the last two centuries, disclaims. “The question,” he
expressly says, “does not regard the value of mathematical science,
considered in itself, or in its objective results, but the utility of
mathematical study, that is, in its subjective effect, as an exercise of
mind.”† All that Descartes said against it in this aspect (at least in
the passage quoted, which we may suppose to be one of the strongest) is,
that by affording other objects of thought, it diverts the mind from the
use of ipsa ratio, that is, from the study of pure mental abstractions;
which Descartes, to the great detriment of his philosophy, regarded as
of much superior value to the employment of the thoughts upon objects of
sense, “fquæf magis ad oculos et imaginationem pertinent.”

It was by his example, rather than by his precepts, that Descartes was
destined to illustrate the unfavourable side of the intellectual
influence of mathematical studies; and he must have been a still more
extraordinary man than he was, could he have really understood a kind of
mental perversions of which he is himself, in the history of philosophy,
the most prominent example. Descartes is the completest type which
history presents of the purely mathematical type of mind—that in which
the tendencies produced Edition: current; Page: [485] by mathematical
cultivation reign unbalanced and supreme. This is visible not only in
the abuse of Deduction, which he carried to a greater length than any
distinguished thinker known to us, not excepting the schoolmen; but even
more so in the character of the premises from which his deductions set
out. And here we come upon the one really grave charge which rests on
the mathematical spirit, in respect of the influence it exercises on
pursuits other than mathematical. It leads men to place their ideal of
Science in deriving all knowledge from a small number of axiomatic
premises, accepted as self-evident, and taken for immediate intuitions
of reason. This is what Descartes attempted to do, and inculcated as the
thing to be done: and as he shares with only one other name the honour
of having given his impress to the whole character of the modern
speculative movement, the consequences of his error have been most
calamitous. Nearly everything that is objectionable, along with much of
what is admirable, in the character of French thought, whether on
metaphysics, ethics, or politics, is directly traceable to the fact that
French speculation descends from Descartes instead of from Bacon.* All
reflecting persons in England, and many in France, perceive that the
chief infirmities of French thinking arise from its geometrical spirit;
its determination to evolve its conclusions, even on the most practical
subjects, by mere deduction from some single accepted generalization:
the generalization, too, being frequently not even a theorem, but a
practical rule, supposed to be obtained directly from the fountains of
reason: a mode of thinking which erects one-sidedness into a principle,
under the misapplied name of logic, and makes the popular political
reasoning in France resemble that of a theologian arguing from a text,
or a lawyer from a maxim of law. If this be the case even in France, it
is still worse in Germany, the whole of whose speculative philosophy is
an emanation from Descartes, and to most of whose thinkers the Baconian
point of view is still below the horizon. Through Spinoza, who gave to
his system the very forms as well as the entire spirit of geometry;
through the mathematician Leibnitz, who reigned supreme over the German
speculative mind for above a generation; with its spirit temporarily
modified by the powerful intellectual individuality of Kant, but flying
back after him to its Edition: current; Page: [486] uncorrected
tendencies, the geometrical spirit went on from bad to worse, until in
Schelling and Hegel the laws even of physical nature were deduced by
ratiocination from subjective deliverances of the mind. The whole of
German philosophical speculation has run from the beginning in this
wrong groove, and having only recently become aware of the fact, is at
present making convulsive efforts to get out of it.* All these mistakes,
and this deplorable waste of time and intellectual power by some of the
most gifted and cultivated portions of the human race, are effects of
the too unqualified predominance of the mental habits and tendencies
engendered by elementary mathematics. Applied mathematics in its
post-Newtonian development does nothing to strengthen, and very much to
correct, these errors, provided the applications are studied in such a
manner that the intellect is aware of what it is about, and does not go
to sleep over algebraical symbols; a didactic improvement which Dr.
Whewell, to his honour be it said, was earnestly and successfully
labouring to introduce, thus practically correcting the real defects of
mathematics as a branch of general education, at the very time when Sir
W. Hamilton, who had not the smallest insight into those defects,
selected him for the immediate recipient of an attack on mathematics,
which as it only included what Sir W. Hamilton knew of the subject, left
out everything which was much worth saying.

It is not solely to Mathematical studies that Sir W. Hamilton professes
and shows hostility. Physical investigations generally, apart from their
material fruits, he holds but in low estimation. We have seen in a
former chapter how singularly unaware he is of the power and exertion of
intellect which they often require. Touching their effect on the mind,
he makes two serious complaints, which come out at the very commencement
of his Lectures on Metaphysics.† The first is, that the study of Physics
indisposes persons to believe in Free-will. To this accusation it must
plead guilty: physical science undoubtedly has that tendency. But I
maintain that this is only because physical science teaches people to
judge of evidence. If the free-will doctrine could be proved, there is
nothing in the habits of thought engendered by physical science that
would indispose any one to yield to the evidence. A person who knows
only one physical science, may be unable to feel the force of a kind of
proof different from that which is customary in his Edition: current;
Page: [487] department; but any one who is generally versed in physical
science is accustomed to so many different modes of investigation, that
he is well prepared to feel the force of whatever is really proof.
Metaphysicians of Sir W. Hamilton’s school, who pursue their
investigations without regard to the cautions suggested by physical
science, are equally catholic and comprehensive in the wrong way; they
can mistake for proof anything or everything which is not so, provided
it tends to form an association of ideas in their own minds.

The other objection of Sir W. Hamilton to the scientific study of the
laws of Matter, is one which we should scarcely have expected from him,
namely, that it annihilates Wonder.

“Wonder,” says Aristotle, “is the first cause of philosophy;”[*] but in
the discovery that all existence is but mechanism, the consummation of
science would be an extinction of the very interest from which it
originally sprang. “Even the gorgeous majesty of the heavens,” says a
great religious philosopher,* “the object of a kneeling adoration to an
infant world, subdues no more the mind of him who comprehends the one
mechanical law by which the planetary systems move, maintain their
motion, and even originally form themselves. He no longer wonders at the
object, infinite as it always is, but at the human intellect alone which
in a Copernicus, Kepler, Gassendi, Newton, and Laplace, was able to
transcend the object, by science to terminate the miracle, to reave the
heaven of its divinities, and to exorcise the universe. But even this,
the only admiration of which our intelligent faculties are now capable,
would vanish, were a future Hartley, Darwin, Condillac, or Bonnet, to
succeed in displaying to us a mechanical system of the human mind, as
comprehensive, intelligible, and satisfactory as the Newtonian mechanism
of the heavens.”†

We may be well assured that no Hartley, Darwin, or Condillac will obtain
a hearing, if the “great religious philosopher” can prevent it.

I shall not enter into all the topics suggested by this remarkable
argument. I shall not ask whether, after all, it is better to be
“subdued” than instructed; or whether human nature would suffer a great
loss in losing wonder, if love and admiration remained; for admiration,
pace tantorum virorum, is a different thing from wonder, and is often at
its greatest height when the strangeness, which is a necessary condition
of wonder, has died away. But I do wonder at the barrenness of
imagination of a man who can see nothing wonderful in the material
universe, since Newton, in an evil hour, partially unravelled a limited
portion of it. If ignorance is with him a necessary condition of wonder,
can he find nothing to wonder at in the Edition: current; Page: [488]
origin of the system of which Newton discovered the laws? nothing in the
probable former extension of the solar substance beyond the orbit of
Neptune? nothing in the starry heavens, which, with a full knowledge of
what Newton taught, Kant, in the famous passage which Sir W. Hamilton is
so fond of quoting (and quotes in this very lecture),[*] placed on the
same level of sublimity with the moral law? If ignorance is the cause of
wonder, it is downright impossible that scientific explanation can ever
take it away, since all which explanation does, in the final resort, is
to refer us back to a prior inexplicable. Were the catastrophe to arrive
which is to expel Wonder from the universe—were it conclusively shown
that the mental operations are dependent upon organic agency—would
wonder be at an end because the fact, at which we should then have to
wonder, would be that an arrangement of material particles could produce
thought and feeling? Jacobi and Sir W. Hamilton might have put their
minds at ease. It is not understanding that destroys wonder, it is
familiarity. To a person whose feelings have depth enough to withstand
that, no insight which can ever be attained into natural phænomena will
make Nature less wonderful. And as for those whose sensibilities are
shallow, did Jacobi suppose that they wondered one iota the more at the
planetary motions, when astronomers imagined them to take place by the
complicated evolutions of “cycle on epicycle, orb on orb?”[†] A
spectacle which they saw every day, had, we may rely upon it, as little
effect in kindling their imaginations then, as now. Hear the opinion of
a great poet:* not speaking particularly of wonder, but of the emotions
generally which the spectacle of nature excites, and in words which
apply to that emotion equally with the rest.

Some are of opinion that the habit of analysing, decomposing, and
anatomising, is inevitably unfavourable to the perception of beauty.
People are led into this mistake by overlooking the fact that such
processes being to a certain extent within the reach of a limited
intellect, we are apt to ascribe to them that insensibility of which
they are, in truth, the effect, and not the cause. Admiration and love,
to which all knowledge truly vital must tend, are felt by men of real
genius in proportion as their discoveries in natural philosophy are
enlarged; and the beauty, in form, of a plant or an animal, is not made
less but more apparent, as a whole, by more accurate insight into its
constituent properties and powers.

Hear next one of the most illustrious discoverers in physical science.
Instead of regarding understanding as antithetical to wonder, Dr.
Faraday Edition: current; Page: [489] complains that people do not
wonder sufficiently at the material universe, because they do not
sufficiently understand it.

Let us now consider, for a little while, how wonderfully we stand upon
this world. Here it is we are born, bred, and live, and yet we view
these things with an almost entire absence of wonder to ourselves
respecting the way in which all this happens. So small, indeed, is our
wonder, that we are never taken by surprise; and I do think that, to a
young person of ten, fifteen, or twenty years of age, perhaps the first
sight of a cataract or a mountain would occasion him more surprise than
he had ever felt concerning the means of his own existence; how he came
here; how he lives; by what means he stands upright; and through what
means he moves about from place to place. Hence, we come into this
world, we live, and depart from it, without our thoughts being called
specifically to consider how all this takes place; and were it not for
the exertions of some few inquiring minds who have looked into these
things, and ascertained the very beautiful laws and conditions by which
we do live and stand upon the earth, we should hardly be aware that
there was anything wonderful in it.*

If any additional authority be desired, the greatest poet of modern
Germany was also the keenest scientific naturalist in it.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [490]


CHAPTER XXVIII: Concluding Remarks

in the examination which I have now concluded of Sir W. Hamilton’s
philosophical achievements, I have unavoidably laid stress on points of
difference from him rather than on those of agreement; the reason being,
that I differ from almost everything in his philosophy on which he
particularly valued himself, or which is specially his own. His merits,
which, though I do not rate them so high, I feel and admire as sincerely
as his most enthusiastic disciples, are rather diffused through his
speculations generally, than concentrated on any particular point. They
chiefly consist in his clear and distinct mode of bringing before the
reader many of the fundamental questions of metaphysics; some good
specimens of psychological analysis on a small scale; and the many
detached logical and psychological truths which he has separately
seized, and which are scattered through his writings, mostly applied to
resolve some special difficulty and again lost sight of. I can hardly
point to anything he has done towards helping the more thorough
understanding of the greater mental phænomena, unless it be his theory
of Attention (including Abstraction), which seems to me the most perfect
we havea.* cThe facts and speculations on Sleep and Edition: current;
Page: [491] Dreaming, in his Seventeenth Lecture on Metaphysics,[*] have
been credited to him as an acquisition to philosophy, and are a good
specimen of inductive enquiry; but their principal merit, both in point
of observation and of thought, is avowedly Jouffroy’s.*c

Edition: current; Page: [492]
With regard to the causes which prevented a thinker of such abundant
acuteness, and more than abundant industry, from accomplishing the great
things at which he aimed, it would ill become me to speak dogmatically.
It would be a very unwarrantable assumption of superiority over a mind
like Sir W. Hamilton’s, if I attempted to gauge and measure his
faculties, or give a complete theory of his successes and failures. The
utmost I venture on, is to suggest, as simple possibilities, some of the
causes which may have partly contributed to his shortcomings as a
philosopher. One of those causes is so common as to be the next thing to
universal, but requires all the more to be signalized for its
unfortunate consequences: over-anxiety to make safe a foregone
conclusion. The whole philosophy of Sir W. Hamilton Edition: current;
Page: [493] seems to have had its character determined by the
requirements of the doctrine of Free-will; and to that doctrine he
clung, because he had persuaded himself that it afforded the only
premises from which human reason could deduce the doctrines of natural
religion. I believe that in this persuasion he was thoroughly his own
dupe, and that his speculations have weakened the philosophical
foundation of religion fully as much as they have confirmed it.

Edition: current; Page: [494]
A second cause which may help to account for his not having effected
more in philosophy, is the enormous amount of time and mental vigour
which he expended on mere philosophical erudition, leaving, it may be
said, only the remains of his mind for the real business of thinking.
While he seems to have known, almost by heart, the voluminous Greek
commentators on Aristotle, and to have read all that the most obscure
schoolman or fifth-rate German transcendentalist had written on the
subjects with which he occupied himself; while, not content with a
general knowledge of these authors, he could tell with the greatest
precision what each of them thought on any given topic, and in what each
differed from every other; while expending his time and energy on all
this, he had not enough of them left to complete his Lectures. Those on
Metaphysics, as already remarked, stopped short on the threshold of what
was, especially in his own opinion, the most important part of it, and
never reached even the threshold of the third and last of the parts into
which, in an early lecture, he divided his subject.* Those on Logic he
left dependent, for most of the subordinate developments, on extracts
strung together from German writers, chiefly Krug and Esser; often not
destitute of merit, but generally so vague, as to make all those parts
of his exposition in which they predominate, unsatisfactory;† sometimes
written from points of view different from Sir W. Hamilton’s own, but
which he never found time or took the trouble to re-express in
adaptation to his own mode of thought.‡ In the whole circle of
psychological and logical speculation, it is astonishing how few are the
topics into Edition: current; Page: [495] which he has thrown any of the
powers of his own intellect; and on how small a proportion even of these
he has pushed his investigations beyond what seemed necessary for the
purposes of some particular controversy. In consequence, philosophical
doctrines are taken up, and again laid down, with perfect
unconsciousness, and his philosophy seems made up of scraps from several
conflicting metaphysical systems. The Relativity of human knowledge is
made a great deal of in opposition to Schelling and Cousin, but drops
out or dwindles into nothing in Sir W. Hamilton’s own psychology. The
validity of our natural beliefs, and the doctrine that the incogitable
is not therefore impossible, are strenuously asserted in this place and
disregarded in that, according to the question in hand. On the subject
of General Notions he is avowedly a Nominalist, but teaches the whole of
Logic as if he had never heard of any doctrine but the Conceptualist;
what he presents as a reconcilement of the two being never adverted to
afterwards, and serving only as an excuse to himself for accepting the
one doctrine and invariably using the language of the other. Arriving at
his doctrines almost always under the stimulus of some special dispute,
he never knows how far to press them: consequently there is a region of
haze round the place where opinions of different origin meet. I formerly
quoted from him a felicitous illustration drawn from the mechanical
operation of tunnelling; that process affords another, justly applicable
to himself. The reader must have heard of that gigantic enterprise of
the Italian Government, the tunnel through Mont Cenis. This great work
is carried on simultaneously from both ends, in well-grounded confidence
(such is now the minute accuracy of engineering operations) that the two
parties of workmen will correctly meet in the middle. Were they to
disappoint this expectation, and work past one another in the dark, they
would afford a likeness of Sir W. Hamilton’s mode of tunnelling the
human mind.

This failure to think out subjects until they had been thoroughly
mastered, or until consistency had been attained between the different
views which the author took of them from different points of
observation, may, like the unfinished state of the Lectures, be with
great probability ascribed to the excessive absorption of his time and
energies by the study of old writers. That absorption did worse; for it
left him with neither leisure nor vigour for what was far more important
in every sense, and an entirely indispensable qualification for a master
in philosophy—the systematic study of the sciences. Except physiology,
on some parts of which his mental powers were really employed, he may be
said to have known nothing of any physical science. I do not mean that
he was ignorant of familiar facts, or that he may not, in the course of
his education, have gone through the curriculum. But it must have been
as Gibbon did, who says, in Edition: current; Page: [496] his
autobiography, “I was content to receive the passive impressions of my
professor’s lectures, without any active exercise of my own powers.”[*]
For any trace the study had left in Sir W. Hamilton’s mind, he might as
well never have heard of it.*

It is much to be regretted that Sir W. Hamilton did not write the
history of philosophy, instead of choosing, as the direct object of his
intellectual exertions, philosophy itself. He possessed a knowledge of
the materials such as no one, probably, for many generations, will take
the trouble of acquiring again; and the erudition of philosophy is
emphatically one of the things which it is good that a few should
acquire for the benefit of the rest. Independently of the great interest
and value attaching to a knowledge of Edition: current; Page: [497] the
historical development of speculation, there is much in the old writers
on philosophy, even those of the middle ages, really worth preserving
for its scientific value.* But this should be extracted, and rendered
into the phraseology of modern thought, by persons as familiar with that
as with the ancient, and possessing a command of its language; a
combination never yet so perfectly realized as in Sir W. Hamilton. It is
waste of time for a mere student of philosophy, to have to learn the
familiar use of fifty philosophic phraseologies, all greatly inferior to
that of his own time; and if this were required from all thinkers, there
would be very little time left for thought. A man who had done it so
thoroughly as Sir W. Hamilton, should have made his cotemporaries and
successors, once for all, partakers of the benefit; and rendered it
unnecessary for any one to do it again, except for verifying and
correcting his representations. This, which no one but himself could
have done, he has left undone; and has given us, instead, a contribution
to mental philosophy which has been more than equalled by many not
superior to him in powers, and wholly destitute of erudition. Of all
persons, in modern times, entitled to the name of philosophers, the two,
probably, whose reading on their own subjects was the scantiest, in
proportion to their intellectual capacity, were Dr. Thomas Brown and
Archbishop Whately: accordingly they are the only two of whom Sir W.
Hamilton, though acknowledging their abilities, habitually speaks with a
certain tinge of superciliousness. It cannot be denied that both Dr.
Brown and Archbishop Whately would have thought and written better than
they did, if they had been better read in the writings of previous
thinkers: but I am not afraid that posterity will contradict me when I
say, that either of them has doneh greater service to the world, in the
origination and diffusion of important thought, than Sir W. Hamilton
with all his learning: because, though indolent readers, they were, both
of them, active and fertile thinkers.*

Edition: current; Page: [498]
It is not that Sir W. Hamilton’s erudition is not frequently of real use
to him on particular questions of philosophy. It does him one valuable
service: it enables him to know all the various opinions which can be
held on the questions he discusses, and to conceive and express them
clearly, leaving none of them out. This it does, though even this not
always; but it does little else, even of what might be expected from
erudition when enlightened by philosophy. He knew, with extraordinary
accuracy, the ὅτι of every philosopher’s doctrine, but gave himself
little trouble about the διότι.[*] With one exception, I find no remarks
bearing upon that point in any part of his writings.* I imagine he would
have been much at a loss if he had been required to draw up a
philosophical estimate of the mind of any great thinker. He irarelyi
seems to look at any opinion of a philosopher in connexion with the same
philosopher’s other opinions. Accordingly, he is Edition: current; Page:
[499] weak as to the mutual relations of philosophical doctrines. He
seldom knows any of the corollaries from a thinker’s opinions, unless
the thinker has himself drawn them; and even then he knows them, not as
corollaries, but only as opinions. One of the most striking examples he
affords of this inability is in the case of Leibnitz; and it is worth
while to analyse this instance, because nothing can more conclusively
show, how little capable he was of entering into the spirit of a system
unlike his own.

If there ever was a thinker whose system of thought could without
difficulty be conceived as a connected whole, it was Leibnitz. Hardly
any philosopher has taken so much pains to display the filiation of all
his main conceptions, in a manner at once satisfactory to his own mind
and intelligible to the world. And there is hardly any one in whom the
filiation is more complete, these various conceptions being all
applications of one common principle. Yet Sir W. Hamilton understands
them so ill, as to be able to say, after giving an account of the
Pre-established Harmony, that “its author himself probably regarded it
more as a specimen of ingenuity than as a Edition: current; Page: [500]
serious doctrine.”* And again: “It is a disputed point whether Leibnitz
was serious in his monadology and pre-established harmony.”† To say
nothing of the injustice done, by this surmise, to the deep sincerity
and high philosophic earnestness of that most eminent man; it is obvious
to those who study opinions in their relation to the mind entertaining
them, that a person, who could thus think concerning the Pre-established
Harmony and the Monadology,[*] however correctly he may have seized many
particular opinions of Leibnitz, had never taken into his mind a
conception of Leibnitz himself as a philosopher. These theories were
necessitated by Leibnitz’s other opinions. They were the only outlet
from the difficulties of the fundamental doctrine of his philosophy, the
Principle of Sufficient Reason.[†]

All who know anything of Leibnitz, are aware that he affirmed it to be a
principle of the universe, that nothing exists which has not an
antecedent ground in reason, and cognisable by reason; a ground which,
when known, gives all the properties of the thing by natural and
necessary consequence. This Sufficient Reason might be some abstract
property of the thing, serving as the pattern on which it was
constructed, and being the key to all its other attributes. Such, for
example, is the property by which mathematicians define the circle or
the triangle, and from which, by mere reasoning, the remaining
properties of those figures are deducible. In other cases, the
Sufficient Reason of a phænomenon is found in its physical cause. But
the mere existence of the cause as an invariable antecedent, does not
constitute it the Sufficient Reason of the effect. There must be
something in the nature of the cause itself, something capable of being
detected in it, which, once known, accounts for its being followed by
that particular effect; something which explains the character of the
effect, and, had it been known beforehand, would have enabled us to
foretel the precise effect that would be produced. To so great a length
did Leibnitz carry this doctrine, as to affirm that God (saving actual
miracle, which as a highly exceptional fact he was willing to admit)[‡]
could not, in the exercise of his ordinary providence, conduct the
government of the world except par la nature des créatures; through
second causes, each containing, in its own properties, wherewithal to
furnish a complete explanation of the phænomena to which it gives
rise.[§]

Setting out with this à priori conception of the order of the universe,
Edition: current; Page: [501] Leibnitz found Mind apparently acting upon
Matter and Matter upon Mind, and was utterly unable to discover in the
nature and attributes of either, any Sufficient Reason for this action.
The two substances seemed wholly disparate: there was nothing in them
from which action of any kind upon one another could have been presumed
to be so much as possible. He saw in this one case, what is true, though
he did not see it, in all cases whatever—that there is no nexus, no
natural link, between agent and patient, between cause and effect, and
that all we know or can know of their relation is, that the one always
follows the other. But to accept the mere fact as ultimate, without
craving for a demonstration, could not enter into Leibnitz’s geometrical
mind; and was positively forbidden by his Principle of Sufficient
Reason. Here was a dilemma! Happily, however, the difficulty of
admitting that Mind could act upon Matter, disappeared in the case of an
Infinite Mind. In the Omnipotence of the Deity there lay a Sufficient
Reason for the possibility of anything which the Deity might be pleased
to do. It must be God, therefore, and no subordinate agency, that
directly produces the effects on Matter which seem owing to Mind, and
the effects on Mind which seem owing to Matter. This being admitted,
there were only two possible theories to choose from. Either God, from
the beginning, wound up Mind and Matter to go together like two clocks,
though without any connexion with one another; and I see an object, not
because the object is before my eyes, but because it was prearranged
from eternity that the presence of the object and the fact of my seeing
should occur at the same instant; or else, at the moment when the object
appears, God intervenes, and gives me the perception of sight, exactly
as if the object had caused it. The former theory is the Pre-established
Harmony; the latter is the doctrine of Occasional Causes, to which, as
rather the less grotesque supposition of the two, the Cartesians had
been driven by the pressure of the same difficulty. But this hypothesis,
as it supposed nothing less than a standing miracle, was wholly
inadmissible by Leibnitz. It was inconsistent with the idea which he had
formed to himself of the perfections of the Deity. He considered it as
assimilating Providence to a bad workman, whose engines will not work
unless he himself stands by, and gives them a helping hand; “a
watchmaker, who, having constructed a timepiece, would still be obliged
himself to turn the hands, to make it mark the hours.”* Leibnitz could
not find, in the idea of God, any Sufficient Reason why so roundabout a
mode of governing the universe should have been chosen by him. He was
thus thrown upon the hypothesis of a Pre-established Harmony, as his
only refuge; and there can be no doubt that he accepted it, with the
full conviction Edition: current; Page: [502] of an intellect accustomed
to pursue given premises to their consequences with all the rigour of
geometrical demonstration.

The doctrine of Monads was as necessary a corollary from Leibnitz’s
first principle as the Pre-established Harmony. Everything, whether
physical or spiritual, which has an individual existence, is a compound
of innumerable attributes, between many of which we cannot seize any
connexion, but on Leibnitz’s theory it was not admissible to suppose
that no connexion exists. There must be something, somewhere, which
contains in its own nature the complete theory and explanation of the
combination of attributes, and is the reason of its being that
combination and no other: and what could this be unless a sort of kernel
of the entire Being—the Soul in the case of a spiritual being, a kind of
Essence of the Individual in that of a merely physical object? The
Monads of Leibnitz do not really differ from the imaginary Essences of
the schoolmen, except in not being abstractions, but objective realities
in the completest meaning of the word; which, indeed, the Substantiæ
Secundæ of the Realists already were, only that they were essences of
classes, and were conceived as inhering simultaneously in numerous
individuals, while the Monads of Leibnitz were lively little beings, the
principles of animation and activity, each of them the real agent or
Force at the bottom of one individual. All this may seem poor stuff, and
a melancholy exhibition of a great intellect. But as there is nothing in
experience which directly disproves these theories, they are not really
more absurd than many a one which has not so quaint an appearance: and
it is the strength, not the weakness of a systematic intellect, that it
does not shrink from conclusions because they have an absurd look, when
they are necessary corollaries from premises which the thinker, and
probably most of those who criticise him, have not ceased to regard as
true. Leibnitz was led to the Monads and the Pre-established Harmony by
the same logical necessity, which made Descartes, far more absurdly,
affirm the automatism of animals;[*] and we might as reasonably doubt
the seriousness of the latter opinion, as of the former. The same
logical consistency made him a Necessitarian, and an Optimist; since the
doctrine of Sufficient Reason made God the author of all that happens,
consequently of all human actions; and God’s attributes could not be a
Sufficient Reason for any world but the best possible.

Other examples may be given, though none greater than this, of Sir W.
Hamilton’s inability to enter into the very mind of another thinker. Is
it not, for instance, a surprising thing, that one who knew Socrates,
Plato, and Aristotle so well, should attribute* to all of them his own
opinion that j(at Edition: current; Page: [503] least in the case of
speculative knowledge)j not truth but the search for truth is the
important matter, and that the pursuit of it is not for the sake of the
attainment, but of the mental activity and energy developed in the
search?* If there have been three men since speculation began who would
have vehemently rejected such a doctrine, they are the three who are
here placed at the head of the authorities in its support. Our author
arrives at this strange misunderstanding, by giving a meaning to single
expressions, derived from his own mode of thought and not from theirs.
In Aristotle’s case the assertion rests on a mistake of the meaning of
the Aristotelian word ἐνέργεια, which did not signify energy, but fact
as opposed to possibility, actus to potentia.† One hardly knows what to
say to a writer who understands Τέλος οὐ γνῶσις ἀλλὰ πρᾶξις,[*] to mean,
“The intellect is perfected not by knowledge but by activity.”‡

We see, from such instances, how much even Sir W. Hamilton’s erudition
wanted of what we have a right to expect from erudition in a superior
mind—that it should enter into the general spirit of the things it
knows, not know them merely in their details. Sir W. Hamilton studied
the eminent thinkers of old, only from the outside. He did not throw his
own mind into their manner of thought; he did not survey the field of
philosophic speculation from their standing point, and see each object
as it would be seen with their lights, and with their modes of looking.
The opinion of an author stands an isolated fact in Sir W. Hamilton’s
pages, without foundation in the author’s individuality, or connexion
with his other doctrines. For want of this elucidation one by another,
even the opinions themselves are, as in the case last cited, very liable
to be misunderstood. lA history of Edition: current; Page: [504]
philosophy from his hand, unless proposing to himself a new object had
altered his point of view, could not have been final; it would not have
been a philosophical history of philosophy; but it would have stood in
the same relation to such a work, in which accurate and complete annals
stand to political history: it would have been an invaluable protection
against the mistakes of subsequent historians, and would have
prodigiously abridged their labours. Such, therefore,l as his
expositions of the opinions of philosophers are, it is greatly to be
regretted that we have not more of them; and that his unrivalled
knowledge of all the antecedents of Philosophy has enriched the world
with nothing but a few selections of passages on topics on which
circumstances had led Sir W. Hamilton to write. He is known to have left
copious common-place books, without which indeed it would have been
hardly possible that such stores of knowledge could be kept within easy
reference. Let us hope that they are carefully preserved; that they
will, in some form or other, be made accessible to students, and will
yet do good service to the future historian of philosophy. Should this
hope be fulfilled, future ages will have greater cause than, I think,
Sir W. Hamilton’s published philosophical speculations will ever give
them, to rejoice in the fruits of his labours, and to celebrate his
name.m

Edition: current; Page: [505]


APPENDICES

Edition: current; Page: [506] Edition: current; Page: [507]


Appendix A


Manuscript Fragments

of the mass of manuscript Mill produced in drafting, rewriting, and
revising the Examination, nothing is known to be extant except the eight
fragments printed below, all of which are drafts of revisions for the
3rd ed. Two of them are in the Yale collection, and so presumably derive
from the Sotheby’s sale of 27 June, 1927; five are in the Houghton
Library, Harvard, in the volume of manuscript material bought by George
Herbert Palmer from the Avignon bookseller, J. Roumanille; and one is
written on a sheet at the end of Mill’s final MS of the Autobiography,
in the Columbia University Library. The five in the Harvard collection,
one may reasonably assume, indicate that the relevant revisions were
made in Avignon late in 1866; it is quite likely that the two at Yale
were simply bundled with papers of more consequence taken back to
England by Mary Taylor when she persuaded her aunt, Helen Taylor, to
leave the Avignon house in 1905.

In the text above, the placing of these fragments is indicated by
superscript letters. Here they are printed with page and line references
to the text above, and with variant readings giving the final versions,
except for the fifth, which was totally rewritten. Cancellations and
interlineations are not indicated.


Fragment 1. Pp. 21.17-22.3 (Yale)

arelative to us: & this could no longer be contested if the only
relativity he meant was not relativity to us but to something else.a

bBut there isb abundant evidence that the relativity which che meant to
affirm ofc our knowledge of attributes was not merely relativity to
their substances but also relativity to us. dWhenever the occasion
presents itself hed affirms of attributes as positively as of
substances, that all our knowledge Edition: current; Page: [508] of them
is relative to us. eHe asserts this in a passage already quoted.*e “In
saying that a thing is known in itself I do not mean that this object is
known in its absolute existence, that is, out of relation to us. This is
impossible for our knowledge is only of the relative.” fSo that, by the
relativity of our knowledge he means relativity to us. Again, when
speaking expressly of attributes†—“byf the expression what they are in
themselves, in reference to the primary qualities, & of relative notion
in reference to the secondary, Reid cannot mean that the former are
known to us absolutely & in themselves, that is, out of relation to our
cognitive faculties; for he elsewhere admits that all our knowledge is
grelative.” To the same effect:‡ “Weg can know, we can conceive, only
what is relative, our knowledge of qualities or phenomena is necessarily
relative; for these exist only as they exist in relation to our
faculties.”§ The distinction, hthen, which he drawsh between our
knowledge of substances & that of attributes, though authentically a
part of his philosophy, is quite irrelevant here. iFor he unquestionably
thinks, &i


Fragment 2. P. 38n.13-27 (Harvard)

as predicated of acts or mental states, & the asame asa attributes of a
person. bThe standard of right is indeedb a positive limit, which even
ideally can cbe onlyc reached, not surpassed: but ddifferent persons may
agree ind exactly conforming to the standard, eyete differ in the
strength of their adherence to itf, in so much that influences
(temptations for instance)f might detach one of them from it, which
would have no effect gon the otherg. There are thus, consistently with
hperfecth observance of the rule of Edition: current; Page: [509] right,
innumerable gradations of the attribute, considered as in a iperson.
This I had overlooked. Buti, on the other hand, jthe extreme limit of
these gradations is the conceptionj of a Person whom no influences, knok
causes, either in or out of himself, can lmake or induce to deviatel
from the law of right. This I apprehend,m, ism a conception of Absolute,
not of Infinite, righteousness. The doctrine, therefore, of the first
edition, that an Infinite Being may have attributes which are Absolute
but not nInfinite, appearsn to me maintainable. But as it is immaterial
to my argument, & was only obrought in as an illustration which lay
nearo at hand of the meaning of the terms, I withdraw it from pthe
present discussionp.


Fragment 3. Pp. 52.14-53.15[*] (Harvard)

This aisa unanswerable if by the Absolute we bareb obliged to understand
something which is not only “out of” all relation, but cis incapable of
ever coming into relation with anything else: butc is this what any one
can possibly mean by the dAbsoluted, who identifies the Absolute with
the Creator? Granting that the Absolute implies an existence eofe
itself, standing in no relation to anything; the only Absolute with
which we are concerned, or in which anybody believes, must not only be
capable of entering into relation with things, but must be capable of
entering into any fpossible relationf with anything. May it not be known
in some at least of those relations, & particularly in the relation of a
Cause? And if it is a “finished, perfected, completed” Cause, i.e. the
most a Cause that it is possible to be—the cause of everything except
itself, then if known as such, it is known as an Absolute Cause. Has Sir
W. Hamilton shewn that an Absolute Cause, thus understood, is
inconceivable or unknowable? No: all he shews is, that although capable
of being known, it

Edition: current; Page: [510]


Fragment 4. P. 57.19-32 (Harvard)

the whole of both; & these being conceived as Infinite, to conceive a
Being as occupying the whole of them is to conceive that Being as
infinite. If thinking God as eternal & omnipresent is thinking him in
Space & Time, athen wea do think God in space & time. If thinking him as
eternal & omnipresent is not thinking him in space & time, bthen we can
think himb out of Space & Time. cIc have already shewn that the ideas of
infinite space & time are real & positive conceptions: that of a Being
who is in all dtime & spaced is no less so. To think anything emuste be
to condition it by attributes which are themselves thinkable; but not
necessarily to condition it by a limited quantum of those attributes: on
the contrary, we may think it under a degree of them greater than all
limited degrees, & this is to think it as Infinite.(a)


Fragment 5. P. 77n.33-41 (Columbia)

aassociations, wea have a natural tendency to disbelieve bit,b but the
suggestion to our mind of csome set of possiblec conditions which would
be a Sufficient Reason for its dtruthd, takes away its eunbelievability,
or in other wordse enables us to ‘conceive it as possible.’ This view of
Sir W. Hamilton’s meaning fwould account forf his using the term in its
third signification; which Mr Mansel (p. 132) also greducesg to the
first, but which may be better identified with the second: for of first
truths also it is impossible to assign any Sufficient Reason. hThat for
this reason, however, the truths which are the basis of all our
conceptions of things should be nicknamed inconceivable, I hold to be an
entirely inadmissible abuse of language.h

Edition: current; Page: [511]


Fragment 6. P. 118n.32[*] (Harvard)

“is one & indivisible may logically (ratione) be considered as diverse &
plural, & vice versa, what are really diverse & plural may logically be
viewed as one & indivisible. As an example of the former;—the sides &
angles of a triangle (or trilateral) as mutually correlative—as together
making up the same simple figure—& as, without destruction of that
figure, actually inseparable from it, & from each other, are really one;
but in as much as they have peculiar relations which may, in thought, be
considered severally & for themselves, they are logically twofold.”

Does Sir W. Hamilton mean to say that the sides of a triangle, & its
angles, are really and in themselves one—that there is “identity”
between them; & that they only differ as the same thing regarded in a
different point of view? If so, the words one, same, & identity, must
have changed their meaning. I could understand his expressions if they
had been used of the figure itself. That, he might justly have said, is
identical, is the same in itself, though it may be regarded in two
relations or points of view; in relation to its sides, as a trilateral;
in relation to its angles, as a triangle. But it might as well be said
that a man’s head & his feet are the same thing regarded in different
points of view, as that the sides & angles of a figure are so.

We shall find, in the sequel, that this particular confusion of ideas is
habitual to Sir W. Hamilton: it is quite usual with him to overlook the
difference between what is implied by a thing, & what is in the thing
itself. The principal novelties which he attempted to introduce into the
Science of Logic, originated, as we shall see, in non-observance of this
distinction.

The following passage, from the “Discussions”, (pp. 47, 48) shews that
in calling knowledge & the consciousness of knowledge “really identical”
he only meant that they are inseparable. “I can feel without perceiving,
I can perceive without imagining, I can imagine without remembering, I
can remember without judging (in the emphatic signification), I can
judge without willing. One of these acts does not immediately suppose
the other. Though modes merely of the same indivisible subject, they are
modes in relation to each other, really distinct, & admit, therefore, of
psychological discrimination. But can I feel without being conscious
that I feel? can I remember, without being conscious that I remember?
or, can I be conscious, without being conscious that I perceive, or
imagine, or reason? . . . . But

Edition: current; Page: [512]


Fragment 7. P. 225n.25-33 (Harvard)

“got directly from the sense of touch”. This is aa good answer to
Platner’s conclusion that those notions are obtained by sight alone: but
it does not conflict with Platner’s observations, nor with any inference
drawn from them by me. It is, on the contrary, exactly what I should
expecta. The sense of sight bnot beingb necessary to give the perception
of simultaneity c(though it gives that perception more promptly & on a
wider scale) is not necessary to the genesis I have suggested of the
idea of extension out of the muscular feelings. Nor do I in the least
doubt that ac person born blind can acquire, dthough by a much slowerd
process, all that there is in our notion of Space, except the visible
picture: but he will be much longer before he realizes it completely, &
in the case of Platner’s patient, that point does not seem to have been
reached.


Fragment 8. Pp. 503.25-504.7[*] (Yale)

A history of philosophy from his hand, unless proposing to himself a new
object had altered his point of view, could not have been final; it
would not have been a philosophical history of philosophy; but it would
have stood in the same relation to such a work—in which accurate &
complete annals stand to political history: it would have aprodigiously
abridged the labour of subsequent historians & could have been an
invaluable protection against their mistakesa. Such, therefore,

Edition: current; Page: [513]


Appendix B


Textual Emendations

the following list includes the corrections and emendations made
silently in the text. Accidental typographical errors in the 1st, 2nd,
and 3rd editions are not recorded, nor are substantives in those
editions, except that those which are probably typographical errors, but
have some plausibility, are recorded as variants in the text, with a
query as to their status. In the list, after the page and line number of
this edition, the first reading is that of the unamended text; this is
followed by the corrected reading as it would appear if we followed the
style and format of the 4th ed. (i.e., our restyling, for example of
quotations, sometimes gives the actual reading in the text a slightly
different appearance from that in the list below). The entries conclude,
where appropriate, with a justification (in square brackets) for the
emendations. The asterisks indicate typographical errors which occurred
as a result of the resetting of lines that, in the previous edition,
began with the word before which the quotation marks appear (in the
original editions all quotations of more than two lines have quotation
marks at the beginning of all lines). The four entries between 103 and
112 are included because Gathering K in the 4th ed. exists in two
states, one of which contains the erroneous readings.

civ. 7 ).[.)]

Table of Contents, Chap. ix On the [Of the] [as in title in text in all
eds., and in Table of Contents in 651, 652]

Table of Contents, Chap xx of Forms [, or Forms,] [as in title in text
in all eds.]

Table of Contents, Chap. xxv 553 [555] [paging altered in this edition]

Table of Contents, Chap. xxvi 561 [564] [paging altered in this edition]

Table of Contents, Chap. xxvii 591 [607] [paging altered in this
edition]

Table of Contents, Chap. xxviii 617 [633] [paging altered in this
edition]

14.18 immediately, [immediately] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

16.36 complement [complement,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

17.13 phænomena— [phænomena,—] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

18.17 “inferred [inferred]*

31.27 “the phænomena [the “phænomena] [as in Source, 67]

Edition: current; Page: [514]
43.15 cognizable [cognisable] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

44.6 est [best] [dropped character]

45.1 [line space added] [as in 651, 652]

45n.17 divine [Divine] [as in Source, 67; note added in 67]

52.12 of a cause [of a Cause] [as in 651, 652, and elsewhere in
sentence]

55n.4-5 denominates “plurality [“denominates plurality] [as in Source,
651]

89. Title conditioned [conditioned,] [as in 651, 652, and Table of
Contents of all eds.]

95.16 a “conscious [“a conscious] [as in Source, 651, 652]

103.35 am I [I am] [as in 651, 652, 67, and other state of 72]

104.19 It is [Is it] [as in 651, 652, 67, and other state of 72]

111.40 now; [now:] [as in 651, 652, 67, and other state of 72]

112.27 organ; [organ:] [as in 651, 652, 67, and other state of 72]

116.30 feeling; [feeling:] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

117n.2 194,5 [194-5] [as in 651, 652]

119.17 relative. The [relative.” “The] [to indicate that two passages
are quoted]

119.31 [I believe [I [believe] [as in 651, 652, and to conform to
Source]

119.35 [of the God [of the [God] [as in 651, 652, and to conform to
Source]

133.6-7 instrumeut [instrument]

138.2 consciousness [Consciousness] [as in 651, 652, and with same and
the following sentences]

138.22 sense [Sense] [as in Source, 651, 652]

142.15 himself [himself.]

150.20 minds. [minds.”] [as in 651, 652, 67; indicated in this edition
by a line space]

150.22 quality [duality] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

151.24 that [“that] [as in 651, 652, 67]*

153n.1 Dissertation C [Note C] [to conform to usage elsewhere]

158.8 succ eds [succeeds]

168.6 it [it,] [as in 651, 652, 67]

173.33 decidedly [“decidedly] [as in 651, 652, 67]

173.37 surrendered [surrendered,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

182.10 ourselves [ourselves.]

190.5 mind [Mind] [as in 651, 652, 67, and elsewhere in same passage]

205n.8 consciousness, [consciousness;] [as in Source, 67; note added in
67]

213.19 matter [Matter] [as in 651, 652, and elsewhere in passage]

223.5-6 Pyschological [Psychological]

223.12 Pyschological [Psychological]

228.32 conceiving [perceiving] [as in Source, 651]

237.3 by [“by] [as in 651, 652, 67]

239.11 on the [on] [as in Source, 651)

252.34 one into [into one] [as in both Sources, 651]

253.18 into mind [into the mind] [as in both Sources, 651]

253.34 another, [another idea,] [as in Source, 651]

253.38 impotant [important]

256.23 results [result] [as in Source, 651, 652]

256.28 constituted [constituent] [as in Source, 651, 652]

272.4 Lecture, [Lecture,* [footnote:] *Lectures, i, 338.] [as in 651,
652, 67; the footnote was erroneously deleted when a revision in 72
deleted the other original footnotes on this page]

273.12 science [science,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

Edition: current; Page: [515]
274n.4 be neither [neither be] [as in Source, 651]

277.28 immediately [mediately] [as in Source, 651]

277.28 consciousness— [consciousness,—] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

277.40 Germany, Prussia [Germany,—Prussia] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

278.26 ideas of A [ideas A] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

281n.9 restricted [astricted] [as in Source, 651]

282.40 antecedent [antecedents] [as in 651, 652, 67]

286.25 and an alkali [and alkali] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

287.4 compositions [compositions,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

287.6 to the [to their] [as in Source, 651]

288.8 retraction [retractation] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

288.12 reading [reaching] [as in 651, 652, 67]

289.19 retraction [retractation] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

291.22 explanation [explanation,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

294.12 cause [Cause] [as in 651, 652, 67, and same sentence]

295.20 this, [this] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

295.40 transport— [transport,—] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

297.10 is [“is] [as in 651, 652, 67]

298.20 principle [Principle] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

304.31 tell; [tell:] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

306.7 [line space added to make references clear]

306.10 it [it,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

306.14 generals [generals,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

306.25-6 object, and [object, and,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

306.32 extended [extended,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

306.34 extended, [extended] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

306.42 then [then,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

307.17 “the employment [the “employment] [as in Source, 651, 652]*

308n.3 co-existing [coexisting] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

309.20 not [not,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

310n.1 iii,137 [iii.137]

318.18 is a part of it [it is a part of] [as in 651, 652]

319.6 follows:* [follows:†]

319.19 that is [that it is] [as in 651, 652, 67]

322.16-17 “the words [the “words] [as in Source, 651, 652]*

325.22 manner [manner,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

332.12 ?” [”?] [the question is JSM’s, not Source’s]

333.10 judgment [Judgment] [as in 651, 652, and elsewhere]

337n.19 for [“for] [as in 651, 652, 67]

337n.27 Hamilton’s. [Hamilton’s,]

338.7 subject [Subject] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

342.10 those [these] [as in Source, 651]

347.13 reasoning [Reasoning] [as in 651, 652, and elsewhere in same
sentence]

348.11 is [in] [as in 651, 652]

348n.3 Ibid [Ibid.]

349n.1 ‘the [“the]

350n.1 practical, not productive [practical, not productive] [as in
Source, 651, 652, 67]

356.8 soul [Soul] [as in 651, 652, 67, and to conform to rest of
passage]

368.23 material [Material] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

Edition: current; Page: [516]
369.16 ἑξοχήν [ἐξοχήν] [correct in 651, 652, 67]

376.19 principle [Principle] [as in 651, 652, and to conform to rest of
passage]

380.16 Concepts [concepts] [as in 651, 652, 67, and to conform to rest
of passage]

382.14 leave [have] [as in 651, 652, 67]

382.15 laws [laws,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

384.11 object [objects] [as in 651, 652, and for sense]

391n.5 a crocodile [the crocodile] [as in Source, 67; passage added in
67]

397.5 means every [means Every] [as in 651, 652, 67, and to conform to
rest of passage]

398.40 all [All] [for sense]

399n.12 this [his] [as in 651, 652, 67, and to match mine in same
sentence]

399n.20 is B [is all B] [for sense]

400n.7 is [is,] [as in 651, 652, 67]

400n.13 all [All] [for sense]

400n.22 Schiebler [Scheibler] [correctly given in 651]

401.13 some [Some] [for sense]

401.14 some [Some] [for sense]

401.29 all [All] [for sense]

403.30 words [moods] [as in Source]

405.23 Roman [Roman,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

407.10 the “harmony [“the harmony] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

408n.1 Lectures [*Lectures]

410.5 disjunctive [Disjunctive] [as in 651, 652, and elsewhere in
passage]

411.18 no [No] [as in 651, 652, 67, and to conform to rest of passage]

411.38 immediata, [immediata] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

415.18 Logicæ; [Logicæ:] [as in 651, 652, 67, and for consistency]

415n.7 Logicæ [Logicum]

417.11 vacuum; [vacuum:] [as in 651, 652, and for consistency]

423n.7 says [says,] [reference moved to end of quotation]

427n.6 now [now] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

427n.13 these: [these;] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

427n.30 same: [same;] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

427n.35 contra. [contra,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

431.34 reaction” (what [reaction.” [What] [for intelligibility and to
accommodate altered style]

432.22 forth, nor [forth, nor,] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

438.39 responsibility, [responsibility,—] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

440n.2 Lectures i [Lectures, i]

440.16 necessity [Necessity] [as in 651, 652, 67, and to conform to rest
of passage]

442n.5 Appendix [(Appendix]

443n.2 on [to] [as passim]

445.12 egress [regress] [as in 651, 652, 67, and for sense]

447.24-5 phliosophers [philosophers]

458n.7 a “well [“a well] [as in Source, 67; passage added in 67]

468.34 shunned [shunned.]

469.9 happen, [happen.]

478.21 qualities [quantities] [as in 651, 652, and for sense]

479.31 Laws [laws] [as in 651, 652, 67, and elsewhere in sentence]

483.5 make [makes]

483.11 “It [“ ‘It] [as in Source]

Edition: current; Page: [517]
483.11 time, says Baillet, since [time,’ says Baillet, ‘since] [JSM adds
says Baillet,]

483.18 traces. [traces.’] [as in Source]

483.19 Revera [‘Revera] [as in Source]

483.25 expedire.” . . . [expedire. . . .’] [to conform to Source; 651,
652, 67 lack the quotation marks]

483.29 of [“of] [as in 651, 652; the quotation from Hamilton continues]

483.36 mankind.” [mankind.’ ”] [as in Source]

486n.8 35, 42 [35-42] [as in 651, 652, 67]

487.11 “Wonder, says Aristotle, is . . . philosophy; [“ ‘Wonder,’ says
Aristotle, ‘is . . . philosophy;’] [as in Source]

487.15 world,’ [world,] [as in Source, 651, 652]

487.25 heavens.” [heavens.’ ”] [as in Source]

490.10 pyschological [psychological]

491n.20 This [This,] [as in 651, 652, 67]

503n.7 τῆν [τὴν] [as in Source]

503n.7 ἴνα [ἵνα] [as in Source, 651, 652, 67]

Edition: current; Page: [517]


Appendix C


Corrected References

in the following list the entries take this form: page and line
reference in this edition; reading in the copy-text; corrected reading
[in square brackets]. The addition of “Vol.” or “P.” and such changes as
“p.” to “P.” are not noted, if there is no other correction made. In all
references to “Footnotes to Reid” we have silently added “n” to JSM’s
page references. Also, except where a correction is involved, the
division or combination of references is not noted. Apart from these
exceptions, and the corrections listed below, all other changes are
signalled in the text by square brackets.

13n.1 p. 643 [pp. 643-4]

14n.5 844 [844n]

15n.2 866 [866n]

21n.5 866 [866n]

22n.1 p. 320 [pp. 322n-3n]

26n.12 p. 313 [Pp. 313n-14n]

27n.2 Reid, 886 [“Dissertations,” p. 880]

27n.8-9 79 [79n]; p. 82 [pp. 82-3]

27n.19 30 [30n]

28n.7 p. 83 [pp. 83-4]

34n.8 90-98 [90-6]

42n.3 p. 13 [pp. 14-15]

43n.4 pp. 32, 33 [p. 33]

44n.1 pp. 34, 35 [p. 35]

45n.19 107 [107n]

50n.4 50 [50n]

52n.24 159 [159n]

61n.9 Pp. 749, 750 [p. 750]

64n.3 p. 36 [pp. 36-7]

64n.19 126 [126n]

64n.24 126 [126n]

74n.2 234, 235 [235-6]

76n.12 132 [132n]

77n.8 36 [36n]

77n.39 132 [132n]

81n.6 100 et seq. [100-4]

Edition: current; Page: [519]
99n.40 pp. 28, 29 [p. 28]

111n.2 228 [pp. 228-9]

111n.4-112n.1 218-221 [*218-19 †219-21]

118n.20 806 [806n]

123n.13 129 [129n]

132n.1-2 pp. 743-745 [divided into two, p. 743, p. 745]

137n.19 p. 129 [pp. 129-30]

141n.6 pp. 52, 53 [P. 52]

142n.4 894 [894n]

149n.1 377 [277]

149n.3 p. 283 [pp. 283-4]

150n.1-151n.2 288-95 [reference split into two (the first, on p. 150n.1,
is to 288; and the second, on p. 151n.2 is corrected to 292-4)]

152n.1 pp. 296-7 [p. 296]

153n.21 817 [817n]

154n.4 p. xxxix [pp. xxxviii—xl]

154n.6 p. 684 [pp. 684-6]

165n.17-18 p. 309 [pp. 309-10]

169n.1 p. 56 [pp. 56-7]

170n.4 p. 123 [pp. 123-4]

205n.9 p. 7 [Pp. 7-8]

214n.8 854, 855 [864n-5n]

220n.1 869 [869n]

224n.1 p. 174 [pp. 174-5]

225n.25 143 [143n]

229n.1 p. 167 [pp. 167-8]

234n.5 p. 376 [pp. 376-7]

234n.5 368 [369]

234n.43 p. 377 [pp. 377n-8n]

235n.1 861 [861n]

237n.8 pp. 874, 875 [p. 875n]

237n.11 151 [151n]

262n.16 p. 90 [pp. 90-1]

266n.16 p. xxvii [Pp. xxvii-xxviii]

266n.19 112 [112n]

267n.1 p. 149 [pp. 149-50]

274n.20 339-346 [339-40]

275n.1-3 347-349 and 349-351 [references split among three separate
notes]

278n.1 iii [i]

290n.9 620 [620n]

298n.2 p. 149 [pp. 149-50]

302n.3 286 [296]

302n.4 p. 287 [pp. 287-8]

303n.1 287-290 [288-90]

305n.1 p. 298 [pp. 298-300]

306n.1-307n.1 131-137 [131, 134-6] [reference split between two separate
notes]

317n.6 p. 276 [pp. 276-7]

319n.1 p. 171 [pp. 171-2]

321n.1 121, 127 [121, 126, 127]

321n.3 283 [283n]

Edition: current; Page: [520]
321n.5 212 [126]

330n.1 p. 204 [pp. 204-5]

332n.14 53-56 [53-5]

334n.1 787, 788 [787n-8n]

337n.8 p. 58 [pp. 58-9]

358n.1 p. 78 [pp. 78-9]

373n.1 113 [713n]

383n.19 527, 528 [527-9]

393n.4 379-384 [379 and ff.]

396n.2 601 [691n]

400n.19 p. 259 [pp. 259-61]

401n.11 600, 601 [690n-1n]

414n.9 Sect. 5 et 6 [§§8 and 9]

415n.10 p. 197 [pp. 197-8]

416n.2 652 [652n]

420n.1 pp. 628, 631 [p. 628n]

422n.4 861 [861n]

434n.1 p. 495 [pp. 494-5]

438n.1 25 et seqq. [25-6]

440n.2 26, 37 [26-7]

449n.6 22 et seqq. [22-3]

452n.1 13, 14 [43-4]

466n.7 46 [46n]

491n.20 pp. 247, 248 [p. 248]

497n.13 p. 2 [pp. 3-4]

Edition: current; Page: [521]


Appendix D


Bibliographic Index of Persons and Works Cited in the Examination, with Variants and Notes

mill, like most nineteenth-century authors, is cavalier in his approach
to sources, seldom identifying them with sufficient care, and frequently
quoting them inaccurately. This Appendix is intended to help correct
these deficiencies, and to serve as an index of names and titles (which
are consequently omitted in the Index proper). The material is arranged
in alphabetical order, with an entry for each person or work quoted or
referred to in the text.

The entries take the following form:

1. Identification: author, title, etc., in the usual bibliographic form.

2. Notes (if required) giving information about JSM’s use of the source,
indication if the work is in his library, and any other relevant
information.

3. A list of the places where the author or work is quoted, and a
separate list of the places where there is reference only. Those works
that are reviewed are so noted.

4. A list of substantive variants between JSM’s text and his source, in
this form: Page and line reference to the present text. Reading in the
present text] Reading in the source (page reference in the source).

The list of substantive variants also attempts to place quoted passages
in their contexts by giving the beginnings and endings of sentences.
Omissions of two sentences or less are given in full; only the length of
other omissions is given. Translated material from the French is given
in the original. When the style has been altered, the original form is
retained in the entries (except that the quotation marks in the left
margin of the original, used to signal the continuation of quotations,
are omitted).

Abbott, Thomas Kingsmill. Sight and Touch: an attempt to disprove the
received (or Berkeleian) theory of vision. London: Longman, Green,
Longman, Roberts, and Green, 1864.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Mahaffy. Fraser’s article
mentioned at 242n was apparently not republished.

quoted: 242n

referred to: 240

242n.3 “Let us suppose] Let us then suppose (70)

242n.5 which, therefore, is] which is therefore (70)

242n.8 farthest] furthest (70)

Edition: current; Page: [522]
Abelard, Peter.

note: the quotation is in a quotation from Hamilton, who mistakenly
attributes the passage to Abelard. See St. Augustine.

quoted: 61

Aldrich, Henry. Artis Logicæ Compendium. Oxford: Sheldonian Theatre,
1704.

note: JSM’s reference is to “Quæstionum Logicarum Determinatio, quæst.
19,” which is Lib. II, Cap. v, §15 in the 1st ed. (Oxford: Sheldonian
Theatre, 1691), but is there designated as JSM designates it in the ed.
cited (a copy of which is in the London Library, and may have been part
of JSM’s donation of his father’s books). The first sentence he quotes
is the rubric for the section. A copy of the ed. edited by H. L. Mansel
(Oxford: Graham, 1852) is in JSM’s library, Somerville College,
inscribed “From the Author” on the flyleaf.

quoted: 415

415.6 “Contraria . . . distant. Non] 19. Contraria . . . distant. /
§.19. Non (118)

Alembert, Jean le Rond d’. Mélanges de littérature, d’histoire, et de
philosophie. New ed. 5 vols. Amsterdam: Chatelain, 1759-67.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College. Both references, which are
to the same passage, derive from Hamilton.

referred to: 228, 255n

Alexander, Patrick Proctor. Mill and Carlyle. An Examination of Mr. John
Stuart Mill’s Doctrine of Causation in Relation to Moral Freedom. With
an Occasional Discourse on Sauerteig, by Smelfungus. Edinburgh: Nimmo,
1866.

quoted: 449n, 450n, 451n, 457n, 460n, 462n, 463n

referred to: civ, 449n, 457n, 460n, 463n, 466n, 467n

449n.3 consciousness. . . . As] consciousness; certain it is at least,
it was at one time by Mr Mill himself so considered—vide “System of
Logic,” as before quoted—“The practical feeling of Free-will common in a
greater or less degree to all mankind.” [ellipsis indicates 4-sentence
omission] As (22-3) [cf. entry for 450n.26 below]

449n.23 “general . . . race;”] To the general . . . race, philosophers
with rigour excepted. (25)

449n.25 “unless . . . thousand,”] It is not that the philosopher will
lie like a thief, in wilful misreport of his consciousness; but by the
very conditions of the case, unless . . . thousand, he is incapable of
an accurate observation and candid notation of its contents. (25)

450n.26 “practical feeling of Free Will”] Perhaps it is not; but what I
feel I am able to do is surely a subject of consciousness; certain it is
at least, it was at one time by Mr Mill himself so considered—vide
“System of Logic,” as before quoted—“The practical feeling of Free-will
common in a greater or less degree to all mankind.” (22) [cf. Mill, A
System of Logic, CW, VIII, 836]

450n.26-7 “a feeling of Moral Freedom which we are conscious of,”] “The
feeling of moral Freedom we are conscious of.” (22-3) [cf. Mill, A
System of Logic, CW, VIII, 841]

450n.27-8 “was . . . conscious”] And as Mr Mill himself now interprets
this feeling of Freedom of which he was . . . conscious, it “must have
meant” a being “conscious before he had decided that he was able to
decide either way.” (23)

451n.2 he not] not he (29)

451n.14-15 “veritable consciousness.” . . . “ a fraudulent substitute
palmed upon him”] Should Mr Mill, on the other hand, deny that he is so
conscious, we venture to assert with some confidence, that his
consciousness contradicts that of every man not a Necessitarian
philosopher; and further, that it is not his veritable consciousness,
but a fraudulent substitute palmed off upon him by the “system” to which
he is wedded. (29)

457n.2-3 “our current moralities” . . . “as a form of superstition,”]
And no man who reasons with the least strictness can fail to evolve for
himself this result of the doctrine; having done which, he can only, on
the ground of logic, regard our current Moralities as a form of
superstition, useful, perhaps—as the Christian religion is admitted
still to have its uses by many who for themselves will have none of
it—but not otherwise entitled to the respect of an advanced
intelligence. (118)

Edition: current; Page: [523]
457n.3-4 “moral ideas as illusions,” . . . “it . . . motives:”]
Precisely according to the decisiveness with which we recognise moral
ideas as illusions, it . . . motives. (119)

457n.5-7 “The . . . evaporated:”] The . . . evaporated—it has
absolutely, so to speak, evaporated in the emancipated world—relatively
in the emancipated individual—on the obvious ground of the extinction in
him of the special sympathy. (119)

457n.8-9 “in . . . indifference,” . . . “might . . . are,”] Also, in the
emancipated world, the other remaining “external sanctions” might . . .
are, in . . . indifference, which—even in the supposed disappearance of
all virtue—would be nearly sure to proclaim itself in the virtue of
charity. (119) [JSM has reversed clausal order]

457n.10-11 “succeed . . . gorilla.”] But instantly the tendency to so
degrade itself would begin to operate in the world, and—give him
time—how much we decline to specify—our faith in man is fixed that he
would succeed . . . Gorilla, so as even to satisfy the strictest
scientific requirements of the Professor Huxley of the period. (120-1)

462n.32 “How should] For how should (65)

462n.3-6 “could . . . assurance,” . . . “that . . . one, we should be
obliged to admit that their doom was not just in the particular
instance.”] Of assassins who “ regard themselves not as criminals but as
heroic martyrs,” we may boldly say that could . . . assurance that . . .
one, however, on obvious grounds of general expediency, we might
acquiesce in the doom awarded them, the Justice of it as deserved or due
to their deed, considered in itself, and as an isolated act, we should
very peremptorily deny. Justifiable we should call it in general not
just in the particular instance. (63-4)

462n.12 “may . . . virtue.”] Generally, in such cases, while we may
doubt if it be morally just (deserved) that the particular hero should
suffer for what may really have been an act of sublime virtue, his
punishment may yet seem justifiable to us, on the ground that no society
could afford to grow a succession of them. (64)

462n.22 “culpable . . . it.”] As to “crimes committed in obedience to a
perverted conscience,” it seems sufficient to say that we consider them
justly (or deservedly) punished as so committed; we hold the felon
responsible for his crime, if not immediately perhaps, yet mediately as
culpable . . . it, in so far as this may fairly be surmised to have
emerged under the conditions of sanity. (63)

463n.12-16 “asserting . . . motives;” . . . “to assert an absolute
commencement as the mode under . . . though inconceivable, has . . .
believed:” . . . “would . . . uncaused.”] How, while with emphasis
asserting . . . motives, could Hamilton also intend to assert “an
absolute commencement” as the mode under . . . though “inconceivable,
was . . . believed? This would . . . uncaused. (80)

Ammonius Hermiæ. Ammonii Hermiæ in Aristotelis de Interpretatione Librum
Commentarius. Venice: Aldus, 1546.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College; Vol. I of the 3-vol. set is
inscribed: “This is indeed a liber rarissimus & was bought by me at
Norwich upon the sale of Mr. Hobson’s books. SP [i.e., Samuel Parr].”
The quotation of Aristotle at 413 is from Ammonius, 175.

quoted: 413

Anon. “Mill on Hamilton,” North American Review, CIII (July, 1866),
250-60.

quoted: 31

referred to: cv, 32n

31.3 “An existence] But if Hamilton’s more extended use of the word be
admissible, then an existence (252)

31.6 things. . . . If the meaning] [ellipsis indicates 3-sentence
omission] This is the issue of the book; but if the meaning (252-3)

31.6 word phenomenon which] word “phenomenon” which (253)

31.8 figure, &c., though] figure, etc., though (253)

Archimedes. Referred to: 482

Aristotle.

note: the references at 142, 152, 395 are in quotations from Hamilton;
that at 328 is in a Edition: current; Page: [524] quotation from Reid;
one of those at 385 is in a quotation from Hamilton, the other in a
quotation from Baynes.

referred to: cvii, 142, 152, 328, 385, 389, 395, 489n, 494, 502

— Categories, in The Categories, On Interpretation, Prior Analytics
(Greek and English). Trans. Harold P. Cooke and Hugh Tredennick. London:
Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1938, 12-108.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The quotations at 413-16,
Latin translations of vi, 6a17-18, are in quotations from various
writers on logic.

quoted: 413, 413-16

referred to: 345

— The Metaphysics (Greek and English). Trans. Hugh Tredennick. 2 vols.
London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1933.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The quotations at 40, 40n are
in a quotation from Hamilton; that at 413 is in a quotation from
Ammonius Hermiæ; the indirect quotation at 487 is in a quotation from
Hamilton; the quotations at 498, 503n derive from Hamilton.

quoted: 40, 40n, 411, 413, 487, 498, 503, 503n

— The Nichomachean Ethics (Greek and English). Trans. H. Rackham.
London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1926.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The quotation at 105n is in a
quotation from Mansel; that at 349n is in a quotation from Hamilton;
those at 503, 503n derive from Hamilton; the references derive from
Hamilton.

quoted: 105n, 349n, 503, 503n

referred to: 349, 435

— On the Heavens (Greek and English). Trans. W. K. C. Guthrie. London:
Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1939.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

quoted: 418

— On Interpretation, in The Categories, On Interpretation, Prior
Analytics (Greek and English). Trans. Harold P. Cooke and Hugh
Tredennick. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1938, 114-78.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

quoted: 411-12, 413

— On the Soul, in On the Soul, Parva Naturalia, On Breath (Greek and
English). Trans. W. S. Hett. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1935, 8-203.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The notion of species
sensibiles, mistakenly attributed to Lucretius at 15, originated in this
work. The reference at 356 derives from Reid and Hamilton.

referred to: 15, 155, 356

— Parts of Animals, in Parts of Animals, Movement of Animals,
Progression of Animals (Greek and English). Trans. A. L. Peck. London:
Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1937, 52-430.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

quoted: 418

— The Physics (Greek and English). Trans. Philip H. Wickstead and
Francis M. Cornford. 2 vols. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1963.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The reference derives from
Hamilton.

referred to: 425

Arnauld, Antoine.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 152, 174

Edition: current; Page: [525]
— Des vrayes et des fausses idées, contre ce qu’enseigne l’auteur de la
Recherche de la vérité. Cologne: Schouten, 1683.

note: the reference derives from Reid.

referred to: 175

— and Pierre Nicole. The Port-Royal Logic. See Baynes.

Bacon, Francis.

note: the reference at 497n is in a quotation from Grote.

referred to: 368, 417, 418, 430, 485, 485n, 497n

— De Augmentis Scientiarum, in The Works of Francis Bacon. Ed. James
Spedding, Robert Leslie Ellis and Douglas Denon Heath. 14 vols. London:
Longman, et al., 1857-74, I, 415-840.

referred to: 368

— Novum Organum, in ibid., I, 119-365.

note: the reference at 368 is in a quotation from Hamilton.

quoted: 321

referred to: 368, 423

Bailey, Samuel. Letters on the Philosophy of the Human Mind. Second
Series. London: Longman, Brown, Green, Longmans, and Roberts, 1858.

note: the references are to Letter IV. The Doctrines of Sir William
Hamilton Regarding Perception.

referred to: 162n, 178

— A Review of Berkeley’s Theory of Vision, designed to Show the
Unsoundness of that Celebrated Speculation. London: Ridgway, 1842.

referred to: 178, 236n, 242n-3n, 256n

Baillet, Adrien. La Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes. 2 vols. Paris:
Horthemels, 1691.

note: the quotations are in a quotation from Hamilton.

quoted: 483

Bain, Alexander. Referred to: 9, 51, 216n

— Logic. 2 pts. London: Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer, 1870.

note: the two pts. are separately paginated. The exact wording suggested
by the reference at 268 has not been found, but the doctrine is
reflected in the passage cited, as well as elsewhere in the work.

referred to: 268, 293n

— The Senses and the Intellect. London: Parker, 1855.

note: the reference at 216n is in a quotation from McCosh; the quotation
at 241 is in a quotation from Mahaffy. See also 2nd ed. below.

quoted: 217-19, 241

referred to: 216, 216n, 224, 227n, 234n, 235, 236, 240, 249

217.9 “When a muscle] Under this head it may be asserted that when a
muscle (113)

217.10 carried; there] carried; that there (113)

218.4-5 former (from . . . effort) chiefly] former chiefly (114)

218.9 effort. . . . [paragraph] If] [ellipsis indicates 1-paragraph
omission] (114)

218.10 If] 26. If (114)

218.10-11 determination] discrimination (114)

218.25-6 manner. . . . [paragraph] It] manner. But we shall defer the
consideration of this attribute till we come to speak of the senses,
more especially Touch and Sight. [paragraph] It (115)

218.41 once whether] once as to whether (115)

218.47 The third] 27. The third (116)

219.3 quicker motion with] quicker movement with (116)

Edition: current; Page: [526]
219.8 extension. . . . [paragraph] We] [ellipsis indicates 1-paragraph
omission] (116)

219.9 We] 28. We (116)

241.24 quicker motion with] quicker movement with (116)

— The Senses and the Intellect. 2nd ed. London: Longman, Green, Longman,
Roberts, and Green, 1864.

note: the exact wording of the reference has not been found, but Bain,
in describing the phenomenon, uses “Law of Relativity” and “principle of
relativity” in the passage cited (cf. ibid., 5, 325-6, 399ff., and 1st
ed. [London: Parker, 1855]). The same wordings occur in Bain’s Mental
and Moral Science (London: Longmans, Green, 1868), 83, 185; in his The
Emotions and the Will, 2nd ed. (London: Longmans, Green, 1865), 599; and
in his Logic, I, 3. See also 1st ed. above.

quoted: 226-7, 231-4, 234n, 242, 245

referred to: 5, 216n, 228

226.17-18 eye,” . . . “is] eye is (370)

227.3 visible [“visual”] organ] visible organ (371)

227.5 orbit. . . . [paragraph] When] [ellipsis indicates 2-page
omission] (371-4)

227.11 further experience] further experience (374)

231.12 “I] The statement here made that all sensations, of which we are
conscious as one out of another, afford a condition of apprehending
extension, seems to me to imply and take for granted the point in
dispute: for I (376)

234n.32 place, the essential] place, as remarked in the text, the
essential (377n)

245.26 members.—When] members. [paragraph] When (398)

245.28 In this case] In such a case (398)

245.30 By getting a blow on] By a hurt on (398)

245.31 place in our] place on our (398)

245.34 sensations.”] sensations; if, in addition, they are not well
supplied with distinctive nerves, the difficulty is still greater. (398)

Bartholinus, Casparus. Enchiridion Logicum ex Aristotele. 3rd ed.
Leipzig: Cober, 1618.

note: this ed., which JSM cites, is in the London Library, and may have
been one of his father’s books given by JSM.

quoted: 415

415.14 se mutuo] mutuo se (186)

Bayle, Pierre. Dictionnaire historique et critique. 2 vols. Rotterdam:
Reinier Leers, 1697.

referred to: 425

Baynes, Thomas Spencer. An Essay on the New Analytic of Logical Forms,
being that which gained the prize proposed by Sir Wm. Hamilton in the
year 1846 for the best exposition of the new Doctrine propounded in his
Lectures. With an Historical Appendix. Edinburgh: Sutherland and Knox,
1850.

quoted: 385

—, trans. Antoine Arnauld and Pierre Nicole. The Port-Royal Logic. 3rd
ed. Edinburgh: Sutherland, Knox; London: Simkin, Marshall, 1854.

note: this ed. in JSM’s library, Somerville College. The reference
derives merely from the title-page of Baynes’s Essay on the New Analytic
of Logical Forms.

referred to: 386n

Bentham, Jeremy. Referred to: 37

Berkeley, George.

note: the reference at 153n is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 6, 10, 15n, 110, 152, 153n, 155, 163n, 183, 195, 196, 209n,
307, 362, 424, 493n

— The Analyst: or, a discourse addressed to an infidel mathematician:
Edition: current; Page: [527] wherein it is examined whether the object,
principles, and inferences, of the modern analysis are more distinctly
perceived, or more evidently deduced, than religious mysteries and
points of faith, in The Works of George Berkeley, D. D. 3 vols. London:
Priestley, 1820, II, 401-55.

note: this ed. (now lacking Vol. I) in JSM’s library, Somerville
College.

referred to: 428

— A Defence of Free-Thinking in Mathematics. In Answer to a Pamphlet of
Philalethes Cantabrigiensis, entitled, Geometry no Friend to Infidelity,
or a Defence of Sir Isaac Newton and the British Mathematicians. Also,
An Appendix concerning Mr. Walton’s Vindication of the Principles of
Fluxions against the Objections contained in the Analyst. Wherein it is
attempted to put this controversy in such a light as that every reader
may be able to judge thereof, in ibid., III, 1-62.

referred to: 428

— An Essay towards a New Theory of Vision, in ibid., I, 225-316.

referred to: 230, 242n-3n

— A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, wherein the
chief causes of error and difficulty in the sciences, with the grounds
of scepticism, atheism, and irreligion, are inquired into, in ibid., I,
1-106.

note: JSM undoubtedly takes the quotation from Hamilton (who elides the
paragraph that JSM does), but makes two errors in transcription that
Hamilton does not (see final two entries in the collation below).

quoted: 304-5

304.4 “It] VII. It (5)

304.16 Again] VIII. Again (6)

304.28 whatever] whatsoever (6)

304.29-30 sense. [paragraph] Whether] sense. [1-paragraph omission] X.
Whether (6-8)

304.30 abstracting their ideas] [in italics] (8)

304.34 part] parts (8)

304.42 am] own (8)

Bible. Referred to: 204n

— Acts. Quoted: 35

— I Corinthians.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 262

— Hebrews.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 471

471.34 a cloud of witnesses] Wherefore seeing we also are compassed
about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight,
and the sin which doth so easily be set us, and let us run with patience
the race that is set before us. (12:1)

— Job.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 44

44.13-14 he who feeds the ravens] Who provideth for the raven his
food,/When his young ones cry unto God,/And wander for lack of meat.
(38:41-3)

— Psalms.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 439

439.21-2 the eye must have been made by one who sees, and the ear by one
who hears.] He that planted the ear, shall he not hear?/He that formed
the eye, shall he not see? (94:9)

Edition: current; Page: [528]
Bland, Miles. Algebraical Problems, producing simple and quadratic
equations, with their solutions; designed as an introduction to the
higher branches of analytics. Cambridge: Nicholson, 1812.

referred to: 476

— Geometrical Problems deducible from the first six books of Euclid,
arranged and solved. To which is added, an Appendix containing the
elements of plane geometry. Cambridge: Nicholson, 1819.

referred to: 476

Bolton, M. P. W. Inquisitio Philosophica. An Examination of the
Principles of Kant and Hamilton. London: Chapman and Hall, 1866.

quoted: 52n

referred to: vii, 29n, 35n

52n.21-2 “In discussing] It is to be observed that in discussing (159n)

52n.22 Absolute] “Absolute” (159n)

Bonnet, Charles.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 487

Boswell, James. Life of Johnson. 2nd ed. 3 vols. London: Dilly, 1793.

note: this ed. in JSM’s library, Somerville College.

referred to: 183

Brerewood, Edward. Tractatus Quidam Logici de Prædicabilibus, et
Prædicamentis. 3rd ed. Oxford: Turner, 1637.

note: a copy of this ed. is in the London Library, and may be part of
the donation by JSM of his father’s books. JSM gives Tractatus Decimus,
§§5 and 6, rather than §§8 and 9. (In the 1st ed., ibid., 1628, the
passage is also in §§8 and 9.)

quoted: 414

414.21 “Contraria a Dialecticis] [paragraph] Contraria à Dialecticis
(367)

414.21-3 Sunt Opposita . . . natura.] [in italics] (367)

414.22 et eodem] et eidem (367)

414.23 natura. . . . Sed] [ellipsis indicates 1-paragraph omission, and
a move from §8 to the beginning of the 1st paragraph of §9] (367-8)

414.24 præcipue] præcipuæ (368)

414.24 Dialecticorum] Dialecticorum (368)

414.24 authoritans] authoritatis (368)

414.25 Aristotele] Aristotele (368)

414.25-6 breviorum: Contraria] breviorem. [paragraph] Contraria (368)

Brown, Thomas.

note: the references at 168 and 169 are in quotations from Hamilton.

referred to: 10, 17, 115, 116, 153, 153n, 168, 169, 171, 172, 183, 196,
197, 217n, 239, 291, 294, 362, 440, 490n, 493n, 497, 497n-8n.

— Lectures on the Philosophy of Mind. 19th ed. 4 vols. Edinburgh: Black;
London: Longman, 1851.

note: the reference at 225n is in a quotation from Mahaffy; the last
reference at 158 is in a quotation from Hamilton.

quoted: 167n, 221n

referred to: 15, 155-9, 163-8, 174-6, 219-21, 224, 225n, 424

167n.4-5 “I do not,” . . . “conceive] In the view which I take of the
subject, accordingly, I do not conceive (II, 11)

221n.3-4 feelings” . . . “when] feelings, however, when (II, 3)

221n.4 was] we (II, 3)

221n.5 divisibility . . . parts] [not in italics] (II, 3)

221n.5-6 length . . . divisibility.] [not in italics] (II, 3)

221n.9 “It would] It certainly, at least, would (II, 7)

Edition: current; Page: [529]
221n.10 efforts] effort (II, 7)

221n.12 mind.”] mind, and arisen too in circumstances which must lead to
the combination of them in one complex notion. (II, 7)

Brutus, Marcus Junius.

note: the reference derives from Alexander.

referred to: 462n

Burgersdijck, Franco. Institutionum logicarum libri duo. Cambridge:
Field, 1660.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College. JSM’s spelling is
Burgersdyk, and he refers to the work as Burgersdicii Institutiones
Logicæ.

quoted: 413

413.14-15 “Oppositorum . . . contradictoria.] [paragraph] VI.
Oppositorum . . . contradicentia. (94)

413.15-16 contradictoria. [paragraph] Disparata] [1-paragraph omission]
(94)

413.16 Disparata . . . modo.] VIII. [misprint for VII.] Disparata . . .
modo. (94)

413.16-17 modo. Sic homo & equus, album & cæruleum] modo. [paragraph] I.
§ Sic homo & equus, album & cæruleum (94-5)

413.20 oppositorum] oppositionis (95)

413.20-1 genere. . . . [paragraph] Contraria] genere. Album & nigrum non
sunt disparata, licèt album non solùm nigro, sed etiam mediis coloribus
opponatur: aliter enim album nigro opponitur, aliter coloribus mediis.
Similitur nec liber & servus disparata sunt, licèt servus non solùm
libero, sed etiam domino opponatur, quia non est idem oppositionis genus
utrobique: nam dominus & servus sunt relativè opposita; liber & servus,
contraria. [paragraph] Contraria (95)

413.21 Contraria . . . distant.] [in italics] (95)

413.21 absolute] absoluta (95)

Buridan, Jean.

note: the reference in each case is to the well-known dilemma, Buridan’s
ass, or asinus Buridani. In fact, it is not found in his works, but has
traditionally been attributed to him, probably in derision.

referred to: 451n, 468

Burke, Edmund. Referred to: 160

Byron, George Gordon. Don Juan, in The Works of Lord Byron. Ed. Thomas
Moore. 17 vols. London: Murray, 1832-33, XV-XVII.

referred to: 27n

Cæsar, Julius.

note: the reference is to his “peculiar gift”; s.v. Plutarch.

referred to: 281

Calderwood, Henry. The Philosophy of the Infinite. Edinburgh: Constable;
London: Hamilton and Adams, 1854.

referred to: 92, 93n

— “The Sensational Philosophy—Mr. J. S. Mill and Dr. M’Cosh,” British
and Foreign Evangelical Review, XV (April, 1866), 396-412.

referred to: ciii

Cambridge Problems: Being a collection of the printed questions proposed
to the candidates for the degree of Bachelor of Arts, at the General
Examination, from the year 1801 to the year 1820 inclusively. London:
Black and Armstrong, 1836.

note: this work is merely illustrative: see also the compilations
Mathematical Problems and Examples . . . 1821-1836 (Cambridge: Grant,
1837), and A. H. Frost, ed., The Mathematical Questions . . . 1838-49
(Cambridge: Hall, 1849), and volumes for individual years, such as
Cambridge Problems . . . 1843 (Cambridge: Hall, 1843).

referred to: 476

Edition: current; Page: [530]
Cardaillac, Jean-Jacques Séverin de. Etudes élémentaires de philosophie.
2 vols. Paris: Firmin-Didot, 1830.

note: JSM quotes Hamilton’s rendering of the passage from Cardaillac.

quoted: 281n

Carlyle, Thomas. Sartor Resartus. 2nd ed. Boston: Munroe; Philadelphia
and Pittsburgh: Kay, 1837.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College.

quoted: 423

423.1-2 “a thing can only act where it is; with . . . only where] Again,
Nothing can act but where it is: with . . . only where (59; I, viii)

Cazelles, Emile Honoré. “Introduction du traducteur,” in Herbert
Spencer, Les premiers principes. Trans. E. H. Cazelles. 3rd ed. Paris:
Germer Baillière, 1883, i-lxxx.

note: the 1st ed., 1870, was not easily available, but the
“Introduction” (to which JSM refers) to the 3rd ed. is dated Sept.,
1870. Cazelles also translated (after 1870) Spencer’s Principles of
Biology, and Principles of Sociology, Bain’s The Senses and the
Intellect, and Bentham’s The Influence of Natural Religion; he
translated JSM’s Examination (1869), Subjection of Women (1869),
Autobiography (1874), and Three Essays on Religion (1875).

referred to: 250n

Cazillac [“Rey Régis”]. Histoire naturelle et raisonnée de l’âme. 2
vols. London: n.p., 1789.

note: we have not found Cazillac’s forenames. The reference derives from
Maine de Biran, who notes that “Régis’ ” work is little known.

referred to: 237-8

Cheselden, William. “An Account of some Observations made by a young
Gentleman, who was born blind, or lost his Sight so early, that he had
no Remembrance of ever having seen, and was couch’d between 13 and 14
Years of Age,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, XXXV (1728), 447-50.

note: the quotation at 232n is indirect; that at 236n derives from
Hamilton. The passages here cited contain references also to Cheselden’s
anonymous patient.

quoted: 232n, 236n

referred to: 236

232n.18-19 and asked . . . sense, feeling, or seeing.] We thought he
soon knew what Pictures represented, which were shew’d to him, but we
found afterwards we were mistaken; for about two Months after he was
couch’d, he discovered at once, they represented solid Bodies; when to
that Time he consider’d them only as Party-colour’d Planes, or Surfaces
diversified with Variety of Paint; but even then he was no less
surpriz’d, expecting the Pictures would feel like the Things they
represented, and was amaz’d when he found those Parts, which by their
Light and Shadow appear’d now round and uneven, felt only flat like the
rest; and ask’d . . . Sense, Feeling or Seeing? (449) [the clause, which
JSM has not placed in quotation marks, is, in fact, a direct quotation
from Cheselden]

236n.7-8 “to touch his eyes, as . . . skin.”] [paragraph] When he first
saw, he was so far from making any Judgment about Distances, that he
thought all Objects whatever touch’d his Eyes, (as he expressed it) as .
. . Skin; and thought no Objects so agreeable as those which were smooth
and regular, tho’ he could form no Judgment of their Shape, or guess
what it was in any Object that was pleasing to him: He knew not the
Shape of any Thing, nor any one Thing from another, however different in
Shape or Magnitude; but upon being told what Things were, whose Form he
before knew from feeling, he would carefully observe, that he might know
them again; but having too many Objects to learn at once, he forgot many
of them; and (as he said) at first he learn’d to know, and again forgot
a thousand Things in a Day. (448)

Edition: current; Page: [531]
Clarke, Samuel.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 152

Coleridge, Samuel Taylor. “Preface to Christabel,” in Christabel; Kubla
Khan, a Vision; The Pains of Sleep. London: Murray, 1816.

note: Coleridge refers not to “one of his critics,” but “a set of
critics.”

referred to: 216n

Comte, Auguste. Referred to: 17, 216n-17n, 299, 472

— Cours de philosophie positive. 6 vols. Paris: Bachelier, 1830-42.

note: this ed. in JSM’s library, Somerville College.

referred to: 10, 216n-17n, 300, 472

— Synthèse subjective. Paris: Comte and Dalmont, 1856.

note: this ed. in JSM’s library, Somerville College.

quoted: 472n

472n.9 fournir] former (98)

— Système de politique positive, ou Traité de sociologie, instituant la
religion de l’humanité. 4 vols. Paris: Vol. I, Mathias, Carilian-Gœury
and Dalmont; Vol. II, Comte, Carilian-Gœury and Dalmont, Mathias and
Ladrange; Vols. III and IV, Comte, Carilian-Gœury and Dalmont, 1851-54.

note: this ed. in JSM’s library, Somerville College.

referred to: 314

Condillac, Etienne Bonnot de.

note: the references at 152, and 487 are in quotations from Hamilton.

referred to: 152, 208n, 364n, 440, 487

— La Logique, ou les premiers développemens de l’art de penser, in
Œuvres complètes. 31 vols. Paris: Dufart, 1803, XXX.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College; though JSM’s description of
Chap. i as “on the Soul” is accurate, the title actually is “Comment la
nature donne les premières leçons de l’art de penser.”

referred to: 440n

Copernicus, Nicolas.

note: the reference at 487 is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 333, 487

Corday, Charlotte.

note: the reference derives from Alexander.

referred to: 462n

Cousin, Victor. Referred to: 33, 33n, 143, 152, 495

— Cours de philosophie. Histoire de la philosophie du dix-huitième
siècle. 2 vols. Brussels: Hauman, 1836.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College.

referred to: 139-40, 142

— Cours de philosophie: Introduction à l’histoire de la philosophie.
Brussels: Hauman, 1836.

note: this ed. in JSM’s library, Somerville College; JSM derives his
references from Hamilton’s review of the 1st ed. (Paris: Pichon and
Didier, 1828) in Discussions (originally in the Edinburgh Review, L
[Oct., 1828], 194-221). The quotations and references all derive from
Leçons iv and v. The quotation at 43 is of Hamilton’s translation of
Cousin’s passage; that at 55n is of Hamilton’s conflation of passages
from Cousin.

quoted: 43, 55n

referred to: 34-7, 34n, 39, 40n, 41n, 43-4, 44n-5n, 47, 51, 52-5, 56n,
59, 62, 64, 79, 83-4, 91n, 120, 136-7, 447

Edition: current; Page: [532]
43.8 “where . . . terms;”] La condition de l’intelligence, c’est la
différence; et il ne peut y avoir acte de connaissance que là où il y a
plusieurs termes. (129) [JSM is quoting from Hamilton’s translation of
Cousin]

Crakanthorp, Richard. Logicæ libri quinque. London: Teage, 1622.

note: JSM’s spelling is Crackanthorp. JSM reverses the order of the two
passages.

quoted: 414

414.9-10 “Contraria . . . opponatur. Sic] [paragraph] Contraria . . .
opponatur; Sic (206)

414.14-15 “Disparata sunt . . . opponatur.] [paragraph] Desparata sic
dicta disseparata, sunt . . . opponatur. (206)

414.16 quam Liberalitati. Sic] qua liberalitati: Sic (206)

Crousaz, Jean Pierre de.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 152

Cudworth, Ralph. The True Intellectual System of the Universe: wherein
all the reason and philosophy of atheism is confuted, and its
impossibility demonstrated. Trans. John Harrison. 3 vols. London: Tegg,
1845.

note: the reference derives from Mansel.

referred to: 50n

Cunningham, John. “Mill’s Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s
Philosophy,” Edinburgh Review, CXXIV (July, 1866), 120-50.

referred to: civ, 21n, 22n

Darwin, Erasmus.

note: the first reference is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 487

Democritus.

note: the references are in quotations from Hamilton.

referred to: 152, 421

De Morgan, Augustus. Referred to: 428

— The Elements of Algebra, Preliminary to the Differential Calculus, and
Fit for the Higher Classes of Schools. London: Taylor, 1835.

referred to: 429

— Formal Logic: or, The Calculus of Inference, Necessary and Probable.
London: Taylor and Walton, 1847.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College.

quoted: 403

403.28 “numerically definite”] A numerically definite proposition is of
this kind. (142)

— “On the Symbols of Logic, the theory of the Syllogism, and in
particular of the Copula, and the application of the Theory of
Probabilities to some questions of evidence,” Proceedings of the
Cambridge Philosophical Society, I (Feb., 1850), 90-5.

note: the quotation at 400n is indirect.

quoted: 400n

referred to: 399n

Descartes, René.

note: the reference at 152 is in a quotation from Hamilton; those at
483-4 derive from Hamilton and Baillet; that at 497n is in a quotation
from Grote.

referred to: 152, 474, 478, 483-5, 493n, 497n

Edition: current; Page: [533]
— Dissertatio de Methodo Rectè Utendi Ratione, et Veritatem in Scientiis
Investigandi, in Opera Philosophica. 4th ed. Amsterdam: Elzevir, 1664.

note: this ed. (works separately paged) in JSM’s library, Somerville
College. The reference at 141-2 derives from Hamilton.

referred to: 141-2, 502

— Lettres de Mr Descartes. Ed. Claude Clerselier. 3 vols. Paris: Angot,
1657-67.

note: the reference (to a letter to Henry More, of 15 April, 1649)
derives from Mansel.

referred to: 50n

— Principia Philosophiæ, in Opera Philosophica. 4th ed. Amsterdam:
Elzevir, 1664.

note: this ed. (works separately paged) in JSM’s library, Somerville
College. The quotation is in a quotation from Hamilton, cited by Mansel;
the reference at 50n derives from Mansel; that at 297 is in a quotation
from Mansel.

quoted: 28n

referred to: 29n, 50n, 155, 198, 297, 422

28n.6-7 ‘ut sunt, vel . . . possunt.’] Cum vero putamus nos percipere
colores in objectis, etsi revera nesciamus quidnam sit, quod tunc nomine
coloris appellamus, nec ullam similitudinem intelligere possumus, inter
colorem quem supponimus esse in objectis, & illum quem experimur esse in
sensu; quia tamen hoc ipsum non advertimus, & multa alia sunt, ut
magnitudo, figura, numerus, &c. quæ clarè percipimus, non alitera à
nobis sentiri vel intelligi, quam ut sunt, aut . . . possunt in
objectis; facile in eum errorem delabimur, ut judicemus, id, quod in
objectis vocamus colorem, esse quid omnino simile colori quem sentimus,
atque ita ut id, quod nullo modo percipimus, à nobis clarè percipi
arbitremur. (18)

— Regulae ad directionem ingenii. Amsterdam: Blaev, 1701.

note: the quotation is in a quotation from Hamilton.

quoted: 483

483.19-24 “Revera nihil inanius . . . nugarum . . . imaginationem ipsa
ratione uti desuescamus] Nam revera nihil inanius . . . nugarum . . .
imaginationem . . . ipsa ratione uti desuescamus (12; Reg. IV)

Diogenes (the Cynic). Referred to: 482

Du Hamel, Jean-Baptiste. Philosophia Vetus et Nova ad usum scholæ
accommodata. 5th ed. Amsterdam: Gallet, 1700.

note: a copy of this ed., which JSM cites, is in the London Library, and
may have been one of James Mill’s books donated by JSM.

quoted: 415

Du Trieu, Phillipus. Manuductio ad logicam sive dialectica studiosæ
juventuti ad logicam præparandæ. London: printed McMillan, 1826.

note: this reprint, which was formerly in JSM’s library, Somerville
College (Grote’s copy is in the University of London Library), of the
1662 ed. (Oxford: Oxlad and Pocock; also formerly in JSM’s library,
Somerville College) was made for the group, including JSM, studying at
Grote’s house in the 1820s (see Autobiography, ed. Stillinger, 74).

quoted: 413-14

413.34-414.1 genere. . . . [paragraph] Secunda] genere: sive illud sit
proximum, sicut albedo et nigredo ponuntur sub colore; sive remotum,
sicut injustitia et justitia ponuntur sub diversis generibus proximis,
scilicet virtute et vitio, sed illis mediantibus ponuntur sub eodem
genere remoto, nempe habitu, et ulterius sub qualitate. Itaque contraria
saltem debent esse ejusdem prædicamenti. Per hanc partem excluduntur
privantia et contradictoria. [paragraph] Secunda (74)

414.2 precise repugnent. . . . Hinc] præcise repugnent: quod eodem modo
explicandum est quo supra. Hinc (74)

Edition: current; Page: [534]
Edwards, Jonathan. Referred to: 440

Epicurus.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 152

Esser, Wilhelm. System der Logik. 2nd ed. 2 vols. Munster: Theissing,
1830.

note: the quotations and references derive from Hamilton’s Lectures, the
editors of which use this ed. of Esser’s Logik.

quoted: 323n, 354, 384, 407-8

referred to: 355, 494, 494n

Euclid. Elements.

note: as the references are general, no ed. is cited.

referred to: 62, 441

Faraday, Michael. Lectures on the Various Forces of Matter and on the
Chemical History of a Candle. London: Griffin, Bohn, 1863.

quoted: 488-9

489.10 into] into (3)

Fell, John. Grammatica Rationis, sive Institutiones Logicæ. Oxford:
Sheldonian Theatre, 1673.

note: a copy of this (the 1st) ed. is in the London Library, and may
have been part of the donation by JSM of his father’s books.

quoted: 415

415.19 “Contraria adversa sunt accidentia, posita] [paragraph] Contraria
adversa sunt Accidentia (ut prius definiebantur [p. 52]) posita (121)

415.19 genere] Genere (121)

Ferrier, James Frederick. Referred to: 7

Fichte, Johann Gottlieb. Die Bestimmung des Menschen, in Sämmtliche
Werke. Ed. J. H. Fichte. 8 vols. Berlin: von Velt, 1845, II, 165-319.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 151

Franz, Joann Christoph August. “Memoir of the Case of a Gentleman born
blind, and successfully operated upon in the 18th year of his age, with
Physiological Observations and Experiments,” Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London, CXXXI (1841), 59-68.

note: the passage here cited contains references to Franz’s anonymous
patient.

quoted: 231n-4n

231n.9-12 a sheet . . . denominations,”] A sheet . . . denominations.
(64)

231n.16-17 solid cube and a sphere . . . diameter, was] solid cube and a
sphere . . . diameter, were (65)

231n.18-19 a quadrangular and a circular . . . a square . . . a disc] a
quadrangular and a circular . . . a square . . . a disc (65)

231n.30-1 it; in fact, said he, I must give it up.] it; “in fact,” said
he, “I must give it up.” (65)

232n.5 object] objects (65)

232n.7-8 surprised he . . . with mathematical] surprised that he . . .
with these solid mathematical (65)

Fraser, Alexander Campbell. “Berkeley’s Theory of Vision,” North British
Review, XLI (Aug., 1864), 199-230.

quoted: 232n-3n

referred to: 240, 243n

232n.32-3 “at . . . objects,”] After couching, the boy could, in this
instance, we are told, at . . . objects. (215)

Edition: current; Page: [535]
232n.33-4 “were . . . figure,” . . . “it] Though he could not say which
was the cube, and which the sphere, he saw that they were . . . figure.
It (215)

— “Mr. Mill’s Examination of Sir W. Hamilton’s Philosophy,” North
British Review, XLIII (Sept., 1865), 1-58.

quoted: 29n, 31-2, 32, 32n, 187n

referred to: civ-cv, 32n-3n

29n.12-13 “the solid . . . extended percepts . . . conscious or] The
solid . . . extended percepts . . . conscious of them or (22)

31.39 in our minds] in our own minds (16)

32.6 How does] How then does (15)

32n.4-5 “there . . . of sense-consciousness] Except Berkeley, we know no
other philosopher in these islands who begins by acknowledging that
Matter, whatever it may turn out to be, is at any rate that which we
find in our proper conscious experience—that consciousness is not a mere
medium for representing an extended and solid world which exists behind
it,—and that there . . . of sense-consciousness (20)

32n.13-14 “a . . . Sir W. . . . country,”] We regard it as a . . . Sir
William . . . country. (20)

187n.9-10 “Men cannot . . . live,” . . . “without . . . term external.]
Man cannot . . . live without . . . term “external.” (26)

Froriep, Ludwig Friedrich von.

note: JSM gives “Frorieps”; see Heuck.

referred to: 248

Froriep, Robert.

note: JSM gives “Frorieps”; see Heuck.

referred to: 248

Gassendi, Pierre.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 487

George IV (of England).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 160

Gérard, Balthasar. Referred to: 461

Gerson, Levi Ben.

note: the quotation is taken from Grote (q.v. for collation), who takes
it from Hamilton.

quoted: 400n-1n

Gibbon, Edward. Referred to: 482

— “Memoirs of My Life and Writings,” in Miscellaneous Works. Ed. John
Baker Holroyd, Lord Sheffield. 2 vols. London: Strahan, Cadell and
Davies, 1796, I, 1-185.

quoted: 495-6

496.1 “I] But as my childish propensity for numbers and calculations was
totally extinct, I (I, 65-6)

496.1 impressions] impression (I, 66)

Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von. Referred to: 486n, 489

Grote, George. “John Stuart Mill on the Philosophy of Sir William
Hamilton,” Westminster Review, n.s. XXIX (Jan., 1866), 1-39.

note: the quotation of Levi Ben Gerson at 400n-1n is taken by JSM from
Grote, who takes it from Hamilton.

quoted: 400n-1n, 401n, 491n-2n, 492n, 497n

referred to: cv, 58n, 497n-8n

400n.25 “Sir W. Hamilton,” . . . “insists] Sir W. Hamilton, in this
proceeding, insists (31)

Edition: current; Page: [536]
400n.26 more;] more;* [*footnote omitted] (31)

400n.27 may] may (31)

400n.27 is not] is not (32)

400n.32 accidens. . . . If] accidens. Mr. Mill is, nevertheless, of
opinion (pp. 439-443) that though “the quantified syllogism is not a
true expression of what is in thought, yet writing the predicate with a
quantification may be sometimes a real help to the Art of Logic.” We see
little advantage in providing a new complicated form, for the purpose of
expressing in one proposition what naturally throws itself into two, and
may easily be expressed in two. If (32)

400n.41 quæsita] quæsita (32n)

401n.1 All Man is all Rational] all man is all rational (32n)

401n.1 all man is rational] all man is rational (32n)

401n.2 that rational is denied of everything but man] that rational is
denied of everything but man (32n)

401n.3 quæsita] quæsita (32n)

401n.4 quæsitum] quæsitum, (32n)

401n.5 only—Does . . . that? and not,] only—Does . . . that? and not
(32n)

401n.6 and . . . else.”] and . . . else?” (32n)

491n.40 so. We] so. [JSM omits eight sentences] We (2-3)

492n.3 not. . . . To those] not. [ellipsis indicates 4-sentence
omission] How far Sir W. Hamilton has there furnished good proof of his
own doctrines on External Perception, and on the Primary Qualities of
Matter, we shall not now determine; but to those (3)

492n.4 reasonings are] reasonings on these subjects are (3)

492n.15 “in] Now, in (2)

492n.18 editors,”] editors; and our impression, as readers of his
lectures, disposes us to credit them. (2-3)

Guy, Robert Ephrem (“R.E.G.”). “Calderwood and Mill upon Hamilton,”
Dublin Review, n.s. V (Oct., 1865), 474-504.

referred to: civ

Hamilton, William. Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, Education
and University Reform, chiefly from the Edinburgh Review; corrected,
vindicated, enlarged in notes and appendices. 2nd ed. London: Longman,
Brown, Green and Longmans; Edinburgh: Maclachlan and Stewart, 1853.

note: the reference at 4 is inferential; Hamilton first became widely
known through the early essays in Discussions. The references at 34, 39,
58, 58n are specifically to the first essay, “On the Philosophy of the
Unconditioned” (which first appeared in the Edinburgh Review in 1829);
those at 51n.5-8, 444n are to App. I (A), “Conditions of the Thinkable
Systematised”; that at 163 and the quotations at 163 and 168-9 relate to
“Philosophy of Perception” (which first appeared in the Edinburgh Review
in 1830); the references at 438n, 470-2, 482, 487n, 496n and the
quotations at 474, 475, 476, 477, 480, 483, 484 are to “On the Study of
Mathematics” (which first appeared in the Edinburgh Review in 1836 and
is indexed separately); that at 492n is to the third section,
“Education,” and App. III, “Educational.”

quoted: 13, 18, 19n-20n, 20, 29n, 34n-5n, 35-6, 36, 39, 39n, 41, 42,
42-3, 43, 43-4, 44, 44n, 52n, 53, 55n, 58n, 62, 66, 76n-7n, 79, 91, 94,
113, 116, 136, 155, 157, 163, 163-4, 168, 168-9, 169, 259-60, 260, 290n,
321, 350, 395-6, 396, 396n, 401n, 418, 420, 424, 442-3, 442n, 443, 463n,
474, 475, 476, 477, 480, 483, 484, 498n

referred to: 4, 29n, 34, 39, 39n, 43n, 51n, 58, 58n, 154-5, 161, 163,
174n, 316n, 348n, 352, 416n, 421n, 428, 438n, 444n, 470-2, 482, 487n,
492n, 496n

13.14 unknown. . . . Nor] unknown.* [3-sentence footnote omitted] The
philosopher speculating the worlds of matter and of mind, is thus, in a
certain sort, only an ignorant admirer. In his contemplation of the
universe, the philosopher, indeed, resembles Æneas Edition: current;
Page: [537] contemplating the adumbrations on his shield; as it may
equally be said of the sage and of the hero,—/“Miratur; Rerumque
ignarus, Imagine gaudet. [no end quotation marks]/Nor (App. I, 644)

18.38-19.1 “harmoniously re-echoed by every philosopher of every
school;” . . . “with the exception of a few late Absolute theorizers in
Germany;”] With the exception, in fact, of a few late Absolutist
theorisers in Germany, this is, perhaps, the truth of all others most
harmoniously re-echoed by every philosopher of every school; and, as has
so frequently been done, to attribute any merit, or any singularity to
its recognition by any individual thinker, more especially in modern
times, betrays only the ignorance of the encomiasts. [JSM has reversed
the clausal order] (App. I, 644)

19n.12-20n.5 “become . . . themselves.”] [see 13.9-13 in the text above]
(App. I, 643-4)

20.25-7 “become . . . qualities.” [see 13.9-12 in the text above] (App.
I, 643-4)

29n.23 “things in themselves.] The Hypothetical Realist contends, that
he is wholly ignorant of things in themselves, and that these are known
to him, only through a vicarious phænomenon, of which he is conscious in
perception;/“Rerumque ignarus, Imagine gaudet.” (57)

35n.4-5 To . . . God] To . . . God (15n)

35.9 “At] But at (9)

35.9-10 these [finite] existences] these existences (9)

36.10 “limiting and conditioning one another.”] In every act of
consciousness we distinguish a Self or Ego, and something different from
self, a Non-ego; each limited and modified by the other. (9)

39n.3 “finished, perfected, completed,”] [paragraph] 2. [Hamilton’s
second meaning of “Absolute”] Absolutum means finished, perfected,
completed; in which sense the Absolute will be what is out of relation,
&c., as finished, perfect, complete, total, and thus corresponds to τὸ
ὅλον and τὸ τέλειον of Aristotle. (14n)

39.9-10 “the unconditionally unlimited,” . . . “the unconditionally
limited.”] The unconditionally unlimited, or the Infinite, the
unconditionally limited, or the Absolute, cannot positively be construed
to the mind; they can be conceived, only by thinking away from, or
abstraction of, those very conditions under which thought itself is
realised; consequently, the notion of the Unconditioned is only
negative,—negative of the conceivable itself. (13)

39.16 “The term] [The term (14n)

41.8-12 Infinite . . . Absolute . . . negative;] Infinite . . . Absolute
. . . negative, [cf. entry for 39.9-10 above] (13)

41.17 coincide)] coincide*) [footnote omitted] (13)

41.21-2 space, in time, or in degree] space, in time, or in degree (13)

41.23 Infinite and the Absolute properly so called, are] Infinite and
the Absolute, properly so called,† are [footnote omitted] (13)

41.36 a fasciculus of negations] [not in italics] (17)

42.6 Conditioned] Conditioned (14)

42.15 is known] is only known (14)

42.16 cold] void (14)

42.17 [paragraph] How] [no paragraph] (14)

42.30 Cognoscendo . . . cognoscitur.] “Cognoscendo . . . cognoscitur.”
(15)

42.36 “his] In vindicating the truth of this statement, we shall attempt
to show:—in the first place, that M. Cousin is at fault in all the
authorities he quotes in favour of the opinion, that the Absolute,
Infinite, Unconditioned, is a primitive notion, cognisable by our
intellect; in the second, that his (25)

42.37 reverse;” “that] reverse; in the third, that (25)

43.2 Absolute;” and “that] Absolute; and in the fourth, that (25)

43.8 “where . . . plurality of terms;”] “The condition of intelligence,”
says M. Cousin, “is difference; and an active knowledge is only possible
where . . . plurality of terms. (31-2)

43.12 “as] [paragraph] Our author [Cousin] admits, and must admit, that
the Absolute, as (33)

43.12 one. Absolute] one; absolute (33)

Edition: current; Page: [538]
43.13 difference. . . . The condition] difference; the Absolute, and the
Knowledge of the Absolute, are therefore identical. [ellipsis indicates
3-sentence omission] But, on the other hand, it is asserted, that the
condition of intelligence, as knowing, is plurality and difference;
consequently the condition (33)

43.16-18 first . . . second . . . contradictory of the Absolute] first .
. . second . . . contradictory of the absolute (33)

43.22 third] third (33)

43.23 contradictory . . . intelligence] [in italics] (33)

43.26 either] Either (33)

43.26 or] or (33)

43.31 what] What (35)

43.32-3 end. . . . Abstractly] end; and in the accomplishment of that
end, it consummates its own perfection. Abstractly (35)

43.34-6 “is . . . perfection;” . . . “even for its reality] Further, not
only is . . . perfection,—it is dependent on it even for its reality
(35)

44.2 which it] which alone it (35)

44.4 in its effects] in its effects (35)

44n.11 “One] On this hypothesis, one (36)

44n.13-14 from the better . . . better] [in italics] (36)

44n.14 both states are equal] both states are equal (36)

44n.15 consider. The] consider. [paragraph] The (36)

44n.20-1 fate. The] fate. [paragraph] The (36)

44n.24 first cause] first cause (36)

44n.27 cause, the actual] cause, the real, the actual (36)

52n.17-18 “the unconditionally limited,”] [see entry for 39.9-10 above]
(13)

53.10 “finished, perfected, completed”] [see entry for 39n.3 and its
collation] (14n)

53.30 “to think is to condition”] [see 42.8 above] (14)

55n.2 “variously] [paragraph] The first of these Ideas, elements, or
laws, though fundamentally one, our author [Cousin] variously (8)

55n.3-4 &c.,” . . . “we will] &c.; (we would (8)

55n.4 Unconditioned.”] Unconditioned.) (8)

55n.5 “plurality] The second, [see collation for 55n.2 above] he
denominates plurality (8)

55n.6 &c.,” . . . “we would style the Conditioned.”] &c.; (we would
style it the Conditioned.) (8)

58n.22-3 “in Laputa or the Empire”] [paragraph] Out of Laputa or the
Empire it would be idle to enter into an articulate refutation of a
theory, which founds philosophy on the annihilation of consciousness,
and on the identification of the unconscious philosopher with God. (21)

62.30 “given . . . cognitions . . . beliefs:”] [paragraph] Our knowledge
rests ultimately on certain facts of consciousness, which as primitive,
and consequently incomprehensible, are given . . . cognitions . . .
beliefs. (86)

62.31 “Consciousness] But if consciousness (86)

62.31 words our] words, if our (86)

62.31 primary experience] primary experience (86)

62.32 is a faith.”] be a faith; the reality of our knowledge turns on
the veracity of our constitutive beliefs. (86)

66.13 “There] And as the one or the other of contradictories must be
true, whilst both cannot; it proves, that there (App. I, 624)

66.13-14 ground,” . . . “for] ground for (App. I, 624)

66.14-15 our . . . possibility] our . . . possibility (App. I, 624)

79.28 “Things] But practically, the fact, that we are free, is given to
us in the consciousness of an uncompromising law of duty, in the
consciousness of our moral accountability; and this fact of liberty
cannot be redargued on the ground that it is incomprehensible, for the
philosophy of the Conditioned proves, against the necessaritarian, that
things (App. I, 624)

79.29 may] may (App. I, 624)

Edition: current; Page: [539]
79.33 “The] [paragraph] The (15)

79.33 between the two] between two (15)

79.33 unconditionates] inconditionates (15)

79.34 neither . . . possible] neither . . . possible (15)

79.35-6 one . . . necessary] one . . . necessary (15)

79.36 necessary. . . . The] necessary. On this opinion, therefore, our
faculties are shown to be weak, but not deceitful. The (15)

79.38 the extremes] two extremes (15)

91.23 “Absolutum] [paragraph] 1. Absolutum (14n)

91.23 freed or loosed] freed or loosed (14n)

94n.14 “finished, perfected, completed,”] [see 39n.3 and its collation
above] (14n)

113.8 Consciousness . . . world.] Consciousness . . . world.* [footnote
omitted] (51)

116.40 “the] But if, on the one hand, consciousness be only realised
under specific modes, and cannot therefore exist apart from the several
faculties in cumulo; and if, on the other, these faculties can all and
each only be exerted under the condition of consciousness;
consciousness, consequently, is not one of the special modes into which
our mental activity may be resolved, but the (48)

116.40 condition”] condition of them all. (48)

157.16 belief of the existence] belief of the existence (89)

157.17 belief . . . knowledge . . . existence] belief . . . knowledge .
. . existence (89)

157.19 is] be (89)

157.22 I . . . exists] I . . . exists (89)

157.23 I believe . . . existing] I believe . . . existing (89)

157.23-5 I believe . . . perception] I believe . . . perception (89)

157.26 identical. The] identical. [paragraph] The (89)

157.29 belief in the existence] belief in the existence (89)

157.29-30 belief in the knowledge] belief in the knowledge (89)

157.30 but they] but, on grounds to which it is not here necessary to
advert, they (89)

157.37 “Our] [paragraph] Our (86)

157.39 cognitions] cognitions (86)

157.39 beliefs] beliefs (86)

163.4 “the mind] And here, the mind (67)

163.8 “alternative] The other alternative (67)

163.10-11 “either blindly determines itself” or “is blindly determined”]
And here the mind either blindly determines itself, or is blindly
determined by an extrinsic and intelligent cause. (67)

163.12 “utterly] The former lemma is the more philosophical, in so far
as it assumes nothing hyperphysical; but it is otherwise utterly (67)

168.31-2 “We proceed,” . . . “to] [paragraph] These being premised, we
proceed to (58)

168.34 third] third (58)

169.10 “This is too strong,” . . . “Brown’s . . . is not . . . import.]
Brown’s . . . is therefore, not . . . import. [This is too strong. See
Diss. p. 820.] [Hamilton’s square brackets] (60)

260.22 “when] On this theory, also, when (App. I, 615)

290n.3 a Nihilo] [not in italics] (App. I, 620n)

290n.13-14 “the Potential” . . . “what is . . . time.”] [included as
part of Hamilton’s scheme of modal predication] A, / E.) The Potential,
(τὸ ἐν δυνάμει, potentiale, quod in posse, in potentia, est, &c.,) what
is . . . time, = the not actual. (App. II, 703)

321.23 “Concept,” . . . “is] Mr. Stewart has even bestowed on the
reproductive imagination the term Conception;—happily, we do not think;
as both in grammatical propriety, and by the older and correcter usage
of philosophers, this term (or rather the product of this
operation—Concept) is (283n)

321.24 simply.”] simply, and in this sense is admirably rendered by the
Begriff (what is grasped up) of the Germans. (283n)

350.4 “ethics, politics, religion] Art he [Whately] defines the
application of knowledge to practice; in which signification, ethics,
politics, religion (134)

Edition: current; Page: [540]
350.4-5 practical sciences would be arts:”] practical sciences, must be
arts. (134)

395.9 “The self-evident] In the second place, the self-evident (App. II,
650)

395.32-3 species . . . Syllogism] Species . . . Syllogisms (App. II,
651)

396.16 “In] Its [the meaning of “some”] peculiar indefinitude is a
contribution from the contingency of our ignorance, and with our
ignorance would disappear; for, (to say nothing of Individuals or
Individualised Generals,) in (App. II, 691n)

396.17 all, or some, or none] all, or none, or some (App. II, 691n)

396n.4 “the Indesignate] The double inadvertence, as I think, of
Aristotle, (An. Pr. I. 2.) in recognising the indesignate (ἀδιόζιστον)
to be at once a quantity and an indefinitude, (for the Indesignate (App.
II, 691n)

396n.5-6 or . . . presumed] [not in italics] (App. II, 691n)

396n.6 presumed.”] presumed);—this vagueness,—this material, subjective
and contingent indefinitude, lay at the root of his [Aristotle’s] whole
doctrine of Particularity, the indefinitude of which quantity he should
have kept purely formal, objective, and necessary, instead of
confounding the two indefinitudes together. (App. II, 691n)

401n.12 “Every] Its [the meaning of “some”] peculiar indefinitude is a
contribution from the contingency of our ignorance, and with our
ignorance would disappear; for, (to say nothing of Individuals or
Individualised Generals,) in reality and in thought, every (App. II,
691n) [cf. 396.16]

418.21 “Nature] But nature (App. I, 622)

418.22 necessary.”] necessary;—μηδὲν περιττῶς; and to excogitate a
particular force, to perform what can be better explained on the ground
of a general imbecillity, is contrary to every rule of philosophising.
(App. I, 622)

418.23 “that] Not only is it a maxim of his [Aristotle’s] philosophy,
that (App. I, 629)

418.26 πολλὰ):”] πολλά.) (App. I, 629)

420.29 “the] [paragraph] The Law of Parcimony (as the rule ought to be
distinctively called), the (App. I, 628n)

420.30 when] where (App. I, 628n)

420.30-1 hypothesis,” has “never . . . adequately expressed;”]
hypothesis, has, though always virtually in force, never . . .
adequately enounced. (App. I, 628n)

420.32-3 “Neither more nor more onerous causes . . . phænomena] It
should be thus expressed:—Neither more, nor more onerous, causes . . .
phænomena. (App. I, 628n)

442n.4 conceived, be] conceived possible, be (App. I, 615)

442n.4-5 show our] shews out our (App. I, 615)

443.1 But . . . the] But practically, the fact, that we are free, is
given to us in the consciousness of an uncompromising law of duty, in
the consciousness of our moral accountability; and this fact of liberty
cannot be redargued on the ground that it is incomprehensible, for the
philosophy of the Conditioned proves, against the necessitarian, that
things there are, which may, nay must be true, of which the
understanding is wholly unable to construe to itself the possibility.
[paragraph] But this philosophy is not only competent to defend the fact
of our moral liberty, possible though inconceivable, against the assault
of the fatalist; it retorts against himself the very objection of
incomprehensibility by which the fatalist had thought to triumph over
the libertarian. It shews, that the (App. I, 624-5)

463n.3-4 “would . . . worthless;”] [see quotation at 442n.4 and its
collation] (App. I, 615)

463n.4-6 “the . . . will;”] [see 442.32-4 above] (App. I, 624)

474.17 “do] [paragraph] That they [mathematics] do (282)

474.17 generalization,”] generalization is equally apparent. (282)

475.9-10 “Are mathematics then,” . . . “of] [paragraph] Are Mathematics
then of (313)

475.13 mental distraction] mental distraction (314)

475.14 continuous attention] continuous attention (314)

475.15 mind.”] mind; and it is almost the one only, or at least the one
principal, accorded to it by the most intelligent philosophers. (314)

475.16 But] [paragraph] But (322)

475.25-6 “We are far,” . . . “from] [paragraph] We are far from (290)

Edition: current; Page: [541]
475.28 old. . . . Unlike] old; but this we assert,—that the most
ordinary intellect may, by means of these methods and formulæ, once
invented, reproduce and apply, by an effort nearly mechanical, all that
the original genius discovered. [ellipsis indicates 3-sentence omission]
[paragraph] Unlike] (290)

475.36 “Mathematical] [paragraph] 1.) As to the
difficulties:—Mathematical (291)

475.36-7 deducing conclusions] deducing conditions (291)

475.7-8 looking out for premises] looking out for premises (291)

476.30 “to] To (268n)

476.32 Newton:”] Newton. (268n)

477.18 measurable] mensurable (334)

480.10-11 “hypothetically . . . calculus.”] [see 477 above] (335)

480.33 “continuous attention”] [see 475 above] (314)

483.11 “It] [paragraph] “It (277)

483.11 time, says Baillet, since] time, since (277)

483.18 traces. The] traces.” (Cartesii Regulae ad Directionem Ingenii,
Reg. iv. MSS.)—[The (277)

483.19 Revera] “Revera (277)

483.20 talium] taliam (277)

483.25 expedire.” . . . Baillet] expedire. Quum vero postea cogitarem,
unde ergo fieret, ut primi olim Philosophiæ inventores, neminem
Matheseos imperitum ad studium sapientiæ vellent admittere, [a fable,
the oldest recorders of which flourished above eight centuries
subsequent to Plato,*] [4-sentence footnote omitted] tanquam hæc
disciplina omnium facillima et maxime necessaria videatur, ad ingenia
capessendis aliis majoribus scientiis erudienda et præparanda; plane
suspicatus sum, quamdam eos Mathesim agnovisse, valde diversam a vulgari
nostrae ætatis.”]—Baillet (278)

483.36 mankind.”] mankind.”† [footnote omitted] (278)

484.14 “did] For, though himself [Socrates] not inconversant with
these,” (which he had studied under the celebrated geometer, Theodorus
of Cyrene), “he did (323) [Hamilton is quoting from Xenophon]

484.14-15 they” . . . “could] they could (323)

484.17 acquirements.”] acquirements.”∥ [footnote] ∥Xenophontis
Memorabilia, l.iv.c.7, §§3, 5. (323)

484.21 “The] [paragraph] Before entering on details, it is proper here,
once for all to premise:—In the first place, that the (266)

484.21 question,” . . . “does] question does (266)

484.22-4 value of mathematical science, considered . . . results, but
the utility of mathematical study, that is, in . . . mind] value of
mathematical science, considered . . . results, but the utility of
mathematical study, that is, in . . . mind (266)

484.24 mind.] mind; and in the second [place], that the expediency is
not disputed, of leaving mathematics, as a co-ordinate, to find their
level among the other branches of academical instruction. (266)

498n.20 “not] His [Hume’s] reasoning is from their [the foundations of
knowledge] subsequent contradiction to their original falsehood; and his
premises, not (87)

498n.20 himself,” but “accepted] himself, are accepted (87)

— “Dissertations on Reid,” in The Works of Thomas Reid. Ed. William
Hamilton. Edinburgh: Maclachlan and Stewart; London: Longman, Brown,
Green and Longmans, 1846, 742-914.

note: this ed. used for all references and quotations, with the
exception of those at 33n, 117, 255n where the 6th ed. (2 vols.
[Edinburgh: Maclachlan and Stewart, 1863]), which contains additional
material not included in earlier eds. and employed by JSM in these
places only, is used. See also Hamilton’s “Foot-notes to Reid” below.
“Dissertations on Reid” is JSM’s title, which we have accepted and used
in all cases; in the work, a half-title page gives “Dissertations,
Historical, Critical, and Supplementary, by the Editor.”

quoted: 13-14, 14, 15, 16, 18, 21, 26, 26n-7n, 28n, 33n, 61, 63n, 65n,
76, 80, 113, 114, 117, Edition: current; Page: [542] 118n, 123n, 129n,
132, 132-3, 133, 134, 136, 138-9, 142, 153n, 155, 156, 172, 173-4, 175,
214n, 219-20, 234-5, 237, 238, 239, 255n, 296n, 311n, 362n, 423n-4n, 447

referred to: 3, 22, 29-30, 30n, 79, 114, 131, 168, 174, 216n, 251n, 334,
422n, 437

13.28-14.1 Realism” . . . “asserts] Realism, asserts (825)

14.11 “that] His philosophy, if that of Natural Realism, founded in the
common sense of mankind, made it incumbent on him to shew, that (842)

14.12 example—called up or suggested] example, ‘called up or suggested,’
(842)

14.15 knowledge of] knowledge or consciousness of (842)

14.17 “If] [no paragraph] But if (842)

14.20 at least] at best (842)

14.27 “The notion of body being given] Psychologically speaking, an
attribute would not be primary if it could be thought away from body;
and the notion of body being supposed given (844n)

14.29 “The] It is thus apparent that the (846)

14.30 deduced] deduced (846)

14.32 implies.”] implies: whereas the Secundo-primary and Secondary must
be induced a posteriori; both being attributes contingently super-added
to the naked notion of matter. (846)

14.35 “that] For they [Secundo-primary Qualities] are all only various
forms of a relative or superable resistance to displacement, which, we
learn by experience, bodies oppose to other bodies, and, among these, to
our organism moving through space;—a resistance similar in kind (and
therefore clearly conceived) to that (848)

15.1 “The Primary” Qualities “are] 5. The Primary are (857)

15.3-5 Secundo-primary” . . . “as] Secundo-primary, as (857)

15.5 us. . . . We] us. [ellipsis indicates 3-paragraph omission]
[paragraph] 9. Under this head [Considered as in Bodies] we (857)

15.11 us. . . . We] us. [ellipsis indicates 5½-paragraph omission] In
other words:—We (858)

15.12 self;] self;* [footnote:] *How much this differs from the doctrine
of Reid, Stewart, &c., who hold that in every sensation there is not
only a subjective object of sensation, but also an objective object of
perception, see Note D*, §1. (858)

15.13 once.”] once.† [4-paragraph footnote omitted] (858)

15.29 “In] But in (866n)

15.34 mediately:”] mediately. (866n)

18.13-24 “immediately . . . primary”] [see passages quoted on 13-15
above]

21.24 “In] But in (866n)

21.26 out . . . us] [not in italics] (866n)

21.26-7 our . . . relative] [not in italics] (866n)

26.5-9 “as . . . bodies,” . . . “as . . . us;” . . . “essential . . .
existing;” . . . “modes . . . not-self,” . . . “modes . . . self;”] [see
13-15 above]

26n.16 proper,” . . . “is] proper is (880)

26n.18 condition.”] condition; but every Sensation has not a Perception
proper as its conditionate—unless, what I think ought to be done, we
view the general consciousness of the locality of a sensorial affection
as a Perception proper. (880)

26n.18-19 “The fact . . . other:”] But though the fact . . . other, this
is all;—for the two cognitions, though coexistent, are not
proportionally coexistent. (880)

27n.1-2 “in . . . to one another”] It may accordingly be stated as a
general rule—That, above a certain point, the stronger the Sensation,
the weaker the Perception; and the distincter the perception the less
obtrusive the sensation; in other words—Though Perception proper and
Sensation proper exist only as they coexist, in . . . to each other.
(880)

27n.3 “The] [paragraph] 16. Using the term strictly, the (858)

27n.4 Primary” qualities “are] Primary are (858)

28n.15 philosophers” (Locke and Descartes) “we] philosophers, we (839)

33n.8 [paragraph] “That] [paragraph] 1. [first of two principles] That
(965) [Note N breaks off at the end of the passage quoted, before the
second principle is discussed]

Edition: current; Page: [543]
33n.15 The . . . knowledge.] [not in italics] (965)

33n.19 other: these] other. These (965)

33n.21 comparison”] comparison. (965)

61.11 “St.] [no paragraph] St (760)

61.11 know] know (760)

61.11 but believe] we believe (760)

61.25 a mere mode] a mode (750)

61.29 nature.”] nature, / Quæ nisi sit veri, ratio quoque falsa fit
omnis. (750)

63n.2 “the] [paragraph] IX. The ninth, is that the (763)

63n.2 knowledge.] Knowledges.* [footnote:] *Knowledges, in common use
with Bacon and our English philosophers till after the time of Locke,
ought not to be discarded. It is however unnoticed by any English
Lexicographer. (763)

65n.2 “the original data of reason,”] But reason itself must rest at
last upon authority; for the original data of reason do not rest on
reason, but are necessarily accepted by reason on the authority of what
is beyond itself. (760)

76.14 “The] For the (745)

76.16 incomprehensible . . . that is . . . we] incomprehensible. [JSM
moves back to the previous sentence] For it will argue nothing against
the trustworthiness of consciousness, that all or any of its
deliverances are inexplicable—are incomprehensible; that is, that we
(745)

80.1 “the] [paragraph] To this head [The Law of Relativity or
Integration], I may simply notice, though I cannot now explain, are to
be referred those compulsory relatives, imposed upon thought by that
great, but as yet undeveloped, law of our intellectual being, which I
have elsewhere denominated the (911)

80.1-3 That . . . necessary] That . . . necessary (911)

80.3-4 necessary.” . . . “from . . . intellect” that “we] necessary.
From . . . intellect, we (911)

113.32-3 “consciousness . . . act] [paragraph] 15.—“Consciousness . . .
act (810)

114.4-5 “all . . . immediate.”] Therefore all . . . immediate. (810)

117.34 [paragraph] “Consciousness is] [no paragraph] Consciousness also
is (932)

117.39 intensity. . . . It] [ellipsis indicates 4-sentence omission]
(932)

117.40 intension.”] intension; and as the extensive quantity of such
movements is always in the inverse ratio of its intensive, that
consciousness will be most perfect which is concentrated within the
smallest sphere. (932)

118n.15 “The] As an example of the former [something in itself
indivisible, which may be considered by the mind plural];—the (806n)

123n.48-9 “the . . . knowledge.”] [paragraph] IX. The ninth [condition
determining a class of names], is that the . . . Knowledges.*
[footnote:] *Knowledges, in common use with Bacon and our English
philosophers till after the time of Locke, ought not to be discarded. It
is however unnoticed by any English Lexicographer. (763)

129n.8 “As] For as (744)

132.3 “How] [paragraph] Limiting, therefore, our consideration to the
question of authority; how (743)

132.9 lie:”] lie. (743)

132.10 “organized] Nature is not gratuitously to be assumed to work, not
only in vain, but in counteraction of herself; our faculty of Knowledge
is not, without a ground, to be supposed an instrument of illusion; man,
unless the melancholy fact be proved, is not to be held organized (745)
[cf. entry for 133.7 below]

132.37 “Such a supposition” . . . “if] But such a supposition, if (743)

132.38 illegitimate.” “The] illegitimate. For, on the contrary, the
(743)

132.39-133.1 instance” . . . “be] instance, be (743)

133.1-2 false,” . . . “that] false, that (743)

133.4 “neganti . . . probatio.] “Neganti . . . probatio.” (745)

133.7 illusion.”] [for the conclusion of the sentence, see entry for
132.10 above]

134.3 “The] [paragraph] It is therefore manifest that we may throw
wholly out of account the (745)

134.4-5 themselves,” . . . “scepticism is confessedly impossible,”]
themselves; seeing that Edition: current; Page: [544] scepticism in
regard to them, under this limitation, is confessedly impossible; and
that it is only requisite to consider the argument from Common Sense, as
it enables us to vindicate the truth of these phænomena, viewed as
attestations of more than their own existence, seeing that they are not,
in this respect, placed beyond the possibility of doubt. (745)

136.20 “Many] I should indeed hardly have deemed that it required an
articulate statement, were it not that, in point of fact, many (749)

138.15 “The first problem of philosophy” is “to] [paragraph] The first
problem of Philosophy—and it is one of no easy accomplishment—being thus
to (752) [see next entry]

138.18-19 possession:” . . . “of no easy accomplishment;” . . .
“argument . . . sense” . . . “manifestly] possession; and the argument .
. . sense being the allegation of these feelings or beliefs as
explicated and ascertained, in proof of the relative truths and their
necessary consequences;—this argument is manifestly (752) [see also
entry above]

138.22 sense] Sense (752) [treated as printer’s error in text]

142.6 “into] He [Aristotle] did not, it may be observed, fall into
(894n)

142.8-9 thought,” . . . “to evolve the conditions under] thought. He
makes no fruitless attempt to shew the genesis of the former; far less
does he attempt to evolve the laws under (894n)

142.10 thinking;”] thinking. (894n)

153n.8-14 Natural Realism . . . themselves. . . . Both build . . . Reid]
Both build . . . Reid. . . . Natural Realism . . . themselves (817n)
[JSM has altered the order of Hamilton’s sentences]

153n.16 perceived, lurks] perceived, there lurks (817n)

153n.27 “Representative knowledge,” . . . “is] [paragraph] In a third
respect Representative knowledge is not self-sufficient; for it is (811)

156.8-10 “such . . . the reality . . . man.”] For if we modify the
obnoxious language of Descartes and Locke; and, instead of saying that
the ideas or notions of the primary qualities resemble, merely assert
that they truly represent, their objects, that is, afford us such . . .
the extended reality . . . man,—and this is certainly all that one,
probably all that either philosopher, intended,—Reid’s doctrine and
theirs would be found in perfect unison. (842)

156.18 “in their own nature occult and inconceivable,”] On this ground,
the Primary, being thought as essential to the notion of Body, are
distinguished from the Secundo-primary and Secondary, as accidental;
while the Primary and Secundo-primary, being thought as manifest or
conceivable in their own nature, are distinguished from the Secondary,
as in their own nature occult and inconceivable. (846)

172.20-1 “in . . . work,” . . . “if] Reid, therefore, as I have already
observed, (p. 129a, note,) may seem to have become doubtful of the
tendency of the doctrine advanced in his earlier work; and we ought not,
at all events, to hold him rigorously accountable for the consequences
of what, if (821)

173.32-3 “seem . . . presentationism,”] For while some of its statements
seem . . . presentationism, others, again appear only compatible with
those of an egoistical representationism. (882)

173.33 “decidedly] For my own part, I am decidedly (820)

173.35 mankind, he] mankind, that he (820)

175.24 “was] Krug is a Kantian; and as originally promulgated in his
‘Entwurf eines neuen Organons,’ 1801, (§5), his system was (797)

214n.1-2 “mental . . . move,”] If this volition become transeunt, be
carried into effect, it passes into the mental . . . move. (864n)

214n.3 “for we are,” . . . “conscious] For we are conscious (864n)

214n.5 of the limb] in the limb (865n)

219.32 ipso facto] [not in italics] (869n)

219.34 sought. The] sought, (p. 146a.)—The (869n)

219.40 involves] involve (869n)

219.41 in length] or length (869n)

Edition: current; Page: [545]
219.43 in consciousness a succession in time] to consciousness a length
in time (869n)

219.45 second or third is affirmed] second or the third be affirmed
(869n)

220.1 in length] or length (869n)

234.4-6 “The opinions,” . . . “so] The opinions so (861n)

235.3-4 eo ipso] [not in italics] (861n)

237.9 were made] were, however, made (875n)

237.10 of motive] of the motive (875n)

237.15 say whence] say from whence (875n)

237.16 proceeded. . . . The] proceeded. It is unfortunately not stated
whether he could discriminate one pain from another, say the pain of
pinching from the pain of pricking; but had this not been the case, the
notice of so remarkable a circumstance could hardly, I presume, have
been overlooked. The (875n)

238.13-14 “A perception” . . . “of] [paragraph] 25. Thus a perception of
(881)

238.16 The primary] [paragraph] 26. The primary (881)

238.17 i.e.] [not in italics] (881)

238.17 immediately know] immediately know (881)

238.22-3 “extension] [paragraph] 27. Further, in no part of the organism
have we any apprehension, any immediate knowledge, of extension (881)

238.23 magnitude;”] magnitude; perception noting only the fact given in
sensation, and sensation affording no standard, by which to measure the
dimensions given in one sentient part with those given in another. (882)

238.26 “As] For, as (882)

238.32 that.] that.* [4-sentence footnote omitted] (882)

239.9 “that] His philosophy, if that of Natural Realism, founded in the
common sense of mankind, make it incumbent on him to shew, that (842)

239.10 called up or suggested] ‘called up or suggested,’ (842)

239.11 on the occasion] on occasion (842)

239.12 we have] we really have (842)

239.12-13 as by nature we believe we have] [not in italics] (842)

255n.11 “has] For this field [of vision] has (920)

255n.13 indefinitely,”] indefinitely. (920)

255n.16 “we] But in vision, where every affection is an affection of
colour, we (920)

296n.2 “Volition] The purport of the sixth argument is not given, as
Hume, notwithstanding the usual want of precision in his language,
certainly intended it;—which was to this effect:—Volition (866n)

296n.19 determined.”] determined? (867n)

311n.3 “Though] [paragraph] In reference to both Cohesion and Gravity, I
may notice, that though (852)

311n.4 external] internal (852)

311n.5-6 we . . . force] [not in italics] (852)

311n.10 de facto] [not in italics] (853)

362n.2 “A] [paragraph] 10.—A (809)

362n.2 object] object (809)

362n.3 act] act (809)

362n.5 mediate] (mediate) (809)

362n.7 object] object (809)

362n.8 act] act (809)

362n.10-11 producing process] producing process (809)

423n.8 “remains] [paragraph] Repulsion (to take them [Gravity, Cohesion,
Inertia, Repulsion] backwards)—a resistance to the approximation and
contact of other matter—we come only by a late and learned experience to
view as an attribute of body, and of the elements of body; nay, so far
is it from being a character essential in our notion of matter, it
remains (852)

423n.10 “As] For as (852)

Edition: current; Page: [546]
423n.11-424n.1 action . . . action] notion . . . notion (852)

447.21 “many] I should indeed hardly have deemed that it required an
articulate statement, were it not that, in point of fact, many (749)

447.23 these] their (749)

447.24 all their] their whole (749)

447.24-5 these same philosophers were (strange to say) not disposed to
admit;”] these data the same philosophers were (strange to say!) not
disposed to admit. (749)

— “Foot-notes to Reid,” in The Works of Thomas Reid. Ed. William
Hamilton. Edinburgh: Maclachlan and Stewart; London: Longman, Brown,
Green and Longmans, 1846.

note: the references and quotations derive from footnotes provided by
Hamilton in this ed. of Reid’s Works. “Foot-note to Reid” is JSM’s usual
reference, and we have adopted it throughout, regularizing a few
slightly different forms. See also Hamilton’s “Dissertations on Reid,”
above.

quoted: 21, 21-2, 26n, 112n, 129n, 138n, 172, 173, 236n, 302, 322, 323n,
373, 421n, 424, 442n, 443, 444, 463n, 500

referred to: 29-30, 76n, 307n, 356n, 442, 448, 468

21.28 what they are in themselves,] “what they are in themselves,”
(313n)

21.29 relative notion] “relative notion,” (313n)

21.30-1 absolutely and in themselves] absolutely and in themselves
(313n)

21.31 out of relation] out of relation (313n)

21.33-4 qualities or phænomena] qualities or phænomena (323n)

21.34-22.1 in relation to our faculties] in relation to our faculties
(323n)

26n.7-8 objective . . . subjective] objective . . . subjective (313n)

26n.9-10 perception . . . primary] perception . . . primary (313n)

112n.29 “It] But it (590n)

112n.30-2 than . . . other] [not in italics] (590n)

129n.5 “In] For, in (442n)

129n.7 consciousness] consciousness (442n)

138n.1 principle,” . . . “has] principle has (300n)

138n.2-6 other. . . . It . . . speculations. . . . And yet . . .
itself.] other; and yet . . . itself. To trace the influence of this
assumption would be, in fact, in a certain sort, to write the history of
philosophy; for, though this influence has never yet been historically
developed, it . . . speculations. [JSM has moved latter half of first
sentence to the end of the quotation] (300n)

172.16 extension] extension (129n)

173.5 “appears] This paragraph appears (310n)

236n.5 “perception of externality”] In the case of Cheselden—that in
which the blindness previous to the recovery of sight was most perfect,
and, therefore, the most instructive upon record—the patient, though he
had little or no perception of distance, i.e. of the degree of
externality, had still a perception of that externality absolutely.
(177n)

236n.7-11 “to touch . . . skin.” . . . “a . . . organ,” . . . “as . . .
eyes.”] The objects, he said, seemed to “touch his eyes, as what he felt
did his skin;” but they did not appear to him as if in his eyes, far
less as a mere affection of the organ. (177n) [JSM has altered the order
of the elements of the sentence]

302.25 “that the opposing parties are really at one.”] The opposite
parties are substantially at one. (412n)

322.17 “the words Conception, Concept, Notion] The words Conception,
Concept, Notion (360n)

322.18 in imagination] in the imagination (360n)

323n.6 “the . . . notion,”] By verbal definition, is meant the more
accurate determination of the signification of a word; by real, the . .
. notion. (691n)

373.5 “because . . . contradiction.”] Of the former [“the reality of the
phænomenon”], scepticism is impossible, because . . . contradiction.
(713)

Edition: current; Page: [547]
421n.7 “In] For, in (236n)

421n.7 et veræ sint] “et veræ sint” (236n)

424.28-30 “an exposition of the contradictions involved in our notion of
motion,” . . . “fallacy has not yet been detected.“] The fallacy of
Zeno’s exposition of the contradictions involved in our notion of
motion, has not yet been detected. (102n)

442n.6 “Is] But is (602n)

442n.7 agent] [not in italics] (602n)

442n.10 cause . . . motive] cause . . . motive (602n)

442n.10-11 rational . . . cause] rational . . . cause (602n)

443.24 are at] are thus at (602n)

443.36 Liberty.”] Liberty; to say nothing of many contradictories,
neither of which can be thought, but one of which must, on the laws of
Contradiction and Excluded Middle, necessarily be. (602n)

444.7 influence to action,] “influence to action,” (608n)

444.25 comprehensible] comprehensible (610n)

444.27-8 “But,” . . . “was] But was (611n)

444.30 dispositions, and tendencies] dispositions, tendencies (611n)

444.37 in] in (611n)

444.38 to the notion] to notion (611n)

463n.6-7 “it . . . cause.”] [see quotation at 442n.6-11 and its
collation]

500.1 was] were (309n)

— Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic. Ed. Henry Longueville Mansel and
John Veitch. 4 vols. Edinburgh and London: Blackwood, 1859-60.

quoted: 16-17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 31, 48, 61, 62, 65, 76, 76n-7n,
79, 80-1, 82-3, 84, 110, 111, 112, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 118n, 119,
119-20, 120, 120-1, 121, 122, 123n, 126-8, 128, 130, 130n, 131, 133,
134n, 136, 137n, 138n, 142, 143, 147n, 149, 150, 150-1, 151, 152, 158,
158-9, 159, 160-1, 161, 162, 162n-3n, 166, 176, 188-9, 193, 223, 223-4,
224, 228, 228-9, 230, 251n, 252, 252-3, 253-4, 254, 256, 260, 272, 272n,
273, 273n, 274, 274n, 275, 276n, 277, 278, 279, 280, 281, 281n, 286,
286-7, 287, 287-8, 289, 290, 291, 291-2, 292, 293, 293n, 294, 295, 296,
297n, 302, 303, 304-5, 305, 305-6, 306-7, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311-12,
315-16, 319, 319-20, 320n, 321, 321-2, 322, 323n, 324, 325, 325-6, 326,
327, 328, 329, 330, 330-1, 331, 332, 335, 336n, 338, 342, 346, 348, 349,
349n-50n, 350, 351, 352, 352-3, 353, 354, 357, 358, 358n-9n, 361, 362,
364, 368, 369n, 372, 372n, 373, 374, 375, 376, 377, 379, 380, 382, 383n,
384, 385, 391-2, 392, 393, 393n, 399n-400n, 403, 404-5, 407, 407-8, 408,
410, 411-12, 416, 421, 422, 424, 427n-8n, 430, 431, 432, 433, 434, 435,
437-8, 438, 440, 440n, 442, 445, 445n, 464, 487, 490n, 491n, 494n, 496n,
499, 501, 503, 503n

referred to: cviii, 3, 30n, 78, 86n, 89, 113, 134, 153n, 161, 163, 168,
174, 174n, 283, 286n, 316n, 337n, 356, 365, 378, 392n, 400n-1n, 409,
413, 418, 422n, 437, 448, 473n, 481, 486, 488, 491, 494, 495, 502-3

16.25 “now] [paragraph] But the meaning of these terms will be best
illustrated by now (I, 136)

17.24 said] says (I, 138)

18.4 “had] But were the number of our faculties coextensive with the
modes of being,—had (I, 153)

20.4 “analogous to our faculties,”] [JSM gives two references]
[paragraph] In regard to the first assertion, it is evident that nothing
exists for us, except in so far as it is known to us, and that nothing
is known to us, except certain properties or modes of existence, which
are relative or analogous to our faculties. (I, 141)] We know, and can
know, nothing absolutely and in itself: all that we know is existence in
certain special forms or modes, and these, likewise, only in so far as
they may be analogous to our faculties. (I, 153)

20.9 “possess] We may suppose existence to have a thousand modes;—but
these thousand modes are all to us as zero, unless we possess (I, 153)

21.22 “In] In this proposition, the term relative is opposed to the term
absolute; and, therefore, in (I, 136-7)

Edition: current; Page: [548]
21.23 nothing] [not in italics] (I, 137)

21.24 without . . . faculties] [not in italics] (I, 137)

22.19 “From] [paragraph] From (I, 148)

22.20 said,” . . . “you] said, you (I, 148)

22.22 absolutely in] absolutely and in (I, 148)

22.24 faculties.”] faculties; [sentence continues and is completed with
passage quoted at 22.29-31] (I, 148)

22.30 assented] presented (I, 148)

22.31 those] these (I, 148)

23.3 [paragraph] In] [no paragraph] In (I, 146)

23.22 itself. I] itself.α [footnote omitted] [paragraph] I (I, 147)

31.27-8 “that . . . qualities,” . . . “the phænomena . . . inhere.”]
[see 17 above] (I, 137, 138)

61.7 [paragraph] “The] [paragraph] 2°, That the (II, App. iii, 530)

62.23 “great axiom”] [see 16 above] (I, 136)

65.3-5 “by . . . believed,”] [see 61 above] (II, App. iii, 531)

76.8 else.”] else; but to do this of the infinite is to think the
infinite as finite, which is contradictory and absurd. (III, 102)

76.11-12 “to conceive the possibility” . . . “conceiving . . . reason.”]
When I say that a thing may be, of which I cannot conceive the
possibility, (that is, by conceiving . . . reason), I only say that
thought is limited; but, within its limits, I do not deny, I do not
subvert, its truth. (III, 100)

79.8-9 conceive the proposition that A is not] enounce the proposition,
A is not (III, 113)

80.8 “All] For if we take a comprehensive view of the phænomena of
thought, we shall find that all (III, 100)

80.8 think . . . lies] think, that is, all that is within the
jurisdiction of the law of Reason and Consequent, lies (III, 100)

80.10 one] the one (III, 100)

80.15 unthinkable . . . we] unthinkable, and, on the hypothesis in
question, all, therefore, equally impossible, we (III, 101)

80.17 Extension may] Extension, then, may (III, 101)

80.18 contradictions] contradictories (III, 101)

80.19 and circumference] a circumference (III, 101)

81.19 inconceivable . . . .] [ellipsis indicates 6-sentence omission]
(III, 103)

81.20 “It] But to return whence we have been carried, it (III, 103)

81.23 we] if we (III, 103)

81.24-5 admitted. . . . [paragraph] It] admitted, the hypothesis is
manifestly false, that proposes the subjective or formal law of Reason
and Consequent as the criterion of real or objective possibility.
[paragraph] It (III, 103)

81.30 opposites,”] opposites, they again afford a similar refutation of
the hypothesis in question. (III, 104)

82.38-83.1 “we . . . absurd.”] [see 76, 80 above] (III, 102)

110.24 “the recognition . . . its own acts or affections;”]
Consciousness is thus, on the one hand, the recognition . . . its acts
and affections;—in other words, the self-affirmation, that certain
modifications are known by me, and that these modifications are mine.
(I, 193)

110.25 “all] In this all (I, 201)

111.3 is palpably] is, therefore, palpably (I, 212)

111.5 that I . . . what I] that I . . . what I (I, 212)

111.17 my own] my (I, 228)

111.21 It] [paragraph] It (I, 228)

111.38-9 “not only false,” but “involves . . . terms.”] [paragraph] I
proceed, therefore, to show that Dr. Reid’s assertion of memory being an
immediate knowledge of the past, is not only false, but that it involves
. . . terms.α [footnote:] αCompare Discussions, p. 50.—Ed. (I, 218)

111.40 “exists only in the now;”] Every act, and consequently every act
of knowledge, exists only as it now exists; and as it exists only in the
now, it can be cognisant only of a now-existent object. (I, 219)

Edition: current; Page: [549]
112.6-7 been. . . . All] been. I remember an event I saw, —the landing
of George IV. at Leith. This remembrance is only a consciousness of
certain imaginations, involving the conviction that these imaginations
now represent ideally what I formerly really experienced. All (I, 220-1)

112.8 belief. . . . So] [ellipsis indicates 13-sentence omission] (I,
220-1)

112.8 far is] far, therefore, is (I, 221)

112.11-12 past. . . . We] past. [ellipsis indicates that JSM moves back
3 sentences (the last of which he omits)] But, though in memory we must
admit the reality of the representation and belief, as facts of
consciousness, we (I, 220-1)

112.14 delusion:”] delusion. (I, 221)

112.27-30 organ:” . . . “It] organ.β [footnote:] βOn this point, see
Adam Smith, Essays on Philosophical Subjects—Ancient Logics and
Metaphysics, p. 153. Cf. Of the External Senses, p. 289, (edit.
1800.)—Ed. [text:] In fact, if we look alternately with each, we have a
different object in our right, and a different object in our left, eye.
It (II, 153)

112.36 phænomena] phænomenon (II, 154)

114.11-12 “accompanied . . . been.”] [see 112 above] (I, 219)

114.14 “contained”] This [Hamilton’s definition of consciousness] being
admitted, and professing, as we do, to prove that consciousness is the
one generic faculty of knowledge, we, consequently, must maintain that
all knowledge is immediate, and only of the actual or present,—in other
words, that what is called mediate knowledge, knowledge of the past,
knowledge of the absent, knowledge of the non-actual or possible, is
either no knowledge at all, or only a knowledge contained in, and
evolved out of, an immediate knowledge of what is now existent and
actually present to the mind. (I, 217-18)

115.15-16 “the . . . affections,”] [see 110 above] (I, 193)

116.41 “in . . . existence.”] But, on the other hand, consciousness is
not to be viewed as anything different from these modifications
themselves, but is, in . . . existence, or of their existence within the
sphere of intelligence. (I, 193)

117.6 “the] Consciousness is thus, on the one hand, the recognition by
the mind or ego of its acts and affections;—in other words, the (I, 193)

117.8-9 “is . . . from” the “modifications themselves.”] [see entry for
116.41 above] (I, 193)

117.12-15 “consciousness and knowledge” . . . “are] Thus, in the present
instance, consciousness and knowledge are (I, 194-5)

117.17 establishment. . . . Though] establishment. Knowledge is a
relation, and every relation supposes two terms. Thus, in the relation
in question, there is, on the one hand, a subject of knowledge,—that is,
the knowing mind,—and on the other, there is an object of
knowledge,—that is, the thing known; and the knowledge itself is the
relation between these two terms. Now though (I, 195)

117.24 permanent] prominent (I, 195)

118n.13 “The] Here the (I, 194)

119.2-3 “a process of reasoning,”] [see 112 above] (II, 153)

119.15 is palpably] is, therefore, palpably (I, 212)

119.17-18 relative. The knowledge . . . object.”] relative. [JSM moves
back a page and a half] The whole question, therefore, turns upon the
proof or disproof of this principle,—for if it can be shown that the
knowledge . . . object, it follows that it is impossible to make
consciousness conversant about the intellectual operations to the
exclusion of their objects. (I, 211)

119.18-19 “It . . . object,”] [see entry for 119.17-18 above] (I, 211)

119.30-5 “that I can know that [I believe] without knowing what I
[believe]—or that I can know the [belief] without knowing what the
[belief] is about: for example, that I am conscious of [remembering a
past event] without being conscious of [the past event remembered]; that
I am conscious of [believing in God], without being conscious [of the
God believed in].”] They [Reid and Stewart] maintain that I can know
that I know, without knowing what I know,—or that I can know the
knowledge without knowing what the knowledge is about; for example, that
I am conscious of perceiving a book without being conscious of the book
perceived,—that I am conscious of remembering its contents without being
conscious of these contents remembered,—and so forth. (I, 212)

Edition: current; Page: [550]
119.35-120.2 “an . . . knowledge” . . . “only . . . object,” . . .
“manifest” . . . “that . . . correlative.”] [see 111 above] (I, 228)

120.33-4 “we may be . . . know,” and that “it] We may, however, be . . .
know, and it (IV, 70)

120.35-6 and modern] and in modern (IV, 70)

120.37 belief,”] belief. (IV, 70)

120.37 “But] [paragraph] But (IV, 73)

121.3 “The] [paragraph] The (IV, 73)

121.4 so] in so (IV, 73)

122.8 “The] Now, the (IV, 73)

122.8 object” . . . “is] object is (IV, 73)

123n.23-4 “one . . . solution.”] [see 121 above] (IV, 73)

126.18 is that] is thus,—that (I, 271)

126.24 them.] them.α [footnote:] αSee Reid’s Works, Note A, p. 743, et
seq.—Ed. (I, 271)

127.15 Stewart. . . . [paragraph] With] Stewart.α [ellipsis indicates
omission of footnote and 5-sentence quotation from Stewart] [paragraph]
With (I, 273)

128.5 not-self.”] not-self.α [footnote referring to Buffier omitted] (I,
175)

128.7 “it] It (I, 276)

128.10 veracity.”] veracity.α [footnote:] αSee Reid’s Works, pp.
743-754, et seq.—Ed. (I, 276)

128.25-6 “the . . . affections.” [see entry for 110.24 above] (I, 193)

130.13-14 “given . . . consciousness” . . . “to . . . evidence.”]
[paragraph] Under this first law [of Parcimony], let it, therefore, be
laid down, in the first place, that by a fact of consciousness properly
so called, is meant a primary and universal fact of our intellectual
being; and, in the second, that such facts are of two kinds,—1°, The
facts given . . . consciousness itself; and, 2°, The facts which
consciousness does not at once give, but to . . . evidence. (I, 275)

130.15 “the veracity of consciousness,”] Philosophy is only a systematic
evolution of the contents of consciousness, by the instrumentality of
consciousness; it, therefore, necessarily supposes, in both respects,
the veracity of consciousness. (I, 276-7)

130n.6-7 “is . . . certainty.] ‘The Criterion of truth is . . .
certainty.’ [Hamilton is quoting himself] (IV, 69)

131.6 “nearly . . . philosophers”] [see 127 above] (I, 272)

133.33-4 “to . . . evidence.”] [see 130 above] (I, 275)

134n.3-6 “Religious disbelief . . . connexion.” . . . “must ever be a
matter” . . . “of regret,” . . . “reprobation.”] I would, therefore,
earnestly request of you to bear in mind, that religious disbelief . . .
connection; and that while the one must ever be a matter of reprobation
and regret, the other is in itself deserving of applause. (I, App. i,
394)

136.17 “Errors” . . . “intelligence as] Errors may, however, arise
either from overlooking the laws or necessary principles which it does
contain; or by attributing to it [intelligence], as (IV, 137)

137n.11 “Nothing,” . . . “can] Nothing can (II, 129)

137n.17 organ. . . . Through] organ; and that is true which Democritus
of old asserted, that all our senses are only modifications of touch.α
[footnote:] αSee below, vol. ii, lect. xxvii, p. 152.—Ed. [text:]
Through (II, 130)

137n.18 retina.”] retina; what we add to this perception must not be
taken into account. (II, 130)

138n.11 “I] [paragraph] I (IV, 95)

138n.17 “relevation” . . . “naturally clear,”] But admitting all this, I
am still bold enough to maintain, that consciousness affords not merely
the only revelation, and only criterion of philosophy, but that this
revelation is naturally clear,—this criterion, in itself, unerring. (I,
266)

142.1 “There] In the second place, there (IV, 92)

142.4 knowledge. . . . To] knowledge. Now, from both of these
considerations, it is evident that to (IV, 92)

Edition: current; Page: [551]
142.35 “that] [paragraph] The First of these rules [“which afford the
exclusive conditions of psychological legitimacy”] is,—That (I, 268)

143.2 “reduce it to a generalization from experience.”] Whenever,
therefore, in our analysis of the intellectual phænomena, we arrive at
an element which we cannot reduce to a generalisation from experience,
but which lies at the root of all experience, and which we cannot,
therefore, resolve into any higher principle,—this we properly call a
fact of consciousness. (I, 270)

143.3 “character of necessity.”] [paragraph] But, in the second place,
this, its character of ultimate priority, supposes its character of
necessity. (I, 270)

147n.7-11 “Whenever . . . consciousness.”] [see entry for 143.2 above]
(I, 270)

147n.12-14 [no paragraph] “A . . . belief”] [paragraph] A . . . belief.
(I, 271)

149.4-6 “No philosopher . . . consciousness.”] [paragraph] But, though
this be too evident to admit of doubt, and though no philosopher . . .
consciousness, we find, nevertheless, that its testimony has been
silently overlooked, and systems established upon principles in direct
hostility to the primary data of intelligence. (I, 277)

149.6-8 “that . . . dependent.”] [beginning of Lecture XVI] On the
principle, which no one has yet been found bold enough formally to deny,
and which, indeed, requires only to be understood to be
acknowledged,—viz. that . . . dependent,—it is manifest, at once and
without further reasoning, that no philosophical theory can pretend to
truth except that single theory which comprehends and develops the fact
of consciousness on which it founds, without retrenchment, distortion,
or addition. (I, 285)

149.10 “the] [paragraph] From these examples, the truth of the position
I maintain is manifest,—that a fact of consciousness can only be
rejected on the supposition of falsity, and that, the falsity of one
fact of consciousness being admitted, the (I, 283)

149.27 and obey] and to obey (I, 284)

150.8 “We] [no paragraph] I shall commence with this great fact to which
I have already alluded,—that we (I, 288)

150.8-9 perception,” . . . “of] perception of (I, 288)

150.18 Such] [paragraph] Such (I, 288)

150.20 of our own] of their own (I, 288)

150.20-1 minds.” [paragraph] We] minds. [JSM moves ahead 4 pages] [no
paragraph] We (I, 288, 292)

150.22 quality] duality [treated as typographical error in this edition]
(I, 292)

150.33-7 consciousness.” . . . [paragraph] “Philosophers] consciousness.
[no paragraph] Philosophers (I, 292)

151.1 integrity.] integrity.α [footnote:] αSee the Author’s Suppl.
Disser. to Reid’s Works, Note C.—Ed. (I, 293)

151.4 philosopher] philosopherβ [footnote:] βThis philosopher is
doubtless Peter Poiret. John Sergeant is subsequently referred to by Sir
W. Hamilton, as holding a similar doctrine in a paradoxical form. See
below, vol. ii. pp. 92, 124.—Ed (I, 293)

151.6 As] [no paragraph] As (I, 293)

151.9-11 Dualism.” . . . [paragraph] “In] Dualism. [paragraph] In (I,
293)

151.14 rejection] rejections (I, 293)

151.15 shown that] shown you, that (I, 293)

151.16-20 impossible.” . . . “But] impossible. But (I, 293)

151.24 deception;” . . . “that] deception,—that (I, 293)

151.32 manifestation] manifestations (I, 294)

151.35 philosophy. . . . But] philosophy, for Oken’s deduction of the
universe from the original nothing,α [footnote:] αSee Oken’s
Physiophilosophy, translated for the Ray Society by Tulk, § 31-43.—Ed.
[text:]—the nothing being equivalent to the Absolute or God, is only the
paradoxical foundation of a system of realism; and, in ancient
philosophy, we know too little of the book of Gorgias the Sophist,
entitled Περὶ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος, ἢ περὶ φύσεως,β [footnote:] βSee Sextus
Empiricus, Adv. Math. vii. 65.—Ed. [text:]—Concerning Nature or the
Non-Existent,—to be able to affirm whether it were maintained by him as
a dogmatic and bona fide doctrine. But (I, 294)

Edition: current; Page: [552]
151.38 result.”] result.γ [footnote:] γSee a remarkable passage in the
Bestimmung des Menschen, p. 174, (Werke, vol. ii. p. 245), translated by
Sir W. Hamilton, Reid’s Works, p. 129.—Ed. (I, 294)

152.9 “that] They [philosophical Unitarians or Monists] reject, however,
the evidence of consciousness to their antithesis in existence, and
maintain that (I, 296)

152.16 “are] “The Dualists, of whom we are now first speaking, are (I,
295)

152.38 dualist] dualistα [3-sentence footnote concerning Aristotle’s
opinion omitted] (I, 296)

152.43 Descartes.”] Descartes.β [footnote:] βSee the Author’s
Discussions, p. 57 seq.—Ed. (I, 296)

158.24 “that] [beginning of Lecture XXIV] In my last Lecture, having
concluded the review of Reid’s Historical Account of Opinions on
Perception, and of Brown’s attack upon that account, I proceeded to the
question,—Is Reid’s own doctrine of perception a scheme of Natural
Realism, that is, did he accept in its integrity the datum of
consciousness,—that we are immediately cognitive both of the phænomena
of matter and of the phænomena of mind; or did he, like Brown, and the
greater number of more recent philosophers, as Brown assumes, hold only
the finer form of the representative hypothesis, which supposes that
(II, 86)

158.28 non-self.”] not-self? (II, 86)

158.31 You will remark,” . . . “that] [no paragraph] You will remark,
likewise, that (II, 106)

158.36 our] an (II, 106)

158.36 the phænomenon] his [Brown’s] phænomenon (II, 106)

159.1 are conscious] are there conscious (II, 106)

159.5-8 exists.” . . . “Nor] exists. [no paragraph] Nor (II, 106)

159.13 “Mark] [paragraph] But mark (II, 138)

160.27 Every] [no paragraph] Every (I, 219)

160.28 Now] now (I, 219)

160.28-9 object. But] object. Memory is an act,—an act of knowledge; it
can, therefore, be cognisant only of a now-existent object. But (I, 219)

160.32 true one, it] true, it (I, 219)

160.34-6 a . . . been] [not in italics] (I, 219)

160.38-9 a . . . experienced] [not in italics] (I, 219)

160.43-4 Of . . . nothing] [not in italics] (I, 220)

161.1-2 as . . . modification] [not in italics] (I, 220)

161.5-6 only . . . knowledge] [not in italics] (I, 220)

162.12-13 which . . . perceive] [not in italics] (II, 154)

162n.11 “Real truth is the] [paragraph] Real truth is, therefore, the
(IV, 67)

163n.1-2 new.” . . . “But] new. But (IV, 67)

163n.11-15 itself.” . . . “All] itself. All (IV, 68)

163n.16 lie:”] lie,—a supposition which is not, without the strongest
evidence, to be admitted; and the argument is as competent against the
sceptic in our present condition, as it would be were we endowed with
any other conceivable form of Acquisitive and Cognitive Faculties. (IV,
68)

166.1 “we . . . representation:”] [see 159 above] (II, 106)

176.23-4 “The object,” . . . “is in this case given] In the latter case,
the object, which may be called the subject-object, is given (II, 432)

193.22-4 “religious . . . connexion] [see entry for 134n.3-6 above] (I,
App. i, 394)

223.20-1 “a . . . scholar,”] [paragraph] This doctrine [that vision is
exclusively responsible for the perception of extension and figure] is
maintained among others by Platner,—a . . . scholar. (II, 173)

223.30 exteriority; in] exteriority, (oertliches Auseinanderseyn), in
(II, 174)

223.34 time . . . space] [not in italics] (II, 174)

223.36 to another] to some other (II, 174)

223.41 kinds] [not in italics] (II, 174)

Edition: current; Page: [553]
224.1 differences] difference (II, 175)

228.32 conceiving] perceiving (II, 167) [treated as a typographical
error in this edition]

229.3 figure. These] figure. [paragraph] These (II, 168)

229.5-6 discussion”. . . . “And] discussion. And (II, 168)

230.32-3 “It is not,” . . . “all] And here you will observe, it is not
all (II, 160)

251n.13 “Those] This law may be thus enounced,—Those (II, 238)

252.1 “whether] Of these [“the vital interests of philosophy”] the first
that I shall touch upon, is the problem;—Whether (II, 144)

252.34 one into] into one (II, 147) [treated as a typographical error in
this edition]

253.18 into mind] into the mind (II, 148) [treated as a typographical
error in this edition]

253.42 “ingenious” . . . “has] [paragraph] the same conclusion is
attained, through a somewhat different process, by Mr James Mill, in his
ingenious Analysis of the Phænomena of the Human Mind. This author,
following Hartley and Priestley, has (II, 146)

254.3-5 laws,” . . . “account . . . principle.”] laws. According to Mr
Mill, the necessity under which we lie of thinking that one
contradictory excludes another,—that a thing cannot at once be and not
be, is only the result of association and custom.β [footnote:] βChap.
iii. p. 75.—Ed. [text:] It is not, therefore, to be marvelled at, that
he should account . . . principle; and this he accordingly does.γ
[footnote:] γChap. iii. p. 68.—Ed. (II, 146)

256.4 “in] [paragraph] Now in opposition to this doctrine [James Mill’s
law of association], nothing appears to me clearer than the first
alternative,—and that, in (II, 149)

256.7-8 “If . . . doctrine” . . . “were] [no paragraph] If . . .
doctrine were (II, 149)

256.15 perception] perceptions (II, 149) [treated as a typographical
error in this edition]

256.23 results] result (II, 149) [treated as a typographical error in
this edition]

256.28 constituted] constituent (II, 150) [treated as a typographical
error in this edition]

260.18 experience.”] experience; our whole empirical knowledge is,
therefore, a merely accidental possession of the mind. (IV, 74)

272.4 “Whether] The question I refer to is, Whether (I, 338)

272.7-9 “the . . . absurd;”] This is the most general expression of a
problem which has hardly been mentioned, far less mooted, in this
country; and when it has attracted a passing notice, the . . . absurd.
(I, 338)

272n.2 “Every act . . . consciousness”] You will recollect that, when
treating of Consciousness in general, I stated to you that consciousness
necessarily involves a judgment; and as every act . . . consciousness,
every act of mind, consequently, involves a judgment.α [footnote
omitted] (II, 277)

272n.7-8 “We must . . . it” . . . “can] We may say of the mental state
of perception too, in his [Reid’s] own language, as indeed we must . . .
it can (II, 73)

273n.5 “This is certainly,” . . . “an] That, in the interval, when out
of consciousness, these cognitions do continue to subsist in the mind,
is certainly an (II, 209)

273n.10-11 “an . . . self-active powers] But the mental activity, the
act of knowledge, of which I now speak, is more than this; it is an . .
. self-active power (II, 211-12) [Hamilton is quoting from Schmid]

274n.3 “Every . . . can be neither] To explain, therefore, the
disappearance of our mental activities, it is only requisite to explain
their weakening or enfeeblement,—which may be attempted in the following
way:—Every . . . can neither be (II, 213) [Hamilton is quoting from
Schmid]

274n.15-16 “Mind, howbeit . . . independence.”] Nor can it be argued,
that the limitations to which the Retentive, or rather the Reproductive,
Faculty is subjected in its energies, in consequence of its bodily
relations, prove the absolute dependence of memory on organisation, and
legitimate the explanation of this faculty by corporeal agencies; for
the incompetency of this inference can be shown from the contradiction
in which it stands to the general laws of mind, which, howbeit . . .
independence.”α [footnote:] αH. Schmid, Versuch einer Metaphysik [p.
235-6.—Ed.] (II, 217-18) [conclusion of Hamilton’s quotation from
Schmid]

Edition: current; Page: [554]
274.1 contains systems] contains certain systems (I, 339)

274.9-13 extinguished.” . . . “in . . . of actually] extinguished. For
example, there are cases in . . . of accurately (I, 340)

275.4 “mental] [paragraph] The problem, then, in regard to this class
is,—Are there, in ordinary, mental (I, 347)

275.7-8 “that . . . of;”] [paragraph] In the question proposed, I am not
only strongly inclined to the affirmative,—nay, I do not hesitate to
maintain, that . . . of,—that our whole knowledge, in fact, is made up
of the unknown and incognisable. (I, 348)

275.9 “the] And without dealing in any general speculation, I shall at
once descend to the special evidence which appears to me, not merely to
warrant, but to necessitate the conclusion, that the (I, 349)

275.15-18 “they are . . . zero.” . . . “must . . . unperceived,” . . .
“When] They are . . . zero. But it is evident, that each half must . . .
unperceived; for as the perceived whole is nothing but the union of the
unperceived halves, so the perception,—the perceived affection itself of
which we are conscious,—is only the sum of two modifications, each of
which severally eludes our consciousness. When (I, 350)

275.29-31 When . . . sea, “this] When . . . sea,—what are the
constituents of the total perception of which we are conscious? This (I,
351)

275.32 something. . . . If] something. The noise of the sea is the
complement of the noise of its several waves;—/ποντίων τε
κυμάτων/Ἀνηριθμον γέλασμα.α [footnote:] αÆschylus, Prometheus, l.
89.—Ed. [text:] and if (I, 351)

276n.1 “In] As, to take an example from vision,—in the external
perception of a stationary object, a certain space,—an expanse of
surface, is necessary to the minimum visible, in other words, an object
of sight cannot come into consciousness unless it be of a certain size;
in like manner, in (I, 369)

276n.4 consciousness.”] consciousness; and as time is divisible ad
infinitum, whatever minimum be taken, there must be admitted to be,
beyond the cognisance of consciousness, intervals of time, in which, if
mental agencies be performed, these will be latent to consciousness. (I,
369-70)

276n.4-6 “It cannot . . . sensation.”] Taking, then, their difference in
degree, and supposing that the degree of the impression determines the
degree of the sensation, it cannot . . . sensation: but this is
undeniable, that, above a certain limit, perception declines, in
proportion as sensation rises. (II, 101-2)

277.7 It] [no paragraph] Now it (I, 352)

277.28 immediately] mediately (I, 353) [treated as a typographical error
in this edition]

278.4 “our acquired dexterities and habits.”] [paragraph] Let us now
turn to another class of phænomena, which in like manner are capable of
an adequate explanation only on the theory I have advanced;—I mean the
operations resulting from our Acquired Dexterities and Habits. (I, 355)

278.21-2 “violates . . . consciousness.” “Consciousness] But, in the
second place, it [assuming a state of consciousness not remembered]
violates . . . consciousness. Consciousness (I, 354)

278.24 “Of] But of (I, 355)

278.26 ideas of A] ideas A (I, 355) [treated as a typographical error in
this edition]

279.11-12 mind,” . . . “that] mind, that (I, 368)

279.13 memory. Vivid] memory. Memory and consciousness are thus in the
direct ratio of each other. On the one hand, looking from cause to
effect,—vivid (I, 368-9)

279.14 memory.”] memory; no consciousness, no memory: and, on the other,
looking from effect to cause,—long memory, vivid consciousness; short
memory, faint consciousness; no memory, no consciousness. (I, 369)

280.25-31 “would . . . conclusions:” . . . “serious meditation” . . .
“without . . . fatigue:” . . . “each . . . process.”] In the present
instance, its [Stewart’s doctrine of real but forgotten consciousness]
admission would . . . conclusions. Take the case of a person reading.
Now, all of you must have experienced, if ever under the necessity of
reading aloud, that, if the matter be uninteresting, your thoughts,
while you are going on in the performance of your Edition: current;
Page: [555] task, are wholly abstracted from the book and its subject,
and you are perhaps deeply occupied in a train of serious meditation.
Here the process of reading is performed without interruption, and with
the most punctual accuracy; and, at the same time, the process of
meditation is carried on without . . . fatigue. Now this, on Mr
Stewart’s doctrine, would seem impossible, for what does his theory
suppose? It supposes that separate acts of concentrated consciousness or
attention, are bestowed on each . . . process. (I, 360)

280.37-8 “concentrated consciousness or attention,”] [see entry for
280.25-31 above] (I, 360)

281n.9 restricted] astricted (II, 258) [treated as a typographical error
in this edition]

281n.14 our nature] their nature (II, 258)

281.12-14 “the . . . each;”] This law is, that the . . . each, and
consequently the less vivid and distinct will be the information it
obtains of the several objects.β [footnote omitted] (I, 237)

281.17-18 “the train of serious meditation”] [see entry for 280.25-31
above] (I, 360)

286.2 “some philosophers who, instead] Nor is this superfluous, for we
shall find that some philosophers, instead (II, 376)

286.9-10 “When we . . . aware,” . . . “of] αWhen [footnote:] αCf.
Discussions, p. 609.—Ed. [text:] we . . . aware of (II, 377)

286.10 exist] be (II, 377)

286.11 does this] does the (II, 377)

286.11 that it has a cause] that it has a cause (II, 377)

286.20 reverti,”] reverti,”β [footnote:] βPersius, iii. 84. [Cf. Rixner,
Geschichte der Philosophie, v. i. p. 83, § 62.] (II, 377)

286.24 as] an (II, 377)

286.25 and an alkali] and alkali (II, 377) [treated as a typographical
error in this edition]

287.1 Put] But (II, 377)

287.2 those] these (II, 377)

287.3 constituents, either] constituents, and these constituents again
of simpler elements, either (II, 378)

287.6-7 to the] to their (II, 378) [treated as a typographical error in
this edition]

287.10 interit,”] interit,”α [footnote:] αOvid, Met. xv. 165.—Ed. (II,
378)

287.17-18 “not . . . mind,”] [paragraph] The eighth [doctrine regarding
the principle of causality] and last opinion is that which regards the
judgment of causality as derived; and derives it not . . . mind; in a
word, from the principle of the Conditioned. (II, 397)

287.31 “We are . . . construe in] In short, we are . . . construe it in
(II, 405)

287.35 the world] a world (II, 405)

287.39-288.1 Can . . . alone] [not in italics] (II, 406)

288.8 retraction] retractation (II, 406) [treated as a typographical
error in this edition]

289.34-5 “complement of existence”] [see 286 above] (II, 377)

290.2-3 “law of the Conditioned,”] The law of mind, that all that is
positively inconceivable, lies in the interval between two inconceivable
extremes, and which, however palpable when stated, has never been
generalised, as far as I know, by any philosopher, I call the Law or
Principle of the Conditioned. (II, 404)

291.21-2 “professes . . . explanation evacuates] Brown professes . . .
explanation, he evacuates (II, 384)

291.37-8 “concurring . . . effect.”] [paragraph] But, in the second
place, as every effect is only produced by the concurrence of at least
two causes, (and by cause, be it observed, I mean everything without
which the effect could not be realised), and as these concurring . . .
effect, it follows, that the lower we descend in the series of causes,
the moe complex will be the product; and that the higher we ascend, it
will be the more simple. (I, 59)

291.38-292.2 “an effect” is “nothing . . . which constitutes]
[paragraph] Considering philosophy, in the first place, in relation to
its first end,—the discovery of causes,—we have seen that causes,
(taking that term as synonymous for all without which the effect would
not be), are only the coefficients of the effect; an effect being
nothing . . . which constitute (I, 97)

Edition: current; Page: [556]
292.2 “An effect] [paragraph] But all the causes or coefficient powers
being brought into reciprocal relation, the salt is the result; for an
effect (II, 540)

292.3 entities;” “causes] entities,—concauses or coefficient powers. In
thought, causes and effects are thus, pro tanto, tautological: an effect
always pre-existed potentially in its causes; and causes (II, 540)

292.9 “Considering] Now, considering (I, 59)

292.10-11 There are, first . . . secondly . . . thirdly] These are,
first, . . . secondly . . . thirdly (I, 59)

292.21 “concause”] [see entries for 292.2 and 292.3 above] (II, 540)

292.22 last,” . . . “as] last, as (I, 97)

292.27-8 “as . . . be;”] [see entry for 291.38-292.2 above] (I, 97)

293.13 “Philosophy] [paragraph] Philosophy (I, 60)

293.17-19 view” . . . “and . . . complete] view, and . . . complete (I,
60)

293n.1-2 “The lower . . . simple.”] [see entry for 291.37-8 above] (I,
59)

295.13 “attempts] It [the doctrine under discussion] attempts (II, 396)

295.14-16 “Listen,” . . . “to] Listen to (II, 397)

295.18 which] that (II, 397)

295.23 consequently we exclude] consequently exclude (II, 397)

295.29-30 opinion,” . . . “is] opinion is (II, 397)

295.37 “not] And what is this relation? Not (II, 391)

295.38-9 in volition] in a volition (II, 391)

295.41-296.2 world.” [paragraph] . . . “This] world. [paragraph] αThis
[footnote:] αSee Reid’s Works, p. 866. Discuss., p. 612.—Ed. (II, 391)

296.12 actually] absolutely (II, 392)

296.14 determination] determinations (II, 392)

296.16-17 the volition] volition (II, 392)

297n.1 “quality of necessity and universality.”] Admitting that
causation were cognisable, and that perception and self-consciousness
were competent to its apprehension, still as these faculties could only
take note of individual causations, we should be wholly unable, out of
such empirical acts, to evolve the quality of necessity and
universality, by which this notion is distinguished. (II, 392)

302.20 “that . . . one.”] In the discussion of this question [“whether
we can form an adequate idea of that which is denoted by an abstract . .
. term”], I shall pursue the following order: first of all, I shall
state to you the arguments of the Nominalists,—of those who hold, that
we are unable to form an idea corresponding to the abstract and general
term; in the second place, I shall state to you the arguments of the
Conceptualists,—of those who maintain that we are so competent; and, in
the last, I shall show you that . . . one, and that the whole
controversy has originated in the imperfection and ambiguity of our
philosophical nomenclature. (II, 296)

302.33 “The] [paragraph] The (II, 287)

302.38 body.” [paragraph] . . . “individual abstract notions;” . . .
“Abstract General Notions.” . . . “when] body. [no paragraph] But had we
only individual abstract notions, what would be our knowledge? We should
be cognisant only of qualities viewed apart from their subjects; (and of
separate phænomena there exist none in nature); and as these qualities
are also separate from each other, we should have no knowledge of their
mutual relations.α [footnote:] αWe should also be overwhelmed with their
number.—Jotting. [text:] [paragraph] It is necessary, therefore, that we
should form Abstract General notions. This is done when (II, 288)

303.7 notion] action (II, 288)

303.25 twofold quantity] twofold kind of quantity (II, 289)

303.34-5 Extension of a notion; the latter, the internal quantity, is
called its Comprehension or Intension. . . . The] Extension of a notion,
(quantitas ambitus); the latter, the internal quantity, is called its
Comprehension or Intension, (quantitas complexus). [ellipsis indicates
omission of 3 sentences and lengthy Greek footnote] The (II, 289-90)

303.37 extension.”] extension.β [footnote omitted] (II, 290)

303.44 “not only true but self-evident.” . . . “irrefragable”] This
opinion [that there are no Edition: current; Page: [557] general
notions], which, after Hobbes, has been in this country maintained,
among others, by Berkeley,β Hume,γ Adam Smith,δ Campbell,α and Stewart,β
[footnotes identifying specific passages from works of these
philosophers omitted] appears to me not only true but self-evident.
[paragraph] No one has stated the case of the nominalists more clearly
than Bishop Berkeley, and as his whole argument is, as far as it goes,
irrefragable, I beg your attention to the following extract from his
Introduction to the Principles of Human Knowledge.γ [footnote:]
γSections vii. viii. x. Works, i. 5 et seq., 4to edit. Cf. Encyclopædia
Britannica, art. Metaphysics, vol. xiv. p. 622, 7th edit.—Ed. (II,
297-8)

304.28 whatever] whatsoever (II, 299)

304.30 abstracting their ideas] abstracting their ideas (II, 299)

304.34 part] parts (II, 299)

304.42 whatsoever.] whatsoever.α [footnote:] αThis argumentation is
employed by Derodon, Logica, [pars ii c. vi §16. Opera, p. 236.—Ed.],
and others. (II, 300)

304.42 am] own (II, 300)

305.15 “point of similarity”] Now it is the points of similarity thus
discovered and identified in the unity of consciousness, which
constitute Concepts or Notions. (III, 125)

305.16 “is not] It [a concept or notion] is, therefore, not (III, 128)

305.19 expresses. . . . The] expresses. [ellipsis indicates 1-paragraph
omission] [paragraph] But the (III, 128)

305.38-306.1 Presentation . . . Phantasy,” that “our] And here I again
stated what a Concept or Notion is in itself, and in contrast to a
Presentation . . . Phantasy. Our (III, 131)

306.4 mediate, indeterminate] mediate, relative, indeterminate (III,
131)

306.6-7 object. . . . [paragraph] Formed by comparison,” concepts
“express] object. [ellipsis indicates 2 3/4-page omission] [no
paragraph] Formed by comparison, they (III, 131, 134)

306.11 as actually] as so actually (III, 134)

306.30 horse] horse (III, 135)

306.35 in] on (III, 135)

307.17 “the employment] This [“that concepts are mere words, and that
there is nothing general in thought itself”] is not indeed held in
reality by any philosopher; for no philosopher has ever denied that we
are capable of apprehending relations, and in particular the relation of
similarity and difference; so that the whole controversy between the
conceptualist and nominalist originates in the ambiguous employment
(III, 136)

307.19-20 relation,” . . . “cannot] relation cannot (II, 312)

307.24 given.”] given; and accordingly this has been done wherever a
philosophical nomenclature of the slightest pretensions to perfection
has been formed. (II, 312)

307.28 faculties.”] faculties.α [footnote:] αSee the Author’s note,
Reid’s Works, p. 412; and Lectures on Metaphysics, vol. ii. p. 296 et
seq.—Ed. (III, 136)

308.13 “As the . . . comparison,” a concept “necessarily] [entire
paragraph indented] ¶XXII.—2°, A concept or notion, as the . . .
comparison, necessarily (III, 128)

308.14-15 “a . . . imagination.”] [see 271 above] (II, 312)

308.18 “a . . . attributes,”] [see 305 above] (III, 129)

308.20 “common circumstance”] [see 303 above] (II, 298)

308.25-6 “the . . . objects,”] [see 307 above] (II, 312)

309.2-3 “In the formation,” . . . “of] This, by way of preface, being
understood, I showed that, in the formation of (III, 132)

309.12 the object] its object (III, 132)

309.19 process. But] process; but (III, 132)

310.13 [paragraph] The] [entire paragraph indented] ¶XXIII. The (III,
137)

311.12 “Language,” . . . “is] Language is (III, 138)

311.16-18 it.” . . . “is] it. Speech is thus not the mother, but the
godmother, of knowledge. But though, in general, we must hold that
language, as the product and correlative of thought, must be viewed as
posterior to the act of thinking itself; on the other hand, it must be
admitted, that we could never have risen above the very lowest degrees
in the scale of thought, without the aid of signs. A sign is (III, 138)

311.19 beyond. A] beyond. [paragraph] A (III, 138)

Edition: current; Page: [558]
312.1 arrested. . . . Admitting] arrested. Thus it is, that the higher
exertions of the higher faculty of Understanding,—the classification of
the objects presented and represented by the subsidiary powers in the
formation of a hierarchy of notions, the connection of these notions
into judgments, the inference of one judgment from another, and, in
general, all our consciousness of the relations of the universal to the
particular, consequently all science strictly so denominated, and every
inductive knowledge of the past and future from the laws of nature:—not
only these, but all ascent from the sphere of sense to the sphere of
moral and religious intelligence, are, as experience proves, if not
altogether impossible without a language, at least possible to a very
low degree. [paragraph] Admitting (II, 139)

315.42-316.1 “realized in thought,” . . . “elicited into
consciousness.”] [see 306 above] (III, 135, 134)

319.7 “As . . . the fictitious] [entire paragraph indented] ¶XXX. As . .
. the factitious (III, 171)

319.33-6 “For . . . part, especially . . . thought, to] [no paragraph]
Speaking of the analysis of complex notions, he [Leibniz] says—“For . .
. part, however, especially . . . thought, for the sake of brevity, to
(III, 181)

319.38 thousand sides] thousand equal sides (III, 181)

319.39 or thousand] a thousand (III, 181)

320.1 mode] kind (III, 181)

320n.12-14 “the symbolical notions of the understanding,” . . . “the . .
. Imagination.”] consequence of the establishment of this distinction by
Leibnitz, that a peculiar expression, (Begriff, conceptus), was
appropriated to the symbolical notions of the Understanding, in contrast
to the . . . Imagination, which last also were furnished with the
distinctive appellations of intuitions, (Anschauungen, intuitus). (III,
183)

321.21 “A Concept,” . . . “is] [paragraph] The conceiving an object is,
therefore, its recognition mediately through a concept; and a Concept is
(III, 122)

321.25 “abusive employment”] This abusive employment has, however, not
been so frequent in reference to this term [notion] as to the term
conception; but it must be acknowledged, that nothing can be imagined
more vague and vacillating than the meaning attached to notion in the
writings of all British philosophers, without exception. (III, 121)

321.26 are sometimes] are also sometimes (III, 126)

321.28 general.”] general; while the other cognitive modifications to
which they are opposed,—perceptions and imaginations,—have, in like
manner, their essence in their individuality. (III, 126)

321.29-33 “If I . . . of Sophroniscus, as Athenian, as philosopher, as
pugnosed . . . my notion or concept] If, for example, I . . . of
Sophroniscus, as Athenian, as philosopher, as pugnosed . . . my notion
or concept (III, 78)

321.35 individual.] individual.β [footnote:] βKrug, ibid. [Logik], §
29.—Ed. (III, 146)

321.36 “It] Now, it (III, 148)

322.9 here is] is here (III, 148)

322.12-14 “If a . . . is . . . not a proper abstract] [paragraph] Thus,
it is manifest, that, as Definition is the analysis of a complex concept
into its component parts or attributes, if a concept be simple, that is,
if it contain in it only a single attribute, it must be indefinable; and
again, that as Division is the analysis of a higher or more general
concept into others lower and less general, if a . . . is indivisible,
is, in fact, not a proper or abstract (III, 152)

323n.20-3 “a concept . . . be clear . . . discriminate” . . . “what . .
. notions:”] “A concept . . . be clear . . . discriminate what . . .
notions; whereas if the degree of consciousness be so remiss that this
and other concepts run into each other, in that case, the notion is said
to be obscure. (III, 160-1) [Hamilton is quoting from Esser]

323n.23-5 “notions absolutely clear” are “notions whose objects” . . .
“possibly . . . unknown.”] But, on the other hand, of notions absolutely
clear, that is, notions whose objects cannot possibly . . . unknown,—of
such notions a limited intelligence is possessed of very few, and,
consequently, our human concepts are, properly, only a mixture of the
opposite qualities;—clear or obscure as applied to them, meaning only
that the one quality or the other is the preponderant. (III, 161)
[Hamilton is quoting from Esser]

324.21 “To judge,” . . . “is] [entire paragraph indented] ¶XLVI. To
judge, (κρίνειν,α Edition: current; Page: [559] [footnote:] αThe verb
κρίνειν, to judge, and still more the substantive, κρίσις, judgment, are
rarely used by the Greeks,—(never by Aristotle)—as technical terms of
Logic or of Psychology. [text:] judicare) is (III, 225)

324.24-5 a Judgment; considered . . . a Proposition or Predication.”] a
Judgment, (λόγος ἀποφανός, judicium); considered . . . a Proposition or
Predication, (ἀπόϕανσις, πρότασις,α [footnote omitted] διάστημα,
propositio, prædicatio, pronunciatum, enunciatio, effatum, profatum,
axiomaβ). [footnote:] βBy Stoics and Ramists. (III, 226)

325.1 “Concepts, in] [entire paragraph indented] ¶XLII. Considered under
their Comprehension, concepts, again, in (III, 213)

325.4-5 notions.” . . . “1°.] notions, (τὸ ἀντικεῖσϑαι, oppositio). This
is twofold;—1°, (III, 213)

325.5 Opposition] Opposition (III, 214)

325.6 Repugnance; and] Repugnance, (τὸ ἀντιϕατικῶς ἀντικεῖσϑαι,
ἀντίϕασις, oppositio immediata sive contradictoria, repugnantia); and,
(III, 214)

325.6 Opposition. The] Opposition, (τὸ ἐναντίως ἀντικεῖσϑαι, ἐναντιότης,
oppositio mediata vel contraria). The (III, 214)

325.7 abolishes directly] abolishes, (tolit), directly (III, 214)

325.8 establishes; the] establishes, (ponit); the (III, 214)

325.10 else.”] else.α [footnote:] α[Cf. Drobisch, Logik, p. 17, § 25
seq.] (III, 214)

325.17 “Identity] [paragraph] “Identity (III, 214)

325.21 although themselves] although in themselves (III, 214)

325.22 conflicting] conflictive (III, 214)

325.32 “When] But when (III, 226)

325.39 judgment.] Judgment.α [footnote:] αCf. Krug, Logik, § 61. (III,
227)

326.12 “we] This process, as you remember, is called Determination;—a
very appropriate expression, inasmuch as by each character or attribute
which we add on, we (III, 194)

326.22-9 other,” . . . “But if . . . unity; we judge that polar . . .
notion electrical . . . is electrical . . . of polarity.] other; but if
. . . unity,—we judge that polar . . . notion electrical . . . is
electrical . . . of polarity. (III, 227) [JSM has added italics except
as indicated]

326.32-3 the . . . other] [not in italics] (III, 229)

327.7-8 “capable . . . thought.”] [see 325 above] (III, 227)

328.22 “presentations of phantasy.”] [see entry for 305.38-306.1 above]
(III, 131)

329.33 “individual things”] [see 324 above] (III, 226)

329.36-8 “the . . . other.”] [see 326 above] (III, 229)

330.20 another. It] another. This fourth condition is in truth only a
necessary consequence of the third,—for it is impossible to discriminate
without judging,—discrimination, or contradistinction, being in fact
only the denying one thing of another. It (I, 204)

330.22-3 general” . . . “have] general have (I, 204)

330.26 object?] object?α [footnote:] αSee Reid’s Works, pp. 243, 414,
with the Editor’s Notes.—Ed. (I, 205)

330.32 judgment.] judgment.α [footnote omitted] (II, 277)

330.39 so and . . . so and] so or . . . so or (II, 278)

331.3 judgment and] judgment or (II, 278)

331.3-6 so . . . process] [not in italics] (II, 278)

331.6 process.”] process itself. (II, 278)

331.17 “Both] These three degrees [Concepts, Judgments, Reasonings] are
all in fact, strictly, only modifications of the second, as both (III,
117)

331.19 expressed. A] expressed. By anticipation:—A (III, 117)

331.20-1 it . . . word] [not in italics] (III, 117)

331.23-4 a . . . judgment] [not in italics] (III, 117)

332.10 “Water rusts iron:”] [see 325 above] (III, 227)

335.20-1 “The exposition . . . its Definition:”] [paragraph] Again; you
will observe the two following distinctions: the first,—the exposition .
. . its Definition; (a simple notion cannot, therefore, be defined); the
second,—the exposition of the Extension of a notion is called its
Division; (an individual notion cannot be divided.) (III, 143)

335.21-3 “Definition is . . . attributes.”] [paragraph] Thus, it is
manifest, that, as Definition Edition: current; Page: [560] is . . .
attributes, if a concept be simple, that is, if it contain in it only a
single attribute, it must be indefinable; and again, that as Division is
the analysis of a higher or more general concept into others lower and
less general, if a concept be an individual, that is, only a bundle of
individual qualities, it is indivisible, is, in fact, not a proper or
abstract concept at all, but only a concrete representation of
Imagination. (III, 151-2)

336n.7 “which] The essential qualities of a thing are those aptitudes,
those manners of existence and action, which (I, 150)

338.3-5 “two . . . and predicate,” . . . “the . . . other,” . . .
“either] We may, therefore, articulately define a judgment or
proposition to be the product of that act in which we pronounce, that,
of two . . . and as predicate, the . . . other, either (III, 229)

338.7 If] [no paragraph] If (III, 231)

338.9 proposition. . . . The] proposition. [paragraph] This distinction
of propositions is founded on the distinction of the two quantities of
concepts,—their Comprehension and their Extension. The (III, 232)

338.20 or] as (III, 232)

338.22 or] [not in italics] (III, 232)

338.32-3 syllogisms] syllogism (III, 233)

342.7 “Reasoning] [entire paragraph indented] ¶LIII.—Reasoning (III,
274)

342.10 those] these (III, 274) [treated as a typographical error in this
edition]

342.11-12 “the self-evident . . . whole.”] Let ABC denote the three
circles [diagram of circles omitted]. Now, ex hypothesi, we know, and
only know, that A contains B, and that B contains C; but as it is a
self-evident . . . whole, we cannot, with our knowledge that B contains
C, and is contained in A, avoid recognising that C is contained in A.
(III, 271)

342.12 “Without] [paragraph] But to speak of the process in
general:—without the power of reasoning we should have been limited in
our knowledge, (if knowledge of such a limitation would deserve the name
of knowledge at all), I say without (III, 277)

346.3 “given . . . intuition.”] [see 342 above] (III, 277)

348.7 “the] [paragraph indented] ¶III. What is Logic? Answer—Logic is
the (III, 4)

348.18 “the discrimination of] But in the third place, the
discrimination itself of (III, 11)

348.21 Politics, and] Politics, Religion, and (III, 11)

348.22 wrong.] wrong.α [footnote:] αCompare Lectures on Metaphysics,
vol. i. p. 115 et seq.—Ed. (III, 11)

348.23 But . . . were] But in the fourth place, were (III, 11)

349.10-13 “apparently . . . applied,” . . . “the . . . usage,” . . .
“rational . . . trace.”] [paragraph] The question, therefore, still
remains, Is this restriction of the term art to certain of the practical
sciences the . . . usage, or is it founded on any rational . . . trace?
The former alternative seems to be the common belief; for no one, in so
far as I know, has endeavoured to account for the apparently . . .
applied. (I, 116) [JSM has reversed sentence order]

349.16-17 “a habit productive,” . . . “a habit practical,”] [paragraph]
Now Aristotle, in formally defining art, defines it as a habit
productive, and not as a habit practical, ἕξις ποιητικὴ μετὰ λόγου;—and,
though he has not always himself adhered strictly to this limitation,
his definition was adopted by his followers, and the term in its
application to the practical sciences, (the term practical being here
used in its generic meaning), came to be exclusively confined to those
whose end did not result in mere action or energy. (I, 118)

349.17-19 “not . . . criticism:” . . . “vindicate,”] This distinction
[see entry directly above] is not . . . criticism, and I am not here to
vindicate its correctness. (I, 118)

349.20-1 “mechanical” . . . “beneath their notice,”] The mechanical
dexterities were beneath their notice; and these were accordingly left
to receive their appellations from those who knew nothing of the
Aristotelic proprieties. (I, 119)

349n.5 “In] [paragraph] In (I, 117)

349n.16 energy. Now] energy.α [Greek footnote omitted] [paragraph] Now
(I, 118)

349n.21 genuine] generic (I, 118)

350.5 “incongruity] But that they [“art and practical science”] are not
employed as synonymous expressions is, as we have seen, shown by the
incongruity (I, 116)

Edition: current; Page: [561]
350n.1 consequently practical, not productive] consequently practical,
not productive (I, 118) [treated as a typographical error in this
edition]

350n.4 forth.”] forth.β [Latin footnote omitted] (I, 118)

352.14-15 “the Laws of Thought as Thought.”] [see 348 above] (III, 4)

352.15 head,” . . . “divides] head naturally divides (III, 12)

352.29-31 thing through or under . . . in or under] thing through or
under . . . in or under (III, 14)

352.37 reduce it under] [not in italics] (III, 14)

352.40-353.1 “the . . . coming under] [paragraph] To answer this
question [“What is meant by Thought as Thought?”], let us remember what
has just been said of the act constitutive of thought,—viz. that it is
the . . . coming under (III, 15)

353.4-5 “the . . . attribute;”] I attempted to make you vaguely
apprehend what is the essential characteristic of thought,—viz. the . .
. attribute. (III, 21)

353.5 “the] Logic, as we have seen, is exclusively conversant about
thought,—about thought considered strictly as the operation of
Comparison or the faculty of Relations; and thought, in this restricted
signification, is the (III, 40)

353.6-7 the . . . conceptions] [not in italics] (III, 40)

353.7-8 “Thought is . . . thing through . . . notion through] Logic, we
have seen, is exclusively conversant about thought strictly so
denominated, and thought proper, we have seen, is the cognition of one
object of thought by another, in or under which it is mentally
included,—in other words, thought is . . . thing through . . . notion
through (III, 42-3)

354.18 “that] Now, when I said that Logic was conversant about thought
considered merely as thought, I meant simply to say, that (III, 15)

354.35 “We] “In this process we (III, 15)

354.36-7 old established] old and established (III, 15)

354.38 the thought] this thought (III, 15)

358.14 “When] But when (III, 78)

358.24-6 and . . . the whole . . . applied.”] and as the whole . . .
applied, their consideration in general constitutes the first chapter in
an orderly system of the science. (III, 79)

358n.19-20 “necessary and universal facts,” “the . . . governed,”]
[paragraph] If, again, we analyse the mental phænomena with the view of
discovering and considering, not contingent appearances, but the
necessary and universal facts,—i.e. the . . . governed, to the end that
we may obtain a criterion by which to judge or to explain their
procedures and manifestations,—we have a science which we may call the
Nomology of Mind,—nomological psychology. (I, 122)

359n.2 “the Laws of Memory,”] Mnemonic, or the science of the laws of
Memory, has been elaborated at least in numerous treatises; but the name
Anamnestic, the art of Recollection or Reminiscence, might be equally
well applied to it. (I, 122-3)

359n.2-3 “the Laws of Association,”] The laws of the Representative
faculty,—that is, the laws of Association, have not yet been elevated
into a separate nomological science. (I, 123)

359n.3 “the laws which govern our capacities of enjoyment,”] [paragraph]
The Nomology of our Feelings, or the science of the laws which govern
our capacities of enjoyment, in relation to the end which they
propose,—i.e. the Pleasurable,—has obtained no precise name in our
language. (I, 123)

361.5 [paragraph] “Logic] [entire paragraph indented] ¶X. Logic (III,
73)

361.24 “The] [no paragraph] The (III, 73)

368.20 “If] For, to speak first of the latter [Material Logic]:—if (IV,
App. i, 232)

368.32 “In] [no paragraph] In (IV, 138)

369n.3 “competent.”] [paragraph] The second condition required is, That
a competent number of the partial objects from which the induction
departs should have been observed, for otherwise the comprehension of
other objects under the total judgment would be rash.α [footnote
omitted] (IV, 169)

369n.13-17 “if a . . . class . . . attribute, . . . this . . . class;” .
. . “if . . . two . . . characters . . . Edition: current; Page: [562]
they . . . is, they . . . class.”] [entire paragraph indented] ¶CVIII.
If we have uniformly observed, that a . . . class (genus or species) . .
. attribute, we are disposed to conclude that this . . . class. This
conclusion is properly called an Inference of Induction. Again, if we
have observed that two . . . characters, we are disposed to conclude
that they . . . is, that they . . . class (genus or species). (IV,
165-6)

372.7-12 “the Law of Reason and Consequent,” . . . “Principle of
Sufficient Reason.” . . . “The Conditions of the Thinkable:”] [entire
paragraph indented] ¶XIII. The Fundamental Laws of Thought or the
conditions of the thinkable, as commonly received, are four:—1. The Law
of Identity; 2. The Law of Contradiction; 3. The Law of Exclusion or of
Excluded Middle; and, 4. The Law of Reason and Consequent, or of
Sufficient Reason. (III, 79)

372n.6 “the laws of Thinking in a strict sense.”] [paragraph] Laws of
Thought are of two kinds:—1°. The laws of the Thinkable,—Identity,
Contradiction, &c. 2°. The laws of Thinking in a strict sense—viz. laws
of Conception, Judgment, and Reasoning. (IV, App. iv, 244-5)

373.27 “principle of all logical affirmation”] [paragraph] The logical
importance of the law of Identity lies in this,—that it is the principle
of all logical affirmation and definition. (III, 80)

374.2 “expressed . . . A,”] It is expressed . . . A; and by A is denoted
every logical thing, every product of our thinking faculty,—concept,
judgment, reasoning, &c.α [footnote:] α[Schulze, Logik, §17. Gerlach,
Logik, §37.] Cf. Krug, Logik, §17.—Ed. (III, 79-80)

375.4 “The] [entire paragraph indented] ¶XVIII. The (III, 114)

376.27-8 “This law,” . . . “is the . . . distinction,”] [paragraph] The
logical import of this law lies in its being the . . . distinction.
(III, 82)

376.28 “is] This law is (III, 81)

376.30 not] not (III, 81)

376.30 or] or (III, 81)

376.30 o:”] O. (III, 81)

376.33-6 “as . . . non-repugnantia.”] [paragraph] Now, in the first
place, in regard to the name of this law, it may be observed that, as .
. . non-repugnantia.α [footnote:] αCompare Krug, Logik, §18.—Ed. (III,
82)

379.7-8 “the principle of disjunctive judgments.”] [paragraph] The law
of Excluded Middle is the principle of Disjunctive Judgments, that is,
of judgments in which a plurality of judgments are contained, and which
stand in such a reciprocal relation that the affirmation of one is the
denial of the other. (III, 84)

379.17 “D is either B, or C, or A.”] [Hamilton is quoting from Krug]
[paragraph] “Disjunctive judgments are those in which the condition
qualifying the relation between the subject and predicate, lies
proximately in the predicate, as in the proposition, D is either B, or
C, or A. (III, 239)

380.23-4 “Whatever,” . . . “violates] The difference in their result
[that of the laws of Identity, Contradiction, and Excluded Middle as
opposed to that of the law of Reason and Consequent] consists in
this,—Whatever violates (III, 98)

380.32 those] these (IV, 65)

380.36-7 “which we are able to violate:”] By law of thought, or by
logical necessity, we do not, therefore, mean a physical law, such as
the law of gravitation, but a general precept which we are able
certainly to violate, but which if we do not obey, our whole process of
thinking is suicidal or absolutely null. (III, 78-9)

382.15 the three] the first three (III, 99)

382.17 itself. When] itself. [paragraph] When (III, 99)

382.20-3 done.” . . . “But] done. But (III, 99)

382.24 does it] does this (III, 99)

383n.6-9 “If I,” . . . “have . . . restricted.”] If I have . . .
restricted; and that within those bounds, (the Conditioned), natural
thought is neither fallible nor mendacious—/“Neque decipitur, nec
decipit umquam.” (I, App. i, 402)

383n.9-10 “In generating . . . laws. . . . Reason] On the contrary, I
have endeavoured to show that Reason,—that Consciousness within its
legitimate limits, is always Edition: current; Page: [563]
veracious,—that in generating . . . laws,—that Consciousness, in fact,
is never spontaneously false, and that Reason (II, App. iv, 543)

383n.12-13 “It is . . . result. . . . The] [paragraph] On the contrary,
my doctrine holds, 1°, That Space and Time, as given, are real forms of
thought and conditions of things; 2°, That Intelligence,—Reason,—within
its legitimate limits, is legitimate; within this sphere it never
deceives; and it is . . . results;—“Ne sapiamus ultra facultates.” The
(I, App. i, 403)

384.8 “I] When I say that a thing may be, of which I cannot conceive the
possibility, (that is, by conceiving it as the consequent of a certain
reason), I (III, 100)

384.10 “solely] It is not, therefore, in any absolute harmony of mere
thought that truth consists, but solely (III, 107) [Hamilton is quoting
from Esser]

385.10 “with the doubtful exception of Aristotle,”] But as all
logicians, with the doubtful exception of Aristotle, have limited their
consideration to that process of reasoning given in the quantity of
extension, to the exclusion of that given in the quantity of
comprehension, it will be proper, in order to avoid misapprehension, to
place some of the distinctions expressed in this paragraph in a still
more explicit contrast. (III, 297)

385.10-11 “have . . . Comprehension”] But as logicians have . . .
Comprehension, they have, consequently, not perceived the proper
application of the former canon [“Prædicatum prædicati est etiam
prædicatum subjecti”]; which, therefore, remained in their systems
either a mere hors d’æuvre, or else was only forced into an unnatural
connection with the principle of the syllogism of extension. (III,
303-4)

385.11-13 “have marvellously . . . comprehension:”] I further showed
that logicians had in simple syllogisms marvellously . . .
comprehension: and that all their rules were exclusively relative to the
reasoning which proceeds in the quantity of extension. (III, 378)

385.14 “relieved] Thus is relieved (IV, App. v, 250)

391.18-392.1 “every . . . quantity.”] [paragraph] After what I have
already stated in regard to the nature of these opposite quantities,
under the doctrine of Concepts and Judgments,α [footnote:] αSee above,
p. 140 et seq.—Ed. [text:] and after the illustrations I have given you
of the possibility of conducting any reasoning in either of these
quantities at will,β [footnote:] βSee above, p. 272 et seq.—Ed.
[text:]—every . . . quantity,—it will be here needless to enlarge upon
the nature of this distinction in general. (III, 287)

392.5-7 “Every . . . agent,”] Every . . . agent. (III, 270)

392.10-12 “Man . . . agent,”] Man . . . agent. (III, 273)

392.15 “the] [paragraph] It is thus manifest, that, though worthy of
notice in a system of Logic, the (III, 399)

392.19-21 “can . . . order,”] They [logicians] ought at least to have
made the student of Logic aware, that a syllogism can . . . order. (III,
397)

392.21 “a] [paragraph] This is the regular succession of sumption,
subsumption, and conclusion, in a syllogism of extension; and as all
that can be said, on the present question, of the one quantity, is
appilcable, mutatis mutandis, to the other, it will be needless to show
articulately that a (III, 397)

393.1 “In] [paragraph] It is only necessary further to observe, that in
(III, 274)

393n.2-3 “altogether . . . Extension”] [paragraph] Now, if in the case
of simple syllogisms, it be marvellous that logicians should have
altogether overlooked the possibility of a reasoning in comprehension,
it is doubly marvellous that, with this their prepossession, they
should, in the case of the Sorites, have altogether . . . extension.
(III, 378-9)

393n.5-6 “a monster undeserving of toleration,”] In fact, the logicians,
in consequence of their exclusive recognition of the reasoning in
extension, were not in possession of the means of showing, that this
figure is a monster undeserving of toleration, far less of countenance
and favour. (III, 424)

399n.16-17 “all triangles are trilateral” . . . “All triangles are all
trilateral:”] [paragraph] For example; if I think that the notion
triangle contains the notion trilateral, and again that the notion
trilateral contains the notion triangle; in other words, if I think that
each of these is inclusively and exclusively applicable to the other; I
formally say, and, if I speak as I think, must say—All triangle is all
trilateral. On the other hand,—if I only think that all triangles are
trilateral, but do not think all trilaterals to be triangular, and yet
say,—All triangle is all trilateral, the proposition, though materially
true, is formally false. (IV, App. v, 292)

Edition: current; Page: [564]
400n.16 “ordinary . . . Predicate as] [paragraph] 2°, But, in fact,
ordinary . . . Predicate so (IV, App. v, 259)

400n.18 “Virtue is the only nobility;”] [paragraph] For example, by the
limitative designations, alone or only, we say,—God alone is good, which
is euivalent to saying,—God is all good, that is, God is all that is
good; Virtue is the only nobility, that is, Virtue is all noble, that
is, all that is noble.β [footnote omitted] (IV, App. v, 260)

400n.18 “Of animals man alone is rational,”] [paragraph] Of animals man
alone is rational; that is, Man is all rational animal. (IV, App. v,
261)

403.28-30 “taken . . . of words.”] The result [of Hamilton’s
reconsideration of De Morgan’s syllogism] was the opinion, that these
two quantifications should be taken . . . of moods.α [footnote:]
αExtract from A Letter to A. de Morgan, Esq., from Sir W. Hamilton, p.
41.—Ed. (IV, App. vi, 355)

404.29 [paragraph] “Logic] [no paragraph] I have frequently inculcated
on you that Logic (III, 450)

405.9 its] the (III, 450)

405.11 have given] have seen given (III, 451)

405.12-14 Aristotle . . . European] Aristotle . . . European (III, 451)

405.25 than as a] than a (III, 451)

405.25-6 certain hypothetical] certain given (III, 451) [probably JSM’s
eye skipped down several lines to where the other wording appears]

405.32 expressions.”] expressions.α [footnote:] αCf. Esser, Logik,
§109.—Ed. (III, 451)

407.10 “the] [paragraph] The other genus of truth,—(the end which the
Real Sciences propose),—is the (IV, 66)

407.12 “harmony] Logical truth is the harmony (IV, 65)

407.16-17 “evolved out of” . . . “Logical] I do not mean by this, that
the antecedent should be necessarily true, or that the consequent be
really contained in it; it is sufficient that the antecedent be assumed
as true, and that the consequent be, in conformity to the laws of
thought, evolved out of it as its part or equation. This last is called
Logical (II, 343)

407.33 “One . . . philosophers,” . . . “defining] [no paragraph] “One
party of philosophers defining (III, 106) [Hamilton is quoting from
Esser]

407.36 knowledge.] knowledge.α [footnote:] αSee Kant, Logik, Einleitung,
vii.; Krug, Logik, §22; Fries, Logik, §42.—Ed. (III, 106)

408.18 existence.”] existence.”α [footnote:]α Esser, Logik, p. 65-6.—Ed.
(III, 107)

408.23-5 “Two opposite doctrines,” . . . “have . . . Logic;”] Yet among
modern, nay recent, philosophers, two opposite doctrines have . . .
Logic. (III, 106)

408.26 “inaccuracy”] [paragraph] The preceding inaccuracy is, however,
of little moment compared with the heresy of another class of
philosophers, to whose observations on this point I can, however, only
allude. (III, 107)

410.17 “is not always possible.”] In the second place, this conversion
is not always possible, and, therefore, it is never necessary. (III,
342)

411.36-7 “Opposition of Notions,” . . . “is] The confliction constitutes
the Opposition of notions, (τὸ ἀντικεῖσϑαι, oppositio). This is (III,
213)

411.40 media] mediata (III, 214)

412.2 else.] else.α [footnote:] α[Cf. Drobisch, Logik, p. 17, §25 seq.]
(III, 214)

412.5 “To] [paragraph] “To (III, 214) [Hamilton is quoting from Krug]

416.19 “stands . . . unrefutable.”] [paragraph] 4°, On this [Synthetic]
order the objection of petitio principii stands . . . unrefutable,
against Logic.α [footnote omitted] (IV, App. x, 401)

421.13 “a] According to these laws [of matter], things
related,—connected, must act and be acted on; but a (II, App. i, 522)

421.18 “the] Therefore the (II, App. i, 522)

421.22-3 Democritus. According . . . erroneous to . . . distant objects]
Democritus. [paragraph] According . . . erroneous, in the first place,
to . . . distant, &c. objects (II, App. i, 522)

422.6-7 “There is . . . any part] [paragraph] Now, in the first place,
there is . . . any one part (II, 127)

Edition: current; Page: [565]
422.9 part,] part,α [footnote in Greek and Latin omitted] (II, 127)

422.10 opinion. . . . Even] opinion. [ellipsis indicates 3-sentence
omission] We have no right, however, to say that it [the soul] is
limited to any one part of the organism; for even (II, 128)

424.17 is,” . . . “on] is on (II, 373)

424.20 that motion] that the possibility of motion (II, 373)

427n.1 “Contradictions . . . Conditioned] [used by Hamilton as heading
b., dated July, 1852, within Appendix iii, which is titled “The
Conditioned”] (II, App. iii, 527)

427n.6 now] now (II, App. iii, 527)

427n.9 in] into (II, App. iii, 527)

427n.12 quantities (extensions, protensions, intensions)] [Hamilton
places quantities above a brace under which appears extensions,
protensions, intensions] (II, App. iii, 527)

427n.14 ergo, &c.] ergo. [sic] (II, App. iii, 528)

427n.26 least.] least.α [footnote omitted] (II, App. iii, 528)

427n.34-5 unextended.] inextended.β [footnote omitted] (II, App. iii,
528)

427n.40 foot.] foot.γ [footnote omitted] (II, App. iii, 528)

428n.4 sides;] sidesδ; [footnote omitted] (II, App. iii, 528)

428n.4 long.] long.ε [footnote omitted] (II, App. iii, 528)

428n.6 signs” [sides?] “must] signs must (II, App. iii, 529)

428n.7 extended.] extended.α [footnote omitted] (II, App. iii, 529)

430.12-13 “the . . . Pain . . . the] [paragraph] In my last Lecture
[xli], I stated the grounds on which it is expedient to consider the
phænomena of Feeling prior to discussing those of Conation;—but before
entering on the consideration of the several feelings, and before
stating under what heads, and in what order, these are to be arranged, I
think it proper, in the first place, to take up the general
question,—What are the . . . Pain; for pleasure and pain are the
phænomena which constitute the essential attribute of feeling, under all
its modifications? [paragraph] In the consideration of this question, I
shall pursue the following order:—I shall, first of all, state the
abstract Theory of Pleasure and Pain, in other words, enounce the (II,
434)

431.6-7 “Pleasure,” . . . “is . . . conscious.] [paragraph] Pleasure is
. . . conscious.α [footnote omitted] (II, 440)

431.9 “concomitant;”] [paragraph] IV. The energy of each power of
conscious existence having, as its reflex or concomitant, an appropriate
pleasure or pain, and no pain or pleasure being competent to man, except
as the concomitant of some determinate energy of life, the all-important
question arises,—What is the general law under which these
counter-phænomena arise, in all their special manifestations? (II, 436)

431.30 “The] [paragraph] In explanation of this paragraph, and of those
which are to follow, I may observe, that the (II, 435)

431.34-5 reaction.” . . . “Be] reaction. Be (II, 435)

431.38 conscious.] conscious.β [footnote:] βHere a written
interpolation,—Occupation, exercise, perhaps better [expressions than
energy, as applying equally to all mental processes, whether active or
passive.] See below, p. 466.—Ed. (II, 435)

432.18-20 “It has been stated,” . . . “that] Now, it has been stated,
that (II, 477)

432.20 exercised] exerted (II, 477)

433.3 “Every] [no paragraph] Touching the term spontaneous, every (II,
441)

433.11-12 springs.—Again . . . stipulates that the conditions] springs.
[paragraph] Again . . . stipulates that the power should not be checked
in the spring it would thus spontaneously make to its maximum of energy,
that is, it is supposed that the conditions (II, 441)

434.8 “When] But when (II, 494)

434.12-13 ignorance.” . . . “But] ignorance. But (II, 495)

435.10 “When] “But when (II, 452) [Hamilton is translating Aristotle]

437.21 “through which our] [paragraph] But, though mind, considered in
itself, be the noblest object of speculation which the created universe
presents to the curiosity of man, it is under a certain relation that I
would now attempt to illustrate its utility; for mind rises to its
highest dignity when viewed as the object through which, and through
which alone, our (I, 25)

Edition: current; Page: [566]
437.22-5 God.” . . . [paragraph] “The Deity,” . . . “is] God. [no
paragraph] The Deity is (I, 25)

438.30 “Now] [paragraph] Now (I, 32)

438.33 agents. . . . But] agents. This being undeniable, it is further
evident, that, should we ever be convinced that we are not moral agents,
we should likewise be convinced that there exists no moral order in the
universe, and no supreme intelligence by which that moral order is
established, sustained, and regulated. [paragraph] Theology is thus
again wholly dependent on Psychology; for, with the proof of the moral
nature of man, stands or falls the proof of the existence of a Deity.
[paragraph] But (I, 32-3)

440.19 “brute necessity”] For if, as the materialist maintains, the only
intelligence of which we have any experience be a consequent of
matter,—on this hypothesis, he not only cannot assume this order to be
reversed in the relations of an intelligence beyond his observation,
but, if he argue logically, he must positively conclude, that, as in
man, so in the universe, the phænomena of intelligence or design are
only in their last analysis the products of a brute necessity. (I, 31)

440n.1-2 “The atheist who holds matter or necessity . . . is.”] Neither
is this notion [of a God] completed by adding to a first cause the
attribute of Omnipotence, for the atheist who holds matter or necessity
. . . is, does not convert his blind force into a God, by merely
affirming it to be all-powerful. (I, 26-7)

440n.2 “Those who] Those, accordingly, who (I, 133)

440n.4 fate.”] fate—must regard the application of the terms Physiology
and Physics to the doctrine of the mind as either singularly
inappropriate, or as significant of a false hypothesis in regard to the
character of the thinking principle. (I, 133)

445.1 “every] For though an unconquerable feeling compels us to
recognise ourselves as accountable, and therefore free, agents, still,
when we attempt to realise in thought how the fact of our liberty can
be, we soon find that this altogether transcends our understanding, and
that every (I, 33-4)

445.3 necessity,”] necessity. (I, 34)

445n.3 “Voluntary] On the other hand, however, we cannot possibly
conceive the existence of a voluntary activity independently of all
feeling; for voluntary (I, 188)

464.3 “the] [paragraph] In the world of sense, illusive appearances
hover around us like evil spirits; unreal dreams mingle themselves with
real knowledge; the accustomed assumes the character of certainty; and
the (III, 47)

487.11 philosophy;”] philosophy:”α [footnote:] αMetaphysics, book i.2,
9. Compare Plato, Theætetus, p. 155.—Ed. (I, 37)

487.25 heavens.”] heavens.”β [footnote:] βJacobi, Werke, vol. ii p.
52-54. Quoted in Discussions, p. 312.—Ed. (I, 37)

490n.4-6 “attend . . . time,” . . . “that . . . impossible.”]
[paragraph] The doctrine that the mind can attend . . . time, would, in
fact, involve the conclusion that . . . impossible; but comparison and
discrimination being possible, this possibility disproves the truth of
the counter proposition. (I, 252)

491n.2-3 “past . . . perceived;”] We must, therefore, compare the past .
. . perceived. (I, 244)

491n.16-17 “instead . . . masses.”] On the contrary, I showed that,
instead . . . masses; that, though our capacity of attention be very
limited in regard to the number of objects on which a faculty can be
simultaneously directed, yet that these objects may be large or small.
(II, 327)

491n.18-19 “an act of will or desire,”] This remark [“that attention is
a voluntary act”] might have led him [Reid] to the observation, that
attention is not a separate faculty, or a faculty of intelligence at
all, but merely an act of will or desire, subordinate to a certain law
of intelligence. (I, 237)

491n.19-20 “a mere vital and irresistible act.”] The first [degree of
attention], a mere vital and irresistible act; the second, an act
determined by desire, which, though involuntary, may be resisted by our
will; the third, an act determined by a deliberate volition. (I, 248)

494n.1-2 “Ontology, or Metaphysics Proper;” “the science conversant
about inferences Edition: current; Page: [567] . . . manifestations;”]
Now, the science conversant about all such inferences . . .
manifestations, is called Ontology, or Metaphysics Proper. (I, 125)

494n.11-12 “a concept . . . be clear when . . . as to enable us . . .
it” . . . “as . . . others:”] [entire paragraph indented] A concept . .
. be clear, (clara), when . . . as enables us . . . it as . . . others;
and obscure, (obscura), when the degree of consciousness is insufficient
to accomplish this. (III, 158)

496n.10-11 “Synthesis without . . . all. . . . A] On the other [hand],
synthesis without . . . all. Both [synthesis and analysis], therefore,
are absolutely necessary to philosophy, and both are, in philosophy, as
much parts of the same method as, in the animal body, inspiration and
expiration are of the same vital function. But though these operations
are each requisite to the other, yet were we to distinguish and compare
what ought to be considered as conjoined, it is to analysis that the
preference must be accorded. An analysis is always valuable; for though
now without a synthesis, this synthesis may at any time be added;
whereas a (I, 99)

496n.28 “reconstruction”] This mental reconstruction is, therefore, the
final, the consummative procedure of philosophy, and it is familiarly
known by the Greek term Synthesis. (I, 98)

499.15-16 “its . . . regarded it more] [paragraph] It is needless to
attempt a refutation of this hypothesis [of the pre-established
harmony], which its . . . regarded more (I, 304)

501.33 “a] You degrade the Divinity, he [Leibniz] subjoined; you [the
Cartesians] make him act like a (I, 303) [Hamilton is quoting Leibniz]

503.12.13 “The intellect is . . . activity.”] [paragraph] “The
intellect,” says Aristotle, in one passage, “is . . . activity;”γ
[footnote:] γ Said of moral knowledge, Eth. Nic. i. 3: Τέλος οὐ γνῶσις,
ἀλλὰ πρᾶξις. Cf. ibid. i.7, 13; i.8, 9; ix.7, 4; xi.9, 7, 1. Met., xi.7:
‘Η νοῦ ἐνέργεια ζωή.—Ed. [text:] and in another, “The arts and sciences
are powers, but every power exists only for the sake of action; the end
of philosophy, therefore, is not knowledge, but the energy conversant
about knowledge.”δ [footnote omitted] (I, 12) [cf. 503n]

503n.1-2 “Speculative truth . . . and held . . . activity”] [paragraph]
In speculative knowledge, on the other hand, there may indeed, at first
sight, seem greater difficulty; but further reflection will prove that
speculative truth . . . and is only held . . . activity: “Sordet cognita
veritas” is a shrewd aphorism of Seneca. (I, 10)

503n.2-3 “speculative truth” . . . “only . . . activity.”] [paragraph]
But if speculative truth itself be only . . . activity, those studies
which determine the faculties to a more vigorous exertion, will, in
every liberal sense, be better entitled, absolutely, to the name of
useful, than those which, with a greater complement of more certain
facts, awaken them to a less intense, and consequently to a less
improving exercise. (I, 13)

— “Notes to the Above Letter,” Edinburgh Review, LXIII (April, 1836),
272-5.

note: this is Hamilton’s reply to Whewell’s letter, “To the Editor of
the Edinburgh Review” (q.v.), which was prompted by Hamilton’s “Study of
Mathematics—University of Cambridge” (q.v.); all three reprinted in
Hamilton’s Discussions at 263-325, 326-8, 329-40.

referred to: 477

— “Study of Mathematics—University of Cambridge,” Edinburgh Review, LXII
(Jan., 1836), 409-55.

note: see also Hamilton, “Notes to the Above Letter,” and Whewell’s
letter, “To the Editor of the Edinburgh Review”; all three reprinted in
Hamilton’s Discussions at 263-325, 326-8, 329-40.

referred to: 470-1, 477, 482

Hartley, David. Referred to: 9, 17, 250, 487, 493n

— Observations on Man, his Frame, his Duty, and his Expectations. 2 pts.
Bath: Leake and Frederick; London: Hitch and Austen, 1749.

note: this ed. in JSM’s library, Somerville College. Concerning the
reference at 283, where Edition: current; Page: [568] JSM says that
Hartley had cited the colour-wheel experiment before James Mill or
Hamilton, it may be noted that Hartley is actually quoting Newton’s
Optics.

referred to: 278, 278n, 283, 363

Haywood, Francis, trans. Critick of Pure Reason translated from the
original of Immanuel Kant. 2nd ed., with notes and explanation of terms.
London: Pickering, 1848.

note: JSM’s page references are to this ed., which is in his library,
Somerville College. See also Kant.

referred to: 154n

Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich.

note: the reference at 152 is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 19, 33n, 65, 68, 95, 98, 152, 486

— Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie. Ed. Carl Ludwig
Michelet, in Werke. 20 vols. Berlin: Duncker and Humblot, 1834-54,
XIII-XV.

note: the quotation is of Mansel’s translation of Hegel.

quoted: 47

Heuck, A. “Bemerkungen über ein vierzehnjähriges Mädchen ohne
Extremitäten,” Neue Notizen aus dem Gebiete der Natur- und Heilkunde,
VII.1 (July, 1838), cols. 1-5.

note: the periodical was edited by Ludwig Friedrich von Froriep and Dr.
Robert Froriep. JSM, who takes the reference from McCosh (who translates
from Schopenhauer, where the original is cited), refers, following
McCosh, to “Frorieps” rather than Heuck. Eva Lauk is the
fourteen-year-old quadraplegic described.

referred to: 248

Hobbes, Thomas. “Of Liberty and Necessity,” Discourse III of Tripos, in
The English Works of Thomas Hobbes. Ed. William Molesworth. 11 vols.
London: Bohn, 1839-45, IV, 229-78.

referred to: 441n

— “Physics, or the Phenomena of Nature,” Part IV of Elements of
Philosophy: The First Section, Concerning Body, in ibid., I, 387-532.

referred to: 51

Hooke, Robert. Micrographia. London: Martyn and Allestry, 1665.

note: the quotations are simply uses of the term “experimentum crucis,”
which Mill, like most other philosophers (including Hume, and following
Newton), attributes elsewhere to Bacon, whose parallel term is actually
“instantia crucis”; see Bacon, Novum Organum, 294.

quoted: 222, 237

Hume, David.

note: the reference at 151 is in a quotation from, and that at 448
derives from, Hamilton.

referred to: cvii, 1, 6, 134, 151, 183, 217n, 294, 296, 297, 448, 493n,
498n

— An Inquiry concerning Human Understanding, in Essays and Treatises on
Several Subjects. 2 vols. Edinburgh: Cadell, 1793, II, 17-183.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College. Until 1758 entitled
Philosophical Essays Concerning Human Understanding. The quotations at
135 are from, and the second reference at 498n-9n is to, “Of the
Academical or Sceptical Philosophy” (Section xii of the Inquiry); the
first quotation at 165n is from “Sceptical Doubts concerning the
Operations of the Understanding” (Section iv); the second quotation at
166n is from “Sceptical Solution of these Doubts” (Section v); the
reference at 299 is to “Of the Idea of Necessary Connection” (Section
vii); and the first reference at 498n-9n is to the work as a whole.

quoted: 135, 165n-6n

Edition: current; Page: [569]
referred to: 299, 498n-9n

135.8-11 “universal . . . men.” . . . “is soon . . . philosophy.”] But
this universal . . . men is soon . . . philosophy, which teaches us,
that nothing can ever be present to the mind but an image or perception,
and that the senses are only the inlets, through which these images are
conveyed, without being able to produce any immediate intercourse
between the mind and the object. (169)

135.24-5 “blind . . . nature.”] It seems also evident, that, when men
follow this blind . . . nature, they always suppose the very images,
presented by the senses, to be the external objects, and never entertain
any suspicion, that the one are nothing but representations of the
other. (169)

165n.41 “It may be a subject worthy curiosity] It may therefore be a
subject worthy of curiosity (39)

166n.1 or the records of our memory.”] [not in italics] (39)

166n.1-2 “all reasonings] All reasonings (39)

166n.3 alone can we go] alone, we can go (39)

166n.4 memory] memory (39)

166n.8 “where . . . memory and senses”] Now, I assert, that this belief,
where . . . memory or senses, is one of a similar nature, and arises
from similar causes, with the transition of thought and vivacity of
conception here explained. (68)

“Inquirer, An.” See Phillipps, Lucy March.

Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich. David Hume über den Glauben, oder Idealismus
und Realismus. Ein Gespräch, in Werke. 6 vols. Leipzig: Fleischer,
1812-25, II, 1-310.

note: the quotation is in a quotation from Hamilton.

quoted: 487

referred to: 488

Johnson, Samuel. London, A Poem: in Imitation of the Third Satire of
Juvenal, in The Works of Samuel Johnson. 14 vols. London: Buckland,
Rivington, et al., 1787-88, I, 319-30.

note: the reference, which is based only on a linguistic resemblance, is
given because Bain, in his John Stuart Mill (122n), says: “Grote thought
that the phrase [“to hell I will go”] was an echo of something occurring
in Ben Jonson; when a military captain’s implicit obedience is crowned
by the illustration—‘Tell him to go to hell, to hell he will go’. I have
never got any clue to the place.” Bain’s “Ben Jonson” may be a mistaken
echo of Grote; in any case, the context in Samuel Johnson is not
appropriate: “No gainful trade their industry can ’scape, / They sing,
they dance, clean shoes, or cure a clap: / All sciences a fasting
Monsieur knows, / And, bid him go to hell, to hell he goes.” (324;
113-16)

referred to: 103

— See also Boswell, Life of Johnson.

Jouffroy, Théodore. Mélanges philosophiques. 2nd ed. Paris: Ladrange,
1838.

note: the reference is to Hamilton’s reliance on Jouffroy’s “Du sommeil”
(Part IV of “Psychologie”), in Mélanges, 290-312 (of which Hamilton
quotes 290-302); Mansel and Veitch (Lectures, I, 324n) give the
reference to the 2nd ed.

referred to: 491

Kant, Immanuel.

note: the references at 41, 175 are in quotations from Hamilton; that at
88n is in a self-quotation; those at 208n, 241 are in quotations from
Mahaffy.

referred to: 1, 9, 10, 23, 25, 27, 29, 29n, 39n, 41, 56, 66, 88n, 143,
143n, 147n-8n, 154, 175, 179, 207, 207n-8n, 241, 313n, 320n, 334, 355,
364, 449n, 466n, 485, 493n

Edition: current; Page: [570]
— Kritik der Praktischen Vernunft, in Sämmtliche Werke. Ed. Karl
Rosenkranz and Friedrich Schubert. 14 vols. in 12. Leipzig: Voss,
1838-40, VIII, 105-318.

note: this ed. used because JSM refers to it at 154n.

referred to: 488

— Kritik der Reinen Vernunft, in ibid., II.

note: see also Haywood.

referred to: 27n, 135, 154n, 260, 360, 374n

— Logic, in Prolegomena zu einer jeden künftigen Metaphysik, die als
Wissenschaft wird auftreten können und Logic, in ibid., III.

referred to: 356, 369n

— Metaphysik der Sitten, in ibid., IX, ix-366.

referred to: 467

Keckermannus, Bartholomæus. Systema Logicae, Tribus Libris Adornatum.
Geneva: de la Rouiere, 1611.

note: JSM’s spelling is Keckermann. A copy of this ed. is in the London
Library, and may have been part of the donation by JSM of his father’s
books.

referred to: 415

Kepler, Johannes.

note: the reference at 487 is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 474, 487

Kinghan, John.

note: the reference derives from McCosh.

referred to: 225n

Krug, Wilhelm Traugott. Referred to: 175, 327, 415

— Logik. 2nd ed. 2 vols. Königsberg: Unzer, 1819.

note: the quotations and references derive from Hamilton’s Lectures, the
editors of which use this ed. of Krug’s Logik.

quoted: 325, 412

referred to: 286n, 337n, 356, 379, 410, 494, 494n

Laplace, Pierre Simon de.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 487

Lauk, Eva. Referred to: 248-9; see also Heuck.

Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von. Referred to: cvii, 152, 295, 320, 440,
485, 499

— Essais de théodicée sur la bonté de Dieu, la liberté de l’homme et
l’origine du mal. Amsterdam: Troyel, 1710.

quoted: 500

referred to: 372, 419, 499-500, 502

500.32-3 par la nature des créatures] Et elles ont cela par leur nature
& par la nature des créatures raisonnables; avant que Dieu décerne de
les créer. (347)

— Meditationes de Cognitione, Veritate et Ideis, in Opera Philosophica.
Ed. Johann Eduard Erdmann. Berlin: Eichler, 1840, 79-81.

note: the quotation is in a quotation from Hamilton.

quoted: 319

referred to: 320, 320n

319.34 (non simul intuemur)] Plerumque autem, præsertim in analysi
longiore, non totam simul naturam rei intuemur, sed rerum loco signis
utimur, quorum explicationem in Edition: current; Page: [571] præsenti
aliqua cogitatione compendii causa solemus prætermittere, scientes, aut
credentes nos eam habere in potestate: ita cum chiliogonum, seu
polygonum mille æqualium laterum cogito, non semper naturam lateris, et
æqualitatis, et millenarii (seu cubi a denario) considero, sed vocabulis
istis (quorum sensus obscure saltem, atque imperfecte menti obversatur)
in animo utor loco idearum, quas de iis habeo, quoniam memini me
significationem istorum vocabulorum habere, explicationem autem nunc
judicio necessariam non esse; qualem cogitationem cæcam, vel etiam
symbolicam appellare soleo, qua et in Algebra, et in Arithmetica utimur,
imo fere ubique: (79-80)

— La Monadologie, in ibid., 705-12.

referred to: 500, 502

— Troisième Éclaircissement, in ibid., 134-6.

note: the indirect quotation is in a quotation from Hamilton, who cites
this edition.

quoted: 501

Lewes, George Henry. Aristotle: A Chapter from the History of Science,
including analyses of Aristotle’s scientific writings. London: Smith,
Elder, 1864.

quoted: 489n

Locke, John.

note: the references at 14, 152 and the second reference at 28n are in
quotations from Hamilton; that at 169 is in a quotation from Reid.

referred to: 1, 14, 15, 28n, 110, 139, 152, 155, 169, 362, 449n, 493n

— Essay Concerning Human Understanding, in Works. New ed. 10 vols.
London: Tegg, Sharpe, Offor, Robinson, and Evans, 1823, I-III.

note: the indirect quotation at 28n is in a quotation from Mansel; the
quotation at 141 is summary (Locke uses “original,” not “origin”), and
so is not collated; the reference at 201 is in a quotation from McCosh.

quoted: 141, 448n

referred to: 28n, 201, 302, 324, 373

448n.1 “Does it not require” . . . “some] For example, does it not
require some (III, 27)

Lucretius Carus, Titus.

note: the notion of species sensibiles is mistakenly attributed to
Lucretius; it originated in Artistotle’s On the Soul (q.v.).

referred to: 15

Luther, Martin. Referred to: 440

McCosh, James. An Examination of Mr. J. S. Mill’s Philosophy, being a
Defence of Fundamental Truth. London: Macmillan, 1866.

quoted: 63n-4n, 72n-3n, 73n, 146n, 201, 216n, 225n, 231n-2n, 237n, 246,
246n, 261n, 284n, 317n, 338n, 391n

referred to: ciii, 72n, 75n, 166n, 208n-9n, 217n, 240, 242n, 244, 247,
262n, 269, 337n, 374n-5n

63n.9-10 word belief,” . . . “is] word “belief” is (36)

64n.2 distinguish primitive faith from primitive knowledge,] distinguish
“primitive faith” from “primitive knowledge,” (36-7)

73n.17 “I] Now I (210)

73n.28 each other] another (211)

73n.29 further] farther (211)

73n.29-30 than another.] than another (see supra, pp. 160-8). (211)

146n.30 “the alleged] Not because of any supposed intuition or necessary
truth,—I am not aware that they ever appealed to such; not even because
of a strong association: but because the alleged (240)

146n.32 downwards.”] downwards, and thus, and not on any a priori
grounds, did they Edition: current; Page: [572] argue that there could
not be antipodes, as persons so situated would fall away into a lower
space. (240-1)

201.18 powers by] powers (specially mentioned by Locke, Essay, B. II. c.
ii. §23) by (118)

201.18 thus] “thus (118) [McCosh is quoting from JSM]

216n.18 “elaborated] At this point Mr. Mill hands us over to his friend
Professor Bain, who, in The Senses and the Intellect, has elaborated
(121)

216n.19 Mill’s Logic;”] Mill’s Logic. (121)

216n.29-31 “as . . . things,”] But he was led by the influence of this
teacher to regard it as . . . things; and to adopt his favourite method
of procedure, which is by deduction from an hypothesis, which he
endeavours to show explains all the phenomena. (8)

216n.31 “the influence”] [see entry above]

225n.24 “a] Those born blind cannot have the visual idea of space, but
they have, he says, a (143n)

231n.3-4 case,” . . . “is] case is (163)

231n.5-6 (Phil. Trans. of Roy. Soc. 1841). The] (Phil. Trans. of Roy.
Soc. 1841), and I shall quote from it at considerable length. The (163)

231n.9 light, a sheet] light, “a sheet (163) [McCosh is quoting from
Franz]

231n.12-13 denominations,” . . . vertical. “ ‘The] denominations.” “The
(164) [McCosh is quoting from Franz]

231n.16 cube . . . sphere] cube . . . sphere (164)

231n.17 was] were (164)

231n.18 quadrangular . . . circular] quadrangular . . . circular (164)

231n.19 square . . . disc] square . . . disc (164)

231n.25 quadrates.” . . . “A] quadrates. A (164)

231n.26 plain” . . . “triangle] plain triangle (164)

231n.30-1 it; in fact, said he, I must give it up.] it, ‘in fact,’ said
he, ‘I must give it up.’ (165)

232n.5-6 the object.” . . . “When] the objects. When (165)

237n.10 “This case] The case (151n)

246.6 “if] From a very early age, and long before they give any evidence
of knowing distance beyond their bodies, or having any other acquired
perceptions, children will indicate that they know at least vaguely the
seat of the pain felt by them—if (150)

246.7-8 “any acquired perceptions”] [see entry above]

246.14-15 “Müller,” . . . “has collected . . . cases,”] Müller has
collected . . . cases (Ib., pp. 746, 747). (148) [“Ib.” refers to
Müller’s Physiology]

246.16 “a student] “A student (148) [McCosh is quoting from Müller]

261n.24-5 “that . . . judgment”] Association may help us to form a
reasonable judgment—and it is a happy circumstance when it does so; but
whether we are or are not so aided, we should be taught that . . .
judgment, in which we look to the nature of things as the same can be
discovered by us. (214)

261n.25 “to] But it is a still higher end of the highest education to
raise us above all hereditary and casual association of times or
circumstances, and to constrain us to (214-15)

284n.10 discover,” . . . “no] discover no (185)

284n.11 sensations.”] sensations, or that two remembered sensations will
ever be anything else than two remembered sensations. (185-6)

317n.1 “I think] I also think (276)

338n.1 “mere] This cannot be said of the second class, or those in which
we compare mere (294)

338n.4 “has] I urge, further, in opposition to the doctrine, that in
those propositions in which the terms are abstract, the predicate,
properly speaking, has (333)

391n.2 “in] In (292)

391n.4 “the] In not a few propositions the (293)

391n.5 the crocodile is a reptile,] ‘the crocodile is a reptile,’ (293)

391n.9 “the] The (293)

391n.16 “proceed . . . things;”] The “tendency” to do this must surely
proceed . . . things; Edition: current; Page: [573] and the possibility
of doing it surely implies an intimate relation between the
Comprehension and the Extension. (293)

391n.20-1 “so . . . Comprehension,”] I have granted that, so . . .
Comprehension. (303)

391n.21-2 “different . . . Extension,”] But it seems to me to be
different . . . Extension. (303)

— “Mill’s Reply to his Critics,” The British and Foreign Evangelical
Review, XVII (April, 1868), 332-62.

quoted: 209n, 247, 248, 284n, 285n

referred to: cvii, 74n, 75n, 208n, 248n-9n, 262n

209n.5-6 “power . . . idea,” . . . “empirical theory;”] If he take the
other alternative, then he is giving to the mind the power . . . idea—a
view utterly inconsistent with his own empirical theory, and the very
view of Leibnitz, who makes intellectus ipse a source of ideas. (343-4)

209n.16 “mental laws, say the] Do they come in obedience to mental laws,
say, to the (345)

209n.22 “obliged”] He is now replying to me (p. 248), is obliged to talk
of one group of possibilities of sensations, “destroying or modifying
another such group;” and this certainly not by laws acting independently
of any discoverable cause in the series which constitutes mind. (346-7)

247.17 “normally”] According to that illustrious physiologist, we
localise our affections received by the senses; and the law of our
nature is, that in touch or feeling, we place the sensation at the spot
where the nerve normally terminates. (350)

248.8-10 “should . . . this,” . . . “might] According to the association
theory, the affection should . . . this, according to Mr Mill, might
(351)

248.20 “Eva] According to this theory, a person born without arms or
legs could have no idea of space; but Schopenhauer has brought forward
the case of Eva (352)

248.25 as they.”] as they.* [footnote:]* My attention was called to this
case by Mr Bleeck, in his Mr J. S. Mill’s Psychological Theory. It is
quoted by Schopenhauer in his Die Welt als Wille, vol. ii. c. 4, and is
taken from Frorieps Neue Notizen aus dem Gebiete der Natur, July 1838.
(353)

248.27-8 “that . . . extension,”] In my Examination of Mill, I
endeavoured to meet this by psychological considerations, and shewed
that . . . extension, could not give us the idea of extension. (352)

284n.21 “a wheel] Now, it so happens that I had produced the ring when a
boy, by a lighted piece of paper; in my college days, I had seen the
experiment of the seven colours; and, in my mature life, I have seen a
wheel (354)

285n.5-6 “the power . . . belief.”] It relates to the power . . .
belief,—in fact, to take the place of judgment or the comparison of
things. (353)

Mahaffy, John Pentland, intro. and trans. Kuno Fischer. A Commentary on
Kant’s Critick of Pure Reason. London: Longmans, Green, 1866.

note: the reference at 27n is to the Introduction, Pt. IV, “The
Variations between the First and Second Editions of the Critick, and the
Idealism of Kant,” and to Appendix C, which includes commentary on those
variations.

quoted: 145n, 146n, 207n-8n, 225n, 240-1, 244, 266n

referred to: civ, 27n, 242, 243, 263n

145n.7 “There] Yet there (viii)

145n.8 kind. We] kind. [1-paragraph omission] We (viii)

207n.17 you,” . . . “conscious] you conscious (lvi)

225n.5 originally] originally (xxi)

240.21 passage” . . . “will] passage (pp. 222, seq.) which follows will
(xviii)

240.33-5 Abbott. (Sight and Touch, chap. v.) More] Abbott, “Sight and
Touch,” chap. v. More (xviii)

241.1 space . . . time] space . . . time (xviii-xix)

241.16-17 that . . . time.] that . . . time.* [footnote omitted] (xix)

241.23 passage . . . “We] passage in p. 225: “we (xix)

241.28 changes] changes (xx)

Edition: current; Page: [574]
241.28 move] move (xx)

241.31 Mill.”] Mill himself (p. 230.). (xx)

266n.11 child,” . . . “who] child who (xxvii)

266n.13 result. . . . Most] [ellipsis indicates 6-sentence omission]
(xxvii-xxviii)

Maine de Biran, Marie François Pierre Gonthier. Nouvelles Considérations
sur les rapports du physique et du moral de l’homme. Ed. Victor Cousin.
Paris: Ladrange, 1834.

note: the reference derives from Hamilton.

referred to: 237

Malebranche, Nicholas de. Referred to: 152

— Recherche de la vérité, in Œuvres. Ed. Jules Simon. 2 vols. Paris:
Charpentier, 1842, II.

referred to: 204n

Malthus, Thomas Robert. Referred to: 110n

Mansel, Henry Longueville. Referred to: 30n, 52, 57, 89-90, 207, 262,
465-6

— The Limits of Religious Thought. 4th ed. London: Murray, 1859.

note: this is the ed. cited by JSM.

quoted: 47, 91, 91n, 92, 92n-3n, 93, 93n, 94n-5n, 95, 95-6, 96, 97n-8n,
98, 101, 103

referred to: 34n, 35n, 45n, 94, 97, 99n, 100, 102, 107n-8n, 383n

47.5 that,” asked Hegel, “which] that,” says Hegel, “which (30)

91.7 “such . . . Nature”] At present I am concerned only with its
pretensions to such . . . Nature as can constitute the foundation of a
Rational Theology. (29)

91.8-9 “to conceive . . . is.” . . . “conceive] To conceive . . . is, we
must conceive (30)

91.17 Absolute] Absolute (30)

91.18 Being.”] Being [note omitted]. (30)

92.10 “a] A (31)

92.14 involves] implies (31)

92.14 relation.”] relation [note omitted]. (31)

93.1-2 “supposing the . . . cause,”] Supposing the . . . cause, it will
follow that it operates by means of free will and consciousness. (32)

93.3 “volition] The act of causation must therefore be voluntary; and
volition (32)

93.8 “conscious of itself,”] The Absolute, it may be said, may possibly
be conscious, provided it is only conscious of itself [note omitted].
(32)

93n.25 as . . . existence] as . . . existence (200)

94n.19 “if] If (34)

95n.1 perfect] [not in italics] (35)

95n.2 its original perfection.”] [not in italics; note omitted] (35)

95n.5 exhausting . . . being] [not in italics] (38)

95n.7 Absolute.”] Absolute; and we are involved in the
self-contradictory assumption of a limited universe, which yet can
neither contain a limit in itself, nor be limited by anything beyond
itself. (38)

95.3 “nothing . . . reality,”] The metaphysical representation of the
Deity, as absolute and infinite, must necessarily, as the profoundest
metaphysicians have acknowledged, amount to nothing . . . reality [note
omitted]. (30)

95.6 “all . . . included.”] “What kind of an Absolute Being is that,”
says Hegel, “which does not contain in itself all . . . included?” [note
omitted] (30)

95.7 infinite,” . . . “must] infinite must (31)

95.15-16 “a whole composed of parts,” or “a . . . attributes,” or a
“conscious . . . object.] Not only is the Absolute, as conceived,
incapable of a necessary relation to anything else; but it is also
incapable of containing, by the constitution of its own nature, an
essential relation within itself; as a whole, for instance, composed of
parts, or as a . . . attributes, or as a conscious . . . object [note
omitted]. (33)

95.19 relatives.] relatives [note omitted]. (33)

Edition: current; Page: [575]
95.22 matter.] matter [note omitted]. (33)

96.2 multiplicity.”] multiplicity [note omitted]. (33)

96.19-20 “that . . . inconceivable,” it “consequently] By the Infinite
is meant that which is free from all possible limitation; that . . .
inconceivable; and which consequently (30)

96.23 “cannot] [paragraph] The Infinite, as contemplated by this
philosophy, cannot (30)

96.32 “the] But the (48)

96.33 anything general] anything in general (48)

96.37 limitation.] limitation [note omitted]. (48)

97n.25 infinite. . . . And] infinite. We cannot, therefore, start from
any abstract assumption of the divine infinity, to reason downwards to
any object of human thought. And (60)

98n.1 thoughts] thought (60)

98.4 “the . . . Absolute” . . . “in . . . only” . . . “our] [paragraph]
What we have hitherto been examining, be it remembered, is not the . . .
Absolute in . . . only our (39)

98.7 Being.”] Being,—a belief which appears forced upon us, as the
complement of our consciousness of the relative and the finite. (45)

101.24 “that] We may suppose the existence in man of a special faculty
of knowledge, of which God is the immediate object,—a kind of religious
sense or reason, by which the Divine attributes are apprehended in their
own nature [note omitted]: or we may maintain that (26)

101.27 God,”] God [note omitted]. (26)

101.29 “the] The latter [notion concerning means to convey a knowledge
of God] is the method of the (26)

101.33 “all the excellences of] On the other hand, we meet with an
opposite style of criticism, which reasons somewhat as follows: All the
excellences, it contends, of (28)

101.38 character.”] character [note omitted]. (28)

103.12-13 “the . . . conceiving”] [see 101 above] (xiii)

— The Philosophy of the Conditioned: comprising some remarks on Sir
William Hamilton’s Philosophy and on Mr. J. S. Mill’s Examination of
that Philosophy. London and New York: Strahan, 1866.

note: first published as: “The Philosophy of the Conditioned: Sir
William Hamilton and John Stuart Mill,” Contemporary Review, I (Jan. and
Feb., 1866), 31-49, 185-219.

quoted: 24, 27, 28n, 29, 34n, 40, 45n, 46n, 50n, 52n, 57n, 58n, 64n,
76n, 77n, 85n, 93n-4n, 94n, 97n, 98n-9n, 99n, 104n-5n, 106n, 107n, 123n,
493n

referred to: ciii, cv, cvi, cvii, 22n, 25, 26, 28, 30, 30n, 32n, 38n,
49n, 56, 92n, 124n

24.28-30 “reacts . . . recipient,”] The assertion that all our knowledge
is relative,—in other words, that we know things only under such
conditions as the laws of our cognitive faculties impose upon us,—is a
statement which looks at first sight like a truism, but which really
contains an answer to a very important question,—Have we reason to
believe that the laws of our cognitive faculties impose any conditions
at all?—that the mind in any way reacts . . . recipient? (63-4)

27.4 “objects” . . . “things in themselves.”] Having thus quietly
assumed that “things in themselves” are identical with “objects,” and
“relations” with “impressions on the human mind,” Mr. Mill bases his
whole criticism on this tacit petitio principii. (79n) [JSM reverses
phrasal order; the quotation derives from Hamilton]

27.4-7 “Objective existence” . . . “does . . . and a phenomenon . . . as
an object] It is simply that objective existence does . . . and that a
phenomenon . . . as an object (82-3)

28n.2-7 “If, indeed,” . . . “Hamilton . . . no, he . . . possunt.’ ”]
If, indeed, Hamilton . . . no,* [footnote:] *Essay, ii. 8, §23. [text:]
he . . . possunt.”* [footnote:] *Reid’s Works, p. 839. (83-4)

29.5 “out . . . time”] “A direct intuition of things in themselves,”
according to Kant and Hamilton, is an intuition of things out . . .
time.” (77-8)

34n.10 “pseudo-concept . . . Infinite,”] Hence it is not to be wondered
at—nay, it is a natural consequence of this doctrine,—that our positive
conception of God as a Person cannot be included under this
pseudo-concept . . . Infinite. (93)

40.21-2 “Out . . . completed” . . . “self-existent] If meant as a
statement of Hamilton’s use of Edition: current; Page: [576] the term,
it is incorrect: absolute, in Hamilton’s philosophy, does not mean
simply “completed,” but “out . . . completed;” i.e., self-existent.
(104)

46n.4 Apparent.”] Apparent.* [footnote:] *Republic, Book v, p. 479.
(109)

50n.1 “indefinitely increasable.”] Can any man suppose that, when the
Divine attributes are spoken of as infinite, it is meant that they are
indefinitely increasable?* [footnote omitted] (114)

52n.4 “pseudo-infinite.”] Whereas Mr. Mill, by laying down the maxim
that the meaning of the abstract must be sought in the concrete, quietly
assumes that this pseudo-infinite is a proper predicate of God, to be
tested by its applicability to the subject, and that what Hamilton says
of this infinite cannot be true unless it is also true of God. (93)

52n.17-18 “the unconditionally limited,”] Can Mr. Mill possibly be
ignorant that all these attributes are relations; that the Absolute in
Hamilton’s sense, “the unconditionally limited,” is not predicable of
God at all; and that when divines and philosophers speak of the absolute
nature of God, they mean a nature in which there is no distinction of
attributes at all? (106)

57n.2 unconditioned” . . . “God] unconditioned, God (17)

57n.8-9 “one . . . depends,”] This is Materialism, which has then to
address itself to the further problem, to reduce the various phenomena
of matter to some one . . . depends. (7)

58n.9-10 “Hamilton . . . maintains . . . absolute and infinite . . .
relative and finite.”] Hamilton maintains . . . “absolute” and
“infinite” . . . “relative” and “finite;” for “correlatives suggest each
other,” and the “knowledge of contradictories is one;” but he denies
that a concrete thing or object can be positively conceived as absolute
or infinite. (110)

64n.18 intuition.”] intuition; but to show this in the various instances
would require a longer dissertation than our present limits will allow.
(126n)

64n.22 “When] But when (126n)

77n.6-7 “To . . . possible,” . . . “we . . . possible; but we] It must
be remembered that, to . . . possible, we . . . possible but that we
(36n)

85n.1-2 “exhaust any finite number, by] Simply because of a conventional
arrangement, by which a single digit, according to its position, can
express, by one mark, tens, hundreds, thousands, &c., of units; and thus
can exhaust the sum by (134)

85n.3 “exhaust the infinite.”] But how can such a process exhaust the
infinite? (134)

93n.37-94n.1 relation” . . . “and] relation, and (117)

94n.7-10 with undertaking . . . impossibility of conceiving a . . . wise
(i.e. . . . existence out . . . relation.”] with “undertaking . . .
impossibility” of conceiving “a . . . wise”* [footnote:] *Examination,
p. 95. [text:] (i.e. . . . existence “out . . . relation.” (153-4)

97n.3 “Is . . . higher perfection?”] To the first part of this objection
we reply by simply asking, “Is . . . ‘higher perfection?’ ” (158)

99n.13-15 saying, I . . . existence?”] saying, “I . . . existence?”
(163)

99n.34-5 “the . . . itself,” . . . “simple, . . . itself,”] It must
therefore be conceivable as the . . . itself; and as simple, . . .
itself. (100)

99n.36-40 “we . . . that” . . . “own . . . subject,” . . . “only . . .
other,”] We . . . that His own . . . subject; but we can conceive Him
only . . . other.* [footnote omitted] (28)

104n.3 “Mr. Mansel asserts] Mr. Mansel, as we have said, asserts (164)

105n.15 child. . . . We] child. [ellipsis indicates 1-page omission] We
will not pause to comment on the temper and taste of this declamation;
we (167-8)

105n.16-17 it certainly is, . . . fellow creatures] it constantly is, .
. . “fellow creatures,” (168)

105n.20-1 a good father . . . a good son? . . . as good,] a good father
. . . a good son? . . . as good, (169)

106n.32 “We] But as regards the former part, we (172)

107n.26 “The . . . Rationalist] Now the . . . “Rationalist” (175)

123n.1-2 “Hamilton,” . . . “maintains] Hamilton maintains (129n)

493n.1-3 “Sir W. Hamilton . . . paper.”] Either Sir W. Hamilton . . .
paper, or the blunders are Mr. Mill’s own. (181)

— Prolegomena Logica. An Inquiry into the Psychological Character of
Logical Processes. Oxford: Graham; London: Whittaker, 1851.

Edition: current; Page: [577]
quoted: 262, 263, 265, 266, 267, 297, 298, 300, 308, 308n, 312-13,
313-14, 318, 322, 332n, 337n, 355, 366, 448n, 465, 468

referred to: 195n, 269, 271, 299, 312, 313n, 316n, 317, 320, 323, 334,
356n, 360, 360-1, 364, 365, 367, 370, 371, 376, 409n, 448, 467, 469

262.13-15 observed,” . . . “that] observed, that (90)

262.17 itself.] itself.* [footnote omitted] (90)

262.18 ideas;] ideas*; [footnote omitted] (90)

262.20-2 other . . . only.] [not in italics] (90-1)

263.4 a hundred] 100 (97)

263.5 experiences] experience (97)

263.6 have] has (97)

263.7 ninety-nine] 99 (97)

263.8 hundredth] 100th (97)

265.1 “experience] Experience (99)

265.4 lines:”] ones. (100)

266.24-5 only,” . . . “conceive . . . presentation;”] only conceive . .
. presentation; and all our past presentations have been given under the
law of succession. (112n)

267.5 conceive,” . . . “a] conceive a (149)

267.8 nevertheless] notwithstanding (149)

267.16 “while] Both are necessary, inasmuch as, while (150)

267.16-17 and circumstances] [not in italics] (150)

297.10-12 “is . . . volitions.”] Our clearest notion of efficiency is .
. . volitions*. [footnote:] *See Reid, Active Powers, Essay i. ch. v.
(140)

297.13 “an interesting] Thus interpreted, the principle in question
stands on precisely the same footing as that of substance;—an
interesting (142)

298.6 “we should] And if we were asked, why these two alternatives alone
are admissible, we should (148)

298.6 Because . . . itself] “because . . . itself” (148)

298.6 But why] Now why (148)

300.9-10 “natural tendency of men” . . . “to . . . themselves,”] Thus
interpreted, the principle in question stands on precisely the same
footing as that of substance;—an interesting illustration of the
universal tendency of men to . . . themselves, even where the
identification tends to the destruction of all clear
thinking;—furnishing a psychological explanation of a form of speech
which has prevailed and will continue to prevail among all people in all
times;—but not properly to be called a necessary truth, nor capable of
any scientific application; inasmuch as, in any such application, it may
be true or false, without our being able to determine which, as the
object of which it treats never comes within the reach of our faculties.
(142)

308.11-12 “cannot . . . imagination”] From this neglect of individual
characteristics arises the first distinguishing feature of a concept;
viz. that it cannot . . . imagination*. [footnote:] *Cf. Hamilton on
Reid, p. 360. (15)

308n.2-4 “In . . . intuition.”] To clear up the point at issue, it will
be necessary to bear in mind two facts which have just been noticed;
viz. firstly, that in . . . intuition; and, secondly, that all concepts
are formed by means of signs which have previously been representative
of individual objects only. (29-30)

312.15-16 “without . . . symbols” . . . “beyond . . . imagination.] This
characteristic cannot indeed be determined à priori, from the mere
notion of the concept as universal, but it may be proved to a moral
certainty à posteriori, by the inability of which in practice every man
is conscious, of advancing, without . . . symbols, beyond . . .
imagination. (15)

312.17 individuals.] individuals*. [footnote omitted] (16)

312.29 successively . . . simultaneously] [in italics] (16)

313.33 “Observe] To solve this dilemma, we need not call in aid the
curious hypothesis of Condillac, who held that the dependence of thought
on sensation (and by implication on language) was a consequence of the
fall of Adam: we need only observe (19)

313.38 class.] class*. [footnote omitted] (20)

Edition: current; Page: [578]
314.8 sight? . . . All] sight? [ellipsis indicates 9-page omission] To
clear up the point at issue, it will be necessary to bear in mind two
facts which have just been noticed; viz. firstly, that in every complete
act of conception, the attributes forming the concept are contemplated
as coexisting in a possible object of intuition; and, secondly, that all
(29)

314.9 only. . . . Similarities] [ellipsis indicates 5-sentence omission]
(30)

314.10 differences:] differences*; [footnote omitted] (31)

318.26-7 “We can,” . . . “and] On the other hand, throughout Berkeley’s
dissertation, too little notice is taken of the important fact, that we
can, and (31)

318.28 individualization. . . . I] individualization. But this is done,
not in any mere act of conception, but only in the more complex
operations of thought in which such act is presupposed. I (31)

318.31-2 The . . . signified] [not in italics] (31-2)

322.21-2 “the . . . concepts.”] The . . . concepts: the true singular
proposition in Logic is not one in which the concept is materially
limited to an individual by extralogical considerations, but one in
which it is formally so limited by a sign of individuality. (63)

322.22-3 “The man” .h. . “as] But the man, as (62)

322.25 Cæsar . . . Pompey,] “Cæsar . . . Pompey,” (62)

332n.23-4 “may . . . This is here.”] The result of every such act may .
. . “this is here.” (53)

332n.27 “But] Every operation of thought is a judgment, in the
psychological sense of the term: but (54)

332n.30 other. . . . The] other. The former cannot be distinguished as
true or false, inasmuch as the object is thereby only judged to be
present at the moment when we are conscious of it as affecting us in a
certain manner; and this consciousness is necessarily true. The latter
is true or false, according as the relations thought as existing between
certain concepts are actually found in the objects represented by those
concepts or not. The (54-5)

337n.20 other is] other set is (59)

337n.33 “must . . . attributes”] Every notion, that is to say, as a
condition of its conceivability, must . . . attributes, in consequence
of which it is capable of subordination to a higher notion: and it must
contain a limited number only of attributes, in consequence of which
lower notions may be subordinated to it. (184-5)

337n.34 “for] For (185)

337n.36-7 are never] are thus never (185)

337n.37 object:”] object. (185)

355.7 distinction between] distinction adopted between (226)

355.9 Matter] Matter (226)

355.11 Form] Form (226)

355.14 it.”] it*. [footnote omitted] (226)

366.29 “accepts] Thus it accepts (265) [see next entry]

366.32 themselves . . . leaving] [ellipsis indicates that JSM has
altered the order of the sentences; see previous entry] It is competent
to test the validity of all such products, in so far as they comply or
not with the conditions of pure thought; leaving (265)

448n.16 “In] In this sense, motives addressed to the will are not
causes; for, in (152)

465.12 “by] But if they would consider that by (298)

465.12 necessarily] necessarily (298)

465.14 does] does (299)

465.16 case. No] case; they probably would not find this doctrine either
contrary to their experience or revolting to their feelings. And no
(299)

465.18 this” . . . “is] this, we might add, is (299)

468.22 “but] The strongest motive prevails; but (302)

— “Supplementary Remarks on Mr. Mill’s Criticism of Sir William
Hamilton,” Contemporary Review, VI (Sept., 1867), 18-31.

quoted: 77n, 103n, 107n

referred to: cvi-cvii, 29n, 35n, 50n, 74n, 85n, 93n

77n.10 “mentally] When I say, “to conceive a thing as possible,” I mean
mentally (27)

Edition: current; Page: [579]
103n.3 “the phenomena] Mr Mill, on the other hand, declares that he will
call no being good who is not what he means when he applies the epithet
to his fellow creatures; and as his only means of judging are by the
phenomena through which such a being is manifested, the declaration can
only mean that he will call no being good, the phenomena (30)

107n.8 “if power] For if power (30n)

Masson, David. Recent British Philosophy: A review, with criticisms;
including some comments on Mr. Mill’s answer to Sir William Hamilton.
London and Cambridge: Macmillan, 1865.

note: the “substance” of the work was delivered as lectures at the Royal
Institution, 21, 23, and 28 March, 1865. A second ed. appeared in 1867.
The quotation at 207 is indirect.

quoted: 207, 492n

referred to: vi, 30, 498n

207.14 organic union] It [the notion of Mind or Self] includes an
organic union somehow of the present with the non-present, the identity
somehow, in one conscious organism, of the was, the is, and the is to
be. (335)

492n.7 “Try him] Throw that [his strength, nerve, and felicity of style]
aside, and try him (308)

492n.12 discussion? . . . Let] discussion. Throw this aside too, and let
(308)

492n.12 W.] William (309)

Mersenne, Marin.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Hamilton, derives from Baillet.

referred to: 483

Mervoyer, Pierre Maurice. Etude sur l’association des idées. Paris:
Durand, 1864.

referred to: 250n

Mill, James. Referred to: 9, 116, 217n, 299, 493n

— Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind. 2 vols. London: Baldwin
and Cradock, 1829.

note: at 252-3 JSM would appear to be quoting directly from his father,
although Hamilton quotes the same passage; one of the references at 256
is in a quotation from Hamilton.

quoted: 115-16, 252-3, 282

referred to: 67, 199, 253-4, 255, 256, 257, 259, 283

116.2 say that I] say I (I, 170)

116.31 Generical marks] generical marks (I, 172)

252.24-5 “Where . . . ideas,” . . . “have] 8. [Mill’s eighth observation
on the law of association] Where . . . ideas have (I, 68)

252.32 single] simple (I, 68)

252.36-7 compounded. . . . [paragraph] It] [ellipsis indicates
5-paragraph omission] (I, 69-70)

253.2 is, of concomitance] is, concomitance (I, 71)

253.11 Some] 9. [Mill’s ninth observation on the law of association]
Some (I, 71)

253.13 we may make] we make (I, 72)

253.33-4 “The . . . another, or] [paragraph] The . . . another idea, or
(I, 75)

282.12 “under an . . . to:”] That this is no argument against the
existence of those feelings, will be made apparent, by the subsequent
explanation of other phenomena, in which the existence of certain
feelings, and an . . . to them, are out of dispute. (33)

Mill, John Stuart. Auguste Compte and Positivism (1865). In Essays on
Ethics, Religion, and Society, Collected Works, X, 261-368.

note: the reference is, more specifically, to 265-9.

referred to: 217n

Edition: current; Page: [580]
— “Bailey on Berkeley’s Theory of Vision,” in Essays on Philosophy and
the Classics, Collected Works, XI, 245-69.

note: reprinted from Dissertations and Discussions, II, 84-114;
originally in Westminster Review, XXXVIII (Oct., 1842), 318-36.

referred to: 256n

— “Coleridge,” in Collected Works, X, 117-63.

note: reprinted from Dissertations and Discussions, I, 393-466;
originally in London and Westminster Review, XXXIII (March, 1840),
257-302.

referred to: 208n-9n.

— “Grote’s Plato,” in Essays on Philosophy and the Classics, Collected
Works, XI, 375-440.

note: reprinted from Dissertations and Discussions, III, 275-379;
originally in Edinburgh Review, CXXIII (April, 1866), 297-364.

referred to: 46n

— On Liberty (1859). In Essays on Politics and Society, Collected Works,
XVIII, 213-310.

referred to: 459n

— A System of Logic: Ratiocinative and Inductive (1848; 8th ed., 1872).
Collected Works, VII and VIII.

note: though the references generally predate the 8th ed. (the copy-text
for the Collected Works), most of them are to arguments contained in all
editions, and so the version in Collected Works (which gives all variant
readings) is cited; the reference at 75n is specifically to the 6th ed.
(1865). The quotations at 450n are taken from Alexander, q.v.; that at
465 is taken from Mansel. The reference at 324 is editorial, calling
attention to a parallel passage.

quoted: 450n, 465

referred to: cviii, 68, 75n, 216n, 216n-17n, 262n, 271, 300, 324, 369n,
390, 416, 439n

450n.26 “practical feeling of Free Will”] The metaphysical theory of
free will, as held by philosophers, (for the practical feeling of it,
common in a greater or less degree to all mankind, is in no way
inconsistent with the contrary theory,) was invented because the
supposed alternative of admitting human actions to be necessary, was
deemed inconsistent with every one’s instinctive consciousness, as well
as humiliating to the pride and even degrading to the moral nature of
man. (VIII, 836)

450n.26-7 “a feeling . . . of,”] [paragraph] And indeed, if we examine
closely, we shall find that this feeling, of our being able to modify
our own character if we wish, is itself the feeling . . . of. (VIII,
841)

— Utilitarianism (1861). In Collected Works, X, 203-59.

referred to: 460n

Milton, John. Paradise Lost, in The Poetical Works of Mr. John Milton.
London: Tonson, 1695, 1-343.

note: the quotation at 42 is in a quotation from Hamilton.

quoted: 42, 198, 488

42.16 “Won from the cold and formless Infinite.”] Or hear’st thou rather
pure Ethereal Stream, / Whose Fountain who shall tell? before the Sun, /
Before the Heav’ns thou wert, and at the voice / Of God as with a Mantle
didst invest / The rising world of waters dark and deep, / Won from the
void and formless infinite. (62; III, 7-12)

198.23 “hanging self-balanced” on its own “centre”] Thus God the Heav’n
created, thus the Earth, / Matter unform’d and void: Darkness profound /
Cover’d th’ Abyss: but on the watry calm / His brooding wings the Spirit
of God outspread, / And vital virtue infus’d, and vital warmth /
Throughout the fluid Mass, but downward purg’d / The black tartareous
cold infernal dregs / Adverse to life: then founded, then conglob’d /
Like things to like, the rest to several place / Disparted, and between
spun out the Air, / And Earth self-balanc’d on her Centre hung. (186;
VII, 232-42)

Edition: current; Page: [581]
488.18-19 “cycle on epicycle, orb on orb?”] To ask or search I blame
thee not, for Heav’n / Is as the Book of God before thee set, / Wherein
to reade his wondrous Works and learn / His Seasons, Hours, or Days, or
Months, or Years: / This to attain, whether Heav’n move or Earth, /
Imports not, if thou reck’n right, the rest / From Man or Angel the
great Architect / Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge / His secrets
to be scann’d by them who ought / Rather admire; or if they list to try
/ Conjecture, he his Fabrick of the Heav’ns / Hath left to their
disputes, perhaps to move / His laughter at their quaint Opinions wide /
Hereafter, when they come to model Heav’n / And calculate the Stars, how
they will wield / The mighty frame, how build, unbuild, contrive / To
save appearances, how gird the Sphere / With Centrick and Eccentrick
scribl’d o’er, / Cycle and Epicycle, Orb in Orb: (201-2; VIII, 66-84)

Montesquieu, Charles-Louis de Secondat, Baron de la Brède et de.
Referred to: 358n

Müller, Johannes Peter. Elements of Physiology. Trans. with notes,
William Baly. London: Taylor and Walton, 1837.

note: JSM takes the quotations and the reference (which is to a section
added by Baly) from McCosh.

quoted: 246, 246-7

246.16 “a student] [paragraph] d. [4th of 9 cases cited] A student

Nefftzer, Auguste. “La Vie de Jésus par M. Ernest Renan,” Revue
Germanique et Française, XXVII (Sept., 1863), 181-4.

quoted: 136n

Newton, Isaac.

note: the reference at 152 is in a quotation from Hamilton; that at 297
in a quotation from Mansel.

referred to: 92, 152, 297, 434, 449n, 487, 488

— Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica, in Opera quae exstant
omnia. Ed. Samuel Horsley. 5 vols. London: Nichols, 1779-85, II-III.

note: this ed. is used for ease of reference. The so-called “Jesuit’s
Edition” (Geneva: Barillot, 1739-42) is in JSM’s library, Somerville
College. The references at 191, 420 are to Newton’s theory of gravity;
that at 476 is in a quotation from Hamilton.

quoted: 421n

referred to: 191, 420, 476

421n.1-3 “Causas rerum naturalium non plures admitti debere quam quæ et
veræ sint, et earum phænomenis explicandis sufficiant.”] Causas rerum
naturalium non plures admitti debere, quàm quæ & veræ sint, & earum
phænomenis explicandis sufficiant. [Regula I of Regulæ Philosophandi]
(III, 2)

Nicole, Pierre. See Arnauld, and Baynes.

Nunneley, Thomas. On the Organs of Vision: Their Anatomy and Physiology.
London: Churchill, 1858.

note: the quotations are taken by JSM from Fraser, q.v. Fraser also
reprints the relevant passage in his ed. of Berkeley’s Works, I, 446-8.
Nunneley identifies his subject only as “a fine and most intelligent
boy, nine years of age,” who lived in “a very large manufacturing
village, about sixteen miles from Leeds.” (31)

quoted: 232n-3n, 236n-7n

232n.32 “at] He could at (32)

232n.33-4 in the shapes of objects,” . . . “were . . . same visible
figure,” . . . “it was] in their shapes; though he could not in the
least say which was the cube, and which the sphere, he saw they were . .
. same figure. It was (32)

232n.34-5 till they had been many times] until they had many times been
(32)

232n.35 by sight] by the eye (32)

232n.37 judgments] perception (32)

232n.38 could tell] could or would tell (32)

Edition: current; Page: [582]
232n.38 eye] eyes (32)

232n.39 in] into (32)

232n.39 hands. Even] hands; even (32)

236n.17 “said] The boy said (32)

237n.1 walked carefully] walked most carefully (32)

237n.1 up] out (32)

Occam. See Ockham, William of.

Ockham, William of.

note: the quotation is mistakenly attributed by Hamilton to Ockham. See
Ponce.

quoted: 418

O’Hanlon, Hugh Francis. A Criticism of John Stuart Mill’s Pure Idealism;
and an attempt to shew that, if logically carried out, it is pure
nihilism. Oxford and London: Parker, 1866.

note: the passages quoted on 203n, 203n-4n are from an intended letter
to Mill (dated 5 Dec., 1866), printed on pp. 12-15 of the pamphlet, in
reply to a letter (not extant? O’Hanlon says received 5/12/66) in which
Mill asked whether O’Hanlon had published his views, as given in a
letter to Mill of Nov., 1865.

quoted: 203n, 203n-4n, 205n, 206n-7n

referred to: civ, 204n

203n.4 absence. . . . If the] absence. [ellipsis indicates 1¼-page
omission] But if so, if the (12, 14)

203n.5 any] my (14)

203n.7 ground. If] ground. [paragraph] If (14)

203n.7 the fire] “the fire” (14)

203n.8 any] my (14)

203n.9-10 modifications . . . absent.”] “modifications . . . absent.”
[i.e., the quotation marks occur because O’Hanlon is quoting JSM] (14)

203n.21 “Conceding the] [paragraph] Again, conceding the (14)

205n.5 “the] In drawing this conclusion, in extending to C [the group of
permanent possibilities of sensation I call my friend Smith], which so
closely resembles B [the group of sensations and of permanent
possibilities of sensation I call my body], my experience of B, I,
according to Mr. Mill, do but extend the (7)

205n.7 “The] [paragraph] I. [of four points] The (7)

205n.7 (a)] [paragraph](a.) (7)

205n.8 (b)] [paragraph] (b.) (8)

206n.33 “A] [paragraph] A (8)

206n.39 me, combined] me, or rather in a greater degree, combined (9)

206n.39-40 manner. Yet] manner. [paragraph] Yet (9)

Ovid. Metamorphoses (Latin and English). Trans. Frank Justus Miller. 2
vols. London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1916.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The quotation is in a
quotation from Hamilton.

quoted: 287

287.10 “Omnia mutantur; nihil interit,”] omnia mutantur, nihil interit:
errat et illinc / huc venit, hinc illuc, et quoslibet occupat artus /
spiritus eque feris humana in corpora transit / inque feras noster, nec
tempore deperit ullo, / utque novis facilis signatur cera figurio / nec
manet ut fuerat nec formas servat easdem, / sed tamen ipsa eadem est,
animam sic semper eandem / esse, sed in varias doceo migrare figuras.
(II, 376; XV, 165-72)

Owen, Robert. Referred to: 453

Paley, William. Natural Theology: or, Evidences of the Existence and
Attributes of the Deity, collected from the Appearances of Nature.
London: Faulder, 1802.

referred to: 192

Edition: current; Page: [583]
— A View of the Evidences of Christianity in Three Parts. 3 vols.
London: Faulder, 1794.

referred to: 192

Pasteur, Louis. Referred to: 280

Persius (Aulus Persius Flaccus). Satires, in Juvenal and Persius (Latin
and English). Trans. G. G. Ramsay. London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s
Sons, 1920, 310-400.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The quotation is in a
quotation from Hamilton.

quoted: 286

286.20 “Ex nihilo nihil, in . . . reverti,”] non ego curo / esse quod
Arcesilas aerumnosique Solones / obstipo capite et figentes lumine
terram / murmura cum secum et rabiosa silentia rodunt / atque exporrecto
trutinantur verba labello, / aegroti veteris meditantes somnia, gigni /
de nihilo nihilum, in . . . reverti. (350-2; III, 78-84)

Phillipps, Lucy F. March (“An Inquirer”). The Battle of the Two
Philosophies. By an Inquirer. London: Longmans, Green, 1866.

note: Lucy F. March Phillips is identified as the author of the Battle
of the Two Philosophies, inter alia, on the title page of her Lectures
on the Cumulative Evidences of Divine Revelation (Cambridge: Deighton
Bell; London: Bell and Sons, 1883).

quoted: 46n-7n, 124, 141n, 147n, 447n, 451-2, 452n, 458n-9n, 466n, 492n

referred to: ciii, 38n, 49n, 441n, 493n

124n.3-4 “a very intricate point;”] The charge then is, that in
examining the phenomena of knowledge and belief, Sir W. Hamilton
ascertained a real distinction existing between them; that in working
out the consequences of this distinction he met with a difficulty he had
not at first noted; that he had occasion in the course of a lecture on
logic to point out this difficulty, but could not then go into it,
because his pupils were unprepared for its investigation, and a lecture
on logic was not the proper place for an irrelevant discussion on a very
intricate point. (32-3)

124n.15-16 “continual . . . discrepancies,”] So also when Mr. Mill
charges Sir W. Hamilton with, indeed proves against him continual . . .
discrepancies, it would not be difficult to show, both from history and
reason, that all sound philosophy, whilst thus incomplete, must be
liable to the objection of inconsistency. (7)

141n.5-6 “contrary to all analogy” . . . “that consciousness . . .
education.”] It is wholly contrary to all analogy, and therefore to all
primâ facie probability, that consciousness . . . education. (52)

147n.3-5 “at the root of all experience;” . . . “that no experience . .
. us.”] Lastly, we must show “that it lies at the root of all
experience,” i.e. that no experience . . . us.* [footnote:] Lectures on
Metaphysics, vol. i. pp. 268-270. (54)

447n.1-2 “gratuitously . . . foreknowledge.”] The fourth vice is
gratuitously . . . foreknowledge; or even with our being able to judge
what men will do, and with there being any such uniformity of volitions
as may suffice for statistical averages. (45)

451.25-452.1 “if the temptation . . . made:”] Afterwards, I am as
distinctly conscious of having made an effort; and if the temptation . .
. made. (43)

452.2 is wholly] is necessarily, or in fact, wholly (44)

452.3 effort. . . . When] effort: if these desires are equally balanced,
they mutually destroy each other, and then no effort is possible; if one
is ever so little stronger than the other, no effort is necessary. When
(44)

452.4 up, no . . . scales.] up—it is Mr. Mill’s own illustration—no . .
. scales, and any such effort would be that factor in the result, which
Mr. Mill is bound to exclude. (44)

458n.7-459n.2 “well . . . opinion, because . . . subject,”] But we
cannot but think it a pity, when a well . . . opinion is thrown aside,
not from its internal failure, but because . . . subject. (50)

459n.15-19 “If . . . right.’ . . . And] Again: if . . . right.” By
increasing its attractions, you necessarily increase my desire for it.
And (49)

459n.20 deserve. . . . For children] deserve; the stronger my evil
desire is, the greater the Edition: current; Page: [584] reward that is
to counterbalance it must be; if your first reward is insufficient, you
must increase it till its attractions exceed those of the unlawful
pleasure. In the case of offenders against society, it might not be
prudent thus to strengthen their too feeble virtue by rewards. But it
would be quite just; and for children (49)

466n.6-7 “how . . . circumstances.”] How . . . circumstances, Mr. Mill
omits to say. (46n)

492n.20-3 “that . . . think.”] One great ground of censure is, that Sir
W. Hamilton has done so little, and left that little so incomplete; but
Mr. Mill wholly ignores that . . . think; a work which Plato considered
the only work worthy to be called philosophical. (6-7)

Pindar. Olympian Odes, in The Odes of Pindar Including Principal
Fragments (Greek and English). Trans. John Sandys. London: Heinemann;
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1946, 1-149.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

quoted: 499n

Platner, Ernst. Philosophische Aphorismen nebst einigen Anleitungen zur
philosophischen Geschichte. 2 vols. Leipzig: Schwickertschen Verlage,
1793, 1800.

note: the quotation at 223-4 (partly repeated at 236) is from Hamilton’s
translation of the passage in Lectures (q.v. for the collation); all the
references derive from Hamilton, including those that include reference
to Mahaffy and McCosh. Platner does not identify the blind person
described.

quoted: 223-4

referred to: 224-5, 225n, 227, 229, 237, 238

Plato. Referred to: 502

— Apology, in Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phædo, Phædrus (Greek and
English). Trans. H. N. Fowler. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1917, 68-144.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

referred to: 129-30

— Phædrus, in ibid., 412-578.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

referred to: 2-3

— Republic (Greek and English). Trans. Paul Shorey. 2 vols. London:
Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1946.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The reference at 45n derives
from Mansel; that at 46n is in a quotation from Mansel.

referred to: 45n, 46n, 457n

— Sophist, in Theætetus, Sophist (Greek and English). Trans. H. N.
Fowler. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1921, 264-458.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

quoted: 44n

— Timæus, in Timæus, Critias, Cleitophon, Menexenus, Epistles (Greek and
English). Trans. R. G. Bury. London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons,
1929, 16-252.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

referred to: 419

Plotinus. Operum philosophicorum omnium libri LIV. in sex enneades
distributi. Basel: Lecythus, 1580.

referred to: 39-40

Plutarch. Life of Cæsar, in Lives (Greek and English). Trans. Bernadotte
Perin. Edition: current; Page: [585] 11 vols. London: Heinemann;
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1914-26, VII, 442-608.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

referred to: 281

Poiret, Peter. Referred to: 151

Ponce, John. Annotation in Duns Scotus, Opera Omnia. Ed. Luke Wadding,
John Ponce, et al. 12 vols. Lyons: Durand, 1639, VII, 723.

note: Mill, following Hamilton (who apparently originated the error),
attributes the phrase to William of Ockham; for a full, spirited, and
apparently still authoritative discussion of the matter, including the
attribution to Ponce, see W. M. Thorburn, “The Myth of Occam’s Razor,”
Mind, XXVII (July, 1918), 345-53.

quoted: 418

Ptolemy. Referred to: 333

Ravaillac, François. Referred to: 461, 462n

Régis, Rey. See Cazillac.

Reid, Thomas.

note: the references at 151, 153n, and the last at 168, are in
quotations from Hamilton.

referred to: 1, 62, 109, 110, 111, 113, 119, 123, 128, 137, 137n, 138,
143, 151, 153n, 155, 157, 168, 169, 175, 183, 196, 197, 216, 239, 250,
257, 493n

— The Works of Thomas Reid, Collected, with Selections from his
Unpublished Letters. Preface, Notes, and Supplementary Dissertations by
Sir William Hamilton. Prefixed, Stewart’s Account of the Life and
Writings of Reid, with Notes by the Editor. Edinburgh: Maclachlan and
Stewart; London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, 1846.

note: see Hamilton, “Dissertations on Reid” and “Foot-notes to Reid”;
and individual works by Reid, below.

— Essays on the Active Powers of the Human Mind, in ibid., 509-679.

note: in this ed., Hamilton includes the original page numbers, which we
have omitted in the collations.

quoted: 356n, 440, 444

referred to: 468

356n.8 theologians.”] Theologians; but Mr. Hume seems not to have
attended to it, or to have thought it to be words without any meaning.
(650)

440.2-3 “far . . . inference,” “can . . . from”] [paragraph] Those,
therefore, who reason justly from this system of materialism, will
easily perceive that the doctrine of necessity is so far . . .
inference, that it can . . . from it. (635)

444.21 “Is] [paragraph] Is (610)

— Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, in ibid., 215-508.

note: in this edition, Hamilton includes the original page numbers,
which we have omitted in the collations.

quoted: 69n, 111, 112, 137n, 172, 172-3, 173, 174, 323, 328

referred to: 75, 113, 162, 190, 257, 498n

69n.1 “To conceive, to imagine, to apprehend] Let it be observed,
therefore, that to conceive, to imagine, to apprehend (223)

69n.4 false. But] false. [paragraph] But (223)

69n.4 these] those (223)

69n.5 cannot be] cannot easily be (223)

69n.6 ambiguity. . . . When] ambiguity. Politeness and good-breeding
lead men, on most occasions, to express their opinions with modesty,
especially when they differ from others whom they ought to respect.
Therefore, when (223)

Edition: current; Page: [586]
69n.11-12 it. Thus] it. [paragraph] Thus (223)

69n.15 opinion. . . . When] opinion. This ambiguity ought to be attended
to, that we may not impose upon ourselves or others in the use of them.
The ambiguity is indeed remedied, in a great measure, by their
construction. When (223)

69n.16 accusative case] accusative case (223)

69n.18 infinitive mood] infinitive mood (223)

69n.20 they] the words (223)

111.37-8 “immediate knowledge of the past,”] [paragraph] It is by memory
that we have an immediate knowledge of things past. (339)

112.24-5 “when . . . object,”] But the difficulty is to make his
[Berkeley’s] opinion coincide with the notions of the vulgar, who are
firmly persuaded that the very identical objects which they perceive,
continue to exist when they do not perceive them; and who are no less
firmly persuaded that, when . . . object. (284)

137n.4-6 “The vulgar . . . and are] [see collation at 112.24-5 above]
(284)

172.31-2 The one is the sign] [not in italics] (312)

172.34 perceive them by means] [not in italics] (311)

172.37 conclude] [not in italics] (310)

173.7-8 the . . . it] [not in italics] (315)

173.8 forgot. . . . The] [ellipsis indicates 4-sentence omission] (315)

173.8-9 The sensations . . . qualities . . . carry] [paragraph] Let him
again touch the pointed body gently, so as to give him no pain; and now
you can hardly persuade him that he feels anything but the figure and
hardness of the body: so difficult it is to attend to the sensations . .
. qualities, when they are neither pleasant nor painful. They carry
(315)

173.10 Nature . . . signs] [not in italics] (315)

173.12-13 If . . . follows] [not in italics] (320)

173.16 the sign] [not in italics] (332)

173.16-17 brought . . . sign] [not in italics] (332)

173.17 sign. In] sign. [paragraph] In (332)

173.17 the . . . sensations] [not in italics] (332)

173.18-19 The . . . perceived] [not in italics] (332)

173.20 nature. Thus] nature. [paragraph] Thus (332)

173.22 it . . . followed] [not in italics] (332)

174.16 “If we] [paragraph] If, therefore, we (258)

174.18 First] First (258)

174.19 Secondly] Secondly (258)

174.20 Thirdly] Thirdly (258)

174.25 “This] [paragraph] I observed, Thirdly, That this (259)

174.27 perceive.”] perceive; we ask no argument for the existence of the
object, but that we perceive it; perception commands our belief upon its
own authority, and disdains to rest its authority upon any reasoning
whatsoever. (259)

323.5 “Most] [paragraph] It will be true that most (404)

328.7 “I give] That I may avoid disputes about the meaning of words, I
wish the reader to understand, that I give (415)

328.8 what is true . . . what is false] [not in italics] (415)

— Inquiry into the Human Mind, in ibid., 93-211.

quoted: 72n, 169, 170, 171

referred to: 74n, 172, 175, 234n, 257, 356, 421

72n.24 “every] [paragraph] Prop. 1. Every (148)

72n.24-5 itself,” . . . “any] itself. [3-paragraph (each 1-sentence
long) omission] [paragraph] 5. Any (148)

72n.25 points.”] points, and mutually bisect each other. (148)

72n.27-9 “that . . . place.” . . . “have . . . sense,” . . . “no . . .
all, since they would often] [paragraph] “It is to be observed, that
every Idomenian firmly believes, that . . . place. For this they have .
. . sense, and they can no . . . all. They often (151)

169.23 “class of natural signs which . . . though] A third class of
natural signs comprehends those which, though (122)

Edition: current; Page: [587]
169.26 “I] [paragraph] I (122)

169.29 our] any (122)

169.31 “when] When (137)

170.4 “I] But I (111)

170.6 exist. . . . And] exist; that memory suggests the notion of past
existence, and the belief that what we remember did exist in time past;
and that our sensations and thoughts do also suggest the notion of a
mind, and the belief of its existence, and of its relation to our
thoughts. By a like natural principle it is, that a beginning of
existence, or any change in nature, suggests to us the notion of a
cause, and compels our belief of its existence. And (111)

170.6 manner, certain] manner, as shall be shewn when we come to the
sense of touch, certain (111)

170.8 motion.”] motion, which are nowise like to sensations, although
they have been hitherto confounded with them. (111)

170.9 “By] I see nothing left, but to conclude, that, by (121)

170.11 words, this] words, that this (121)

170.19 “Extension] [paragraph] Extension (123)

170.19-20 us . . . by] us, by (123)

170.29 “The feelings] [paragraph] What hath imposed upon philosophers in
this matter is, that the feelings (124)

171.1 he feels it hard] he feels it hard (125)

171.5 force. There] force. [paragraph] There (125)

171.6 it. . . . The hardness] it. In order to compare these, we must
view them separately, and then consider by what tie they are connected,
and wherein they resemble one another. The hardness (125)

171.15 “There] [paragraph] Now, there (188)

171.16-17 original . . . constitution] original . . . constitution (188)

171.17 custom] custom (188)

171.17 reasoning. Our] reasoning. [paragraph] Our (188)

171.18 ways. . . . In] ways, our acquired perceptions in the second, and
all that reason discovers of the course of nature, in the third. In
(188)

171.20 placed.] placed—as hath been already explained in the fifth
chapter of this inquiry. (188)

171.21 “In] [paragraph] In (194)

171.24 signified. . . . The] signified. [paragraph] We have
distinguished our perceptions into original and acquired; and language,
into natural and artificial. Between acquired perception and artificial
language, there is a great analogy; but still a greater between original
perception and natural language. [paragraph] The (194-5)

171.24 perceptions] perception (195)

171.28 sign] signs (195)

171.29 creates] create (195)

171.30 “It] Thus, it (195)

Réville, Albert. “De la liberté et du progrès à propos des anciens et
des modernes,” Revue Germanique et Française, XXVII (Sept., 1863), 5-37.

quoted: 458n

458n.1 “La liberté] J’entends par là que la liberté (21)

Ricardo, David. Referred to: 110n

St. Anselm. Proslogion seu Alloquium de Dei Existentia, in Opera Omnia,
Vols. CLVIII-CLIX of Jacques Paul Migné, ed., Patrologiæ cursus
completus, Series latina. Paris: Migné, 1853-54, CLVIII, cols. 223-42.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The quotation is in a
quotation from Hamilton. See also St. Augustine.

quoted: 61

61.18 Crede ut intelligas] Neque enim quæro intelligere, ut credam; sed
credo, ut intelligam. (227)

Edition: current; Page: [588]
St. Augustine.

note: the quotation, which is in a quotation from Hamilton, is
mistakenly attributed by him to St. Augustine, whom he calls St. Austin.

quoted: 42

— De Utilitate credendi ad Honoratum liber unus, in Opera Omnia, Vols.
XXXII-XLVII of Jacques Paul Migné, ed., Patrologiæ cursus completus,
Series latina. Paris: Migné, 1841-49, XLII, cols. 65-92.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The quotation at 61 appears
also in Retractiones, ibid., XXXII, col. 607 (Lib. I, Cap. xiv). As Mill
quotes Hamilton’s translation of this passage, no collation is given. In
conjunction with this passage, Hamilton also cites passages from Abelard
(mistakenly) and St. Anselm; in fact, both passages are to be found
together in St. Augustine, Sermo XLIII, ibid., XXXVIII, col. 258 (Cap.
vii).

quoted: 61

St. Austin. See St. Augustine.

Sanchez, Francisco. Minerva, sive De Causis Latinæ linguæ commentarius,
cui accedunt animadversiones & notæ. Ed. Caspar Schoppe and Jacobus
Perizonius. Franeker: Strickius, 1687.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College. The reference is in a
quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 476

Sanctius. See Sanchez.

Sanderson, Robert. Logicæ Artis Compendium. 2nd ed. Oxford: Lichfield
and Short, 1618.

note: this ed. in JSM’s library, Somerville College. JSM’s spelling is
Saunderson.

quoted: 414

414.5 contraria] Contraria, (52)

414.7 susceptibili.”] susceptibili: ut Calor & Frigus. (52)

Saunderson. See Sanderson.

Scheibler, Christoph. Opera Philosophica. 2 vols. Frankfurt: Wustii,
1665.

note: JSM’s spelling, Schiebler, is treated as a typographical error.

referred to: 400n

Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von.

note: the reference at 52n is in a quotation from Bolton; that at 152 is
in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 19, 33n, 42, 52n, 56n, 68, 152, 486, 495

Schmid, Heinrich. Versuch einer Metaphysik der inneren Natur. Leipzig:
Brockhaus, 1834.

note: JSM quotes from Hamilton’s translation in Lectures, q.v. for the
collation.

quoted: 273n, 274n

referred to: 251n

Schmidts.

note: identified by Müller (the authority quoted by McCosh, from whom
JSM quotes) only as a student from Aix.

referred to: 246

Schopenhauer, Arthur. Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung. 2 vols. in 1.
Leipzig: Brockhaus, 1844.

note: JSM uses McCosh’s translation of the passage (though he may have
located it himself; see his comment following the quotation; McCosh
gives the reference only as Vol. II, Chap. iv), which Schopenhauer takes
from Dr. A. Heuck, q.v.

quoted: 248

Edition: current; Page: [589]
Sextus Empiricus. Against the Logicians II, in Sextus Empiricus (Greek
and English). Trans. R. G. Bury. 4 vols. London: Heinemann; New York:
Putnam’s Sons, 1933-49, II, 240-488.

note: this work is often referred to as Against the Mathematicians VIII.

referred to: 39-40

— Outlines of Pyrrhonism, in ibid., I.

quoted: 383n

Shakespeare, William. Macbeth.

note: since the reference is simply to characters in the play, no ed. is
cited.

referred to: 408-9

— Twelfth Night.

note: the quotation is indirect. The comparative passage is taken from
the Variorum Edition of Horace H. Furness.

quoted: 464

464.8 ginger is hot in the mouth:] Toby. Dost thus think that because
thou art vertuous, there / shall be no more cakes and ale? / Clown. Yes,
by S. Anne, and Ginger shall be hotte y’th / mouth too. (II, iii,
113-16)

Smith, Henry Boynton. “Mill’s Examination of Hamilton’s Philosophy,”
American Presbyterian and Theological Review, IV (Jan., 1866), 126-62.

quoted: 58n, 187n

referred to: civ

58n.20-1 “about . . . entities,” . . . “simply] In particular, he justly
insists upon it, that the alleged difficulties and contradictions vanish
so soon as we cease to talk about . . . entities, and consider them
simply (134)

187n.20-2 “an . . . consequence.”] [paragraph] 6. It is partly implied
in what precedes, but is also worthy of distinct notice, that Mr. Mill
in all his reasonings on this point assumes an . . . consequence, which
he elsewhere as emphatically denies. (157)

Smith, Samuel. Additus ad Logicam. 7th ed. Oxford: Hall, 1656.

note: the copy of this ed. in the London Library (bound with Edward
Brerewood, Elementa Logicæ [Oxford: Hall, 1657]) is autographed “J.
Mill” on the title-page, and was presumably given by JSM with other of
his father’s books.

quoted: 414

414.28 “Contraria] [paragraph] Contraria (56)

414.30 natura. Ad] naturâ. [paragraph] Ad (56)

414.32 positiva.”] positiva; tertiò ut se invicem expellant, nisi
alterum eorum insit à natura: sic calor & frigus in aquâ, in pariete
albedo & nigredo contrariantur. (56)

Smith, William Henry. “J. S. Mill on Our Belief in the External World,”
Blackwood’s Magazine, XCIX (Jan., 1866), 20-45.

quoted: 201n, 244, 244n

referred to: civ, 240

201n.2-3 by which they [Things] act upon each other] by which they act
upon each other (28)

244.18 felt nowhere] felt nowhere (26)

244.23 “that . . . will get our pains into our bodies] But we insist on
this, that . . . will get our pains into our bodies (27)

244.26 other. . . . Many] [ellipsis indicates 3-sentence omission] (27)

244.27 acquired perception.] “acquired perception.” (27)

244n.1-2 “measure itself”] It follows, therefore, that a muscular
sensation, by its greater or less endurance, measures itself—measures
its own greater or less endurance. (32)

Socrates.

note: the reference at 45n derives from Mansel, that at 484 derives from
Hamilton.

referred to: 45n, 129-30, 484, 502

Edition: current; Page: [590]
Sophocles. Œdipus the King, Œdipus at Colonus.

note: since the reference is general, no ed. is cited.

referred to: 465

Spencer, Herbert. Referred to: 51, 143n, 216n

— First Principles. London: Williams and Norgate, 1862.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College. The passages cited are
illustrative only.

referred to: 10

— “Mill versus Hamilton—The Test of Truth,” Fortnightly Review, I (15
July, 1865), 531-50.

quoted: 144n, 145n, 381n

referred to: cv, 143n,

144n.5 “the more] The hypothesis that the more (548)

144n.5-6 among” . . . “states] among his states (548)

144n.7 his consciousness:”] his consciousness, furnishes him with
solutions of numerous facts of consciousness: not, however, of all, if
he assumes that his adjustment of inner to outer relations has resulted
from his own experiences alone. (548)

144n.24-5 “I find . . . consciousness”] Of this difference I can give no
further evidence than that I am conscious of it, and find . . .
consciousness. (538-9)

144n.37-8 “only . . . experiences,” . . . “on what] On the other hand,
the reply that this truth is known only . . . experiences, suggests the
query—On what (549)

144n.39 memory,”] memory, and its validity is determined solely through
the trustworthiness of memory. (549)

144n.39-40 “the . . . memory” . . . “immediate consciousness”] Is it
then that the . . . memory is less open to doubt than the immediate
consciousness that two quantities must be unequal if they differ from a
third quantity in unequal degrees? (549)

145n.28 “the net . . . time,”] Considering that I have avowed a general
agreement with Mr. Mill, in the doctrine that all knowledge is from
experience, and have defended the test of inconceivableness on the very
ground that it “expresses the net . . . time” (Principles of Psychology,
pp. 22, 23)—considering that, so far from asserting the distinction
quoted from Sir W. Hamilton, I have aimed to abolish such
distinction—considering that I have endeavoured to show how all our
conceptions, even down to those on Space and Time, are
“acquired”—considering that I have sought to interpret forms of thought
(and by implication all intuitions) as products of organized and
inherited experiences (Principles of Psychology, p. 579)—I am taken
aback at finding myself classed as in the above paragraph. (536)

145n.36 ice] ice (543)

145n.37 cold] cold (543)

— Principles of Psychology. London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans,
1855.

quoted: 227-8

227.40 This symbolic] We have seen that a set of retinal elements may be
excited simultaneously, as well as serially; that so, a quasi single
state of consciousness becomes the equivalent of a series of states;
that a relation between what we call coexistent positions thus
represents a relation of successive positions; that this symbolic (224)

227.41 and by] and that, by (224)

Spinoza, Baruch. Referred to: 485

Stephen, James Fitzjames. “Mr. Mansel’s Metaphysics,” in Essays by a
Barrister. London: Smith, Elder, 1862, 320-35.

note: the essays were reprinted from the Saturday Review.

quoted: 71n-2n

referred to: 72n, 266

71n.14 “Consider] Let Mr. Mansel consider (333)

72n.13 he had ever seen] he ever saw (334)

Edition: current; Page: [591]
72n.20 exist.”] exist; and Mr. Mansel rests his conclusion, that
straight lines could not under any circumstances enclose a space, on the
impossibility of conceiving that they should do so. (334)

Stewart, Dugald.

note: the reference at 127 and the second at 256 are in quotations from
Hamilton.

referred to: 110, 119, 127, 143, 155, 183, 196, 197, 216, 250, 252, 255,
256, 278n, 282, 421, 470, 490n, 491n, 493

— Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind. 3 vols. Vol. I, London:
Strahan and Cadell; Edinburgh: Creech, 1792. Vol. II, Edinburgh:
Constable; London: Cadell and Davies, 1814. Vol. III, London: Murray,
1827.

note: all the references are to Vol. I, Chap. ii, “Of Attention”; the
quotation is from Vol. I, Chap. v, Part 2, §1, “Of the Influence of
Casual Association on our Speculative Conclusions.”

quoted: 254

referred to: 278, 280, 281

254.19-20 “In consequence,” . . . “of our always] The former of these
words expresses (at least in the sense in which we commonly employ it) a
sensation in the mind; the latter denotes a quality of an external
object; so that there is, in fact, no more connexion between the two
notions, than between those of pain and solidity* [footnote omitted];
and yet, in consequence of our always (I, 341)

254.23-5 “of very . . . connexion with one another.”] I. I formerly had
occasion to mention several instances of very . . . connexion with each
other. (I, 341)

— Philosophical Essays. Edinburgh: Creech, and Constable; London: Cadell
and Davies, Murray, and Constable, Hunter, Park and Hunter, 1810.

note: the references, all to Essay First, Part I, Chap. i, are in a
quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 127, 128

Stirling, James Hutchison. Sir William Hamilton, being the Philosophy of
Perception; an Analysis. London: Longmans, Green, 1865.

quoted: cv, 27n, 131n

cv.22-3 a . . . disingenuousness”] I seem to myself to have discovered
in Hamilton a . . . disingenuousness that, cruelly unjust to
individuals, has probably caused the retardation of general British
philosophy by, perhaps, a generation; and it is the remaining parts of
my deduction that are, after all, the best fitted to demonstrate this,
and establish grounds for any indignation which I may have been
consequently led to express—though without the slightest ill-will, of
which, indeed, however adverse to the mischievous vein concerned, I am
entirely unconscious. (vii)

27n.18-19 “the second] I hold the second (30n)

131n.4 “It is] For the truth is even that which is viewed by Hamilton as
an absurdity: in very truth there is a consciousness beyond
consciousness; and it is (58)

Taine, Hippolyte. De l’Intelligence. 2 vols. Paris: Hachette, 1870.

referred to: 250n

Tucker, Abraham.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 152

Turgot, Anne Robert Jacques. Referred to: 100

Valentin, Gabriel Gustav. “Ueber die subjectiven Gefühle von Personen,
welche mit mangelhaften Extremitäten geboren sind,” Repertorium für
Anatomie und Physiologie, I (1836-37), 328-37.

note: the reference derives from McCosh, who takes it from an addition
by Baly to Müller’s text.

referred to: 247

Edition: current; Page: [592]
Veitch, John. Referred to: 30n

— Memoir of Sir William Hamilton, Bart. Edinburgh: Blackwood and Sons,
1869.

note: the third Appendix (referred to at 503n) is entitled “Sir William
Hamilton on Hume, Leibnitz and Aristotle.”

referred to: cvii-cviii, 503n

Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro). Aeneid, in Works. Trans. H. Rushton
Fairclough. 2 vols. London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1916, I,
240-570; II, 2-364.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The quotation is in a
quotation from Hamilton. Opera, ed. C. G. Heyne (London: Priestley,
1821), is in JSM’s library, Somerville College.

quoted: 17

17.26 “Rerumque . . . gaudet.”] Talia per clipeum Volcani, dona
parentis, / miratur rerumque . . . gaudet, / attollens umero famamque et
fata nepotum. (II, 110; VIII, 729-31)

Voltaire, François Marie Arouet. Micromégas, histoire philosophique, in
Œuvres complètes. 66 vols. Paris: Renouard, 1817-25, XXXIX, 141-67.

note: this ed. in JSM’s library, Somerville College.

referred to: 17-18

Wallis, John. Institutio Logicae, Ad communes usus accommodata. 3rd ed.
Oxford: West, Crosley, Clements, and Peisley, 1702.

note: a copy of this ed., autographed “J. Mill” on the title-page, is in
the London Library, presumably part of JSM’s donation of his father’s
books.

quoted: 415

415.2 “Contraria] [paragraph] Contraria (63)

415.2 quæ . . . distant] [in italics] (63)

415.2-3 calidum . . . nigrum] [in italics] (63)

415.3 contrariæ qualitatis] contrariæ qualitates (63)

Walpole, Horace. Referred to: 482

Ward, William George. “Mr. Mill’s Denial of Necessary Truth,” Dublin
Review, XVII (Oct., 1871), 285-318.

quoted: 165n-6n, 267-8, 269, 269-70, 270, 271

referred to: cviii, 74n, 166n, 261n

165n.10 “an exception”] Yet here is a most pointed exception to the
school’s general doctrine; and an exception which no phenomenist has
made before. (309-10)

165n.14 position” . . . “is] position, his is (310)

165n.16 ne plus ultra] [not in italics] (310)

165n.23-4 “where the distinction lies between . . . intuitions”] There
was an imperative claim on him, then, as he valued his philosophical
character, to explain clearly and pointedly where the distinction lies
between . . . intuitions. (310)

165n.28-9 “more favourably . . . trustworthiness”] To us it seems, that
various classes of intuition are more favourably . . . trustworthiness,
than is that class which Mr. Mill accepts. (310)

267.36 included] included (288)

268.3 triangularity . . . then] triangularity,—and if (as we established
in our last number) the avouchment of my faculties corresponds
infallibly with objective truth,—then (289)

268.6-7 “the . . . truth;”] All these are obvious and undeniable
consequences of the fundamental proposition, that, by my very conception
of a trilateral figure, I know its triangularity: and to admit therefore
this fundamental proposition, is to admit that the . . . truth. (289)

269.6 “a] If, through my constant experience of triangular trilaterals,
I am under a practical necessity of fancying that in every possible
region of existence all trilaterals are Edition: current; Page: [593]
triangular—much more, through my constant experience of uniformity in
phenomenal succession, must I be under a (290)

269.29 “in] Mr. Mill’s whole reasoning turns on the phrase, “necessity
of thought”; and yet he has used that phrase in (292)

269.29-34 A necessity of thought may . . . mean a . . . judgment. But .
. . mean a . . . judgment.] A “necessity of thought” may . . . mean, “a
. . . judgment.” But . . . mean, “a . . . judgment.” (292)

269.35 “that] Now we heartily agree with Mr. Mill, that (292)

269.35 necessity of thought] “necessity of thought” (292)

270.1 necessity of thought] “necessity of thought” (292)

270.2 circumstance. Yet] circumstance: yet (292)

270.3 necessity of thought] “necessity of thought” (292)

270.4 necessity of thought] “necessity of thought” (292)

270.20-1 “mere . . . account for] Most certainly therefore mere . . .
account—as Mr. Mill thinks it does—for (299)

270.29-30 Omnipotence can] Omnipotence (if it exist)* [footnote:] *We
must again remind our readers that, in this early stage of our argument
with Mr. Mill, we are not at liberty to assume the existence of an
Omnipotent Being. [text:] can (299)

270.31-2 habitually and unexceptionably] habitually and unexceptionably
(299)

270.37 “holding] He [JSM] tells me, e.g., to fancy myself holding (298)

271.20-1 “power . . . experience” . . . “one . . . of geometrical
forms,”] [paragraph] Then (2.) [Ward’s second criticism of a passage
which he has quoted from JSM’s Logic]—whereas Mr. Mill purports to
account for man’s power . . . experience—he based that power on “one . .
. of geometrical forms.” (302) [the quoted passage is from JSM’s Logic]

— On Nature and Grace. A Theological Treatise. Book I: Philosophical
Introduction. London: Burns and Lambert, 1860.

note: only Bk. I was published. JSM’s reference might be taken as
general, but Chap. i, §1 is specially relevant (JSM’s views are
discussed, 25-9).

referred to: 164n-5n

Washington, George. Referred to: 100

Weber, Ernst Heinrich. “Der Tastsinn und das Gemeingefühl,” in Rudolph
Wagner, Handwörterbuch der Physiologie mit Rücksicht auf Physiologische
Pathologie. 4 vols. Braunschweig: Bieweg, 1842-53, III, 481-588.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Mahaffy, who takes his
reference from Abbott (who does not give a precise reference).

referred to: 240

Whately, Richard. Referred to: 497, 497n-8n

— Elements of Logic. Comprising the substance of the article in the
Encylopædia Metropolitana: with additions, &c. London: Mawman, 1826.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College. Concerning the references at
316n, it may be noted that against the relevant passage (Whately, 56n)
JSM has written in the margin “[An] important truth [n]ot sufficiently
[e]xplained & [d]eveloped.” Against the passage referred to at 354 JSM
has pencilled lines in the margin. The quotation is not necessarily from
Whately, but the related reference justifies its treatment as such.

quoted: 410

referred to: 316n, 348, 349, 350, 352, 354, 359, 362, 426

410.7 D,”] D; but A is not B, therefore C is D. (113)

Whewell, William. Referred to: 143, 486

— An Elementary Treatise on Mechanics. Vol. I. Cambridge: Deighton:
London: Whittaker, 1819.

note: no further volumes were published, though the volume was expanded
and revised in later eds.

Edition: current; Page: [594]
referred to: 496n

— History of the Inductive Sciences, from the Earliest to the Present
Time. 3rd ed. 3 vols. London: Parker and Son, 1857.

note: formerly in JSM’s library, Somerville College.

referred to: 68

— History of Scientific Ideas: being the First Part of the Philosophy of
the Inductive Sciences. 3rd ed. 2 vols. London: Parker and Son, 1858.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College. This is the 3rd ed. of the
Second Part of the Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences (i.e., not the
3rd ed. of the History of Scientific Ideas); cf. Whewell’s Novum Organon
Renovatum, which is the 3rd ed. of the First Part of the Philosophy of
the Inductive Sciences.

referred to: 68

— Novum Organon Renovatum: being the Second Part of the Philosophy of
the Inductive Sciences. 3rd ed. London: Parker and Son, 1858.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College. This is the 3rd ed. of the
Second Part of the Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences (i.e., not the
3rd ed. of the Novum Organon Renovatum); cf. Whewell’s History of
Scientific Ideas, which is the 3rd ed. of the First Part of the
Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences.

referred to: 68

— On the Philosophy of Discovery, chapters historical and critical;
including the completion of the third edition of the Philosophy of the
Inductive Sciences. London: Parker and Son, 1860.

note: in JSM’s library, Somerville College. Much of this work is an
enlargement of Bk. XII (“Review of Opinions on the Nature of Knowledge,
and the Means of Seeking it”) of the Philosophy of the Inductive
Sciences. Chap. xxii, “Mr. Mill’s Logic,” is a slightly modified version
of Whewell’s Of Induction, with especial reference to Mr. J. Stuart
Mill’s System of Logic (London: Parker, 1849).

referred to: 68

— Thoughts on the Study of Mathematics as a Part of a Liberal Education.
Cambridge: Deighton, 1835.

referred to: 477

— “To the Editor of the Edinburgh Review,” Edinburgh Review, LXIII
(April, 1836), 270-2.

note: this is a criticism of Hamilton’s “On the Study of Mathematics”
(q.v.), which prompted Hamilton’s “Notes to the Above Letter” (q.v.);
all three reprinted in Hamilton’s Discussions at 263-325, 326-8, 329-40.

referred to: 477

Wolff, Christian.

note: the reference derives from Hamilton. Mill, following Hamilton,
uses the spelling Wolf.

referred to: 295

Wordsworth, Christopher. Memoirs of William Wordsworth. 2 vols. London:
Moxon, 1851.

quoted: 488

488.24 [paragraph] “Some] [no paragraph] Some

Wordsworth, William.

quoted: 488; see Wordsworth, Christopher.

Wundt, Wilhelm. Beiträge zur Theorie der Sinneswahrnehmung. Leipzig and
Heidelberg: Winter’sche Verlagshandlung, 1862.

note: the reference derives from McCosh.

referred to: 247

Edition: current; Page: [595]
Xenophon. Memorabilia, in Memorabilia and Œconomicus (Greek and
English). Trans. E. C. Marchant. London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s
Sons, 1923, 2-358.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The reference is in a
quotation from Hamilton.

referred to: 484

Zeno.

note: the references are in quotations, or derive, from Hamilton.

referred to: 424-6

Edition: current; Page: [596] Edition: current; Page: [597]
1
Thomas Reid, Works, ed. Sir W. Hamilton, 6th ed. (Edinburgh: Maclachlan
and Stewart, 1866).

2
Selwyn Grave, The Scottish Philosophy of Common Sense (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1960).

3
Ed. John Veitch and Henry Longueville Mansel, 4 vols. (Edinburgh:
Blackwood, 1859-60).

4
3rd ed. (Edinburgh: Blackwood, 1866). (1st ed., 1852; 2nd ed., 1853,
used by Mill in the Examination.)

5
Mark Pattison, “J. S. Mill on Hamilton,” The Reader, V (20/5/65), 562.

6
Ibid., 563.

7
William George Ward, “Mr. Mill’s Denial of Necessary Truth,” Dublin
Review, n.s. XVII (Oct., 1871), 285-6.

8
James Mill, Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, 2 vols., 2nd
ed., ed. J. S. Mill (London: Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer, 1869).

9
E.g., Examination, 167ff. below. Subsequent references, which are all to
the present edition, are given in parentheses in the text.

10
See Autobiography, ed. Jack Stillinger (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1969),
161-2.

11
Ibid.

12
Ibid., 134.

13
Ibid.

14
But see Jerome B. Schneewind, Sidgwick’s Ethics and Victorian Moral
Philosophy (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977), 96n, where Whewell appears
as a rather liberal churchman.

15
Autobiography, 162.

16
Kant’s Political Writings, ed. Hans Siegbert Reiss (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1970), 144-6.

17
Autobiography, 162.

18
Ibid., 163.

19
Examination, ciii: “a host of writers, whose mode of philosophic thought
was either directly or indirectly implicated in the criticisms made by
this volume on Sir W. Hamilton, have taken up arms against it, and
fought as pro aris et focis.”

20
Rudolf Metz, A Hundred Years of British Philosophy (London: Allen and
Unwin, 1938), Chap. i, gives a brief but lucid account of the final
phases of the Scottish common-sense tradition.

21
William Ritchie Sorley, A History of English Philosophy (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1920), 240.

22
John Veitch, Memoir of Sir William Hamilton (Edinburgh: Blackwood,
1869), 146ff.

23
Ibid., 173-4.

24
Ibid., 207-8.

25
See Augustus De Morgan, On the Syllogism, and Other Logical Writings,
ed. Peter Heath (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966), xvii-xviii.

26
Veitch, Memoir, 344.

27
See ibid., 286-93, for an account of Hamilton’s vain attempts to secure
an adequate pension.

28
Marginalia in the copy of Discussions, 3rd ed. (Edinburgh and London:
Blackwood, 1866), in the London Library, 38.

29
For an account of Mansel’s life, see John William Burgon, The Lives of
Twelve Good Men, 2 vols. (London: Murray, 1888), II, 149-237.

30
Mansel, The Limits of Religious Thought, 4th ed. (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1859), xliii.

31
Ibid., ix-x. He also enjoyed entertaining children with jokes and
outrageous puns. Burgon says that on one occasion when Mansel was out
driving with friends, a little girl in the party exclaimed that a donkey
by the roadside seemed to have got its head stuck in a barrel. “Mansel
was heard to murmur softly to himself,—‘Then it will be a case of
asphyxia. ” (Burgon, Lives of Twelve Good Men, II, 213.) And such
outrages were not reserved for children alone; later when Mansel was
showing a visitor the interior of St. Paul’s, the man “complained of the
heathenish character of the monuments. ‘Just look at that
now,’—(pointing to a huge figure of Neptune). ‘What has that got to do
with Christianity?’ ‘Tridentine Christianity, perhaps,’ suggested
Mansel.” (Ibid.)

32
De Morgan, On the Syllogism, xxi.

33
Discussions, 15n; cf. 34n-5n below.

34
Burgon, Lives of Twelve Good Men, II, 201.

35
Discussions, 16.

36
Ibid., 14-15.

37
“Bain’s Psychology” (1859), in Essays on Philosophy and the Classics,
Collected Works, XI (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1978), 341,
343.

38
Mansel, The Philosophy of the Conditioned (London: Strachan, 1866),
81ff.

39
Herbert Spencer, “Mill versus Hamilton—The Test of Truth,” Fortnightly
Review, I (15 July, 1865), 548.

40
“Bain’s Psychology,” CW, XI, 343-4.

41
Limits of Religious Thought, 5th ed. (London: Murray, 1867), xin-xiin.
(Not in the 4th ed.)

42
Spencer, “Mill versus Hamilton,” 548.

43
Ward, “Necessary Truth,” 298-9.

44
Mansel, Limits of Religious Thought, 5th ed., xvi, 95ff. (Not in the 4th
ed.)

45
Discussions, 14.

46
Philosophy of the Conditioned, 170-1.

47
Limits of Religious Thought, 4th ed., vii.

48
Philosophy of the Conditioned, 167.

49
Discussions, 44.

50
See Jonathan Bennett, Locke, Berkeley, Hume (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1971), Chap. vi.

51
Francis Herbert Bradley, Ethical Studies (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1924), 39n.

52
Ibid., 40n.

53
James Mill, Analysis, I, 402n-4n.

54
J. S. Mill, A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive, Collected
Works, Vols. VII and VIII (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1973),
VII, 224-7 (II, v, i).

55
Mill to John Elliot Cairnes (5/12/71), in Francis E. Mineka and Dwight
N. Lindley, eds., The Later Letters, Collected Works, Vols. XIV-XVII
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1972), XVII, 1862-3.

56
Arthur Norman Prior, Formal Logic (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1955), 148.

57
Discussions, 646.

58
Ibid., 163.

59
See Mansel, Limits of Religious Thought, 4th ed., 56ff.

60
James Boswell, Life of Johnson, ed. George Birkbeck Hill and L. F.
Powell, 6 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1934-50), II, 82.

61
See, e.g., “Theism,” in Essays on Ethics, Religion, and Society,
Collected Works, X (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1969), 446-52,
456.

62
J. S. Mill, On Liberty, in Essays on Politics and Society, Collected
Works, Vols. XVIII and XIX (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1977),
XVIII, 223; and “Whewell’s Moral Philosophy,” CW, X, 197-8.

1
The work is identified in Mill’s bibliography as “An Examination of Sir
W. Hamilton’s Philosophy, and of the Principal Philosophical Questions
discussed in his writings. 8vo Volume, first published in 1865.”
(MacMinn, 96.) In his library, Somerville College, Oxford, is a copy of
the first edition, without corrections or changes, and for the most part
unopened, and a copy of the two-volume American edition, New York: Holt,
1873.

Fifth and sixth London editions appeared in 1878 and 1889 (the latter
also Longmans, New York) while American editions appeared in 1866, 1868
(both Spencer of Boston), 1873, and 1884 (both Holt of New York). A
French translation was published in 1869 (Paris), though, surprisingly,
there seems to have been no German translation until 1908 (it was not
included in the twelve-volume Gesammelte Werke edited by Theodor
Gomperz).

2
In 1865, in addition to the two editions of the Examination, Mill
published the periodical and first book editions of Auguste Comte and
Positivism, the third edition of Considerations on Representative
Government, the sixth editions of both the Logic and the Principles, and
People’s Editions of the Principles, On Liberty, and Representative
Government.

3
See David Masson, ed., The Collected Writings of Thomas De Quincey, 14
vols. (Edinburgh: Black, 1889-90), V, 308.

4
See Francis E. Mineka, ed., The Earlier Letters of John Stuart Mill,
Collected Works, Vols. XII and XIII (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1963), XII, 173 (2/8/33) (henceforth referred to as EL, CW, with
volume and page numbers); and, for Carlyle, Alexander Carlyle, ed.,
Letters of Thomas Carlyle to John Stuart Mill, John Sterling, and Robert
Browning (London: Unwin, 1923), 61 (18/7/33), and 78 (28/10/33). Mill
may also have known that Captain Thomas Hamilton, author of Man and
Manners in America (1833), was Sir William’s brother. (Mill reviewed a
review of Captain Hamilton’s book in his “State of Society in America,”
in Essays on Politics and Society, Collected Works, Vols. XVIII and XIX
[Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1977], XVIII, 91-115.)

5
See John Veitch, Memoir of Sir William Hamilton, Bart. (Edinburgh:
Blackwood, 1869), 128 (letter of 8/7/34), and 175 (letter of 26/11/34).

6
EL, CW, XIII, 528 (to Austin, 7/7/42). In fact, no review appeared.

7
The order and form of publication of Hamilton’s works, and the order in
which Mill read them, led to some confusion, as will be seen below.

8
See the account in the Textual Introduction, Essays on Ethics, Religion,
and Society, Collected Works, X (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1969), cxxii ff.

9
Autobiography, ed. Jack Stillinger (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1969),
160-1. The former article was published in Fraser’s in February, 1862;
the latter in the Westminster in October, 1862.

10
Ibid., 161.

11
Bain, John Stuart Mill (London: Longmans, 1882), 118 (cf. Francis E.
Mineka and Dwight N. Lindley, eds., The Later Letters, Collected Works,
Vols. XIV-XVII [Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1972], XV, 746;
subsequently referred to as LL, CW, with volume and page numbers). Bain
adds that Mill “chose the Westminster when he wanted free room for his
elbow.”

12
See Bain, ibid., letter of December, 1861 (LL, CW, XV, 752): “. . . I
have given up the idea of doing it in anything less than a volume.”

13
Presumably Mill is using the short title, and not implying that he had
ignored the rest of Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, Education
and University Reform.

14
The matter is called by Mansel “Supplementary Part, to complete Former
Editions,” and includes a “Postscript” (989-90), dated 23 August, 1862,
explaining (inadequately) the additions; these consist of the remainder
of D***, and E-U (there is no J), U*, V-Y (all on 915-88), and “Addenda”
(989*-91*).

Another confusion in Mill’s mind, excusable only by the actual dates of
publication of Hamilton’s writings, may be seen in the variants at 163,
when Mill in the first edition had Hamilton quoting, in his paper on
Brown (1830), from his Lectures, which he did not begin to deliver until
1836. But the Discussions (including the paper on Brown) were published
in 1852, and Mill may not have noticed when Hamilton began his
lecturing.

15
Autobiography, 161.

16
Ibid., 161-2.

17
Ibid., 163.

18
Bain, John Stuart Mill, 118 (LL, CW, XV, 752). Mill added to the sixth
edition (1865) of his Logic eleven footnoted references to the
Examination (cf. the Textual Introduction, A System of Logic, Collected
Works, Vols. VII and VIII [Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1973],
VII, lxxxv and n.).

19
LL, CW, XV, 763. The letter continues: “But I do not feel properly
equipped for such a piece of work until I have read your account of
Plato, in which I expect to find much new and valuable thought on the
great problems of metaphysics.” Though he saw Grote’s Plato in
manuscript, it was not in fact published until 1865, too late to be of
use for the Examination.

Grote, replying to the letter and refusing Mill’s invitation that he
join Helen Taylor and himself on a trip to Greece (which its historian
never visited), added: “Your intimation of what you had been doing about
Sir W. Hamilton’s works was still more interesting [than a passage in
Lucian mentioned by Mill], as it holds out to me the hope that you may
one of these days revert to those higher speculative and logical
subjects with which he busies himself.” (Harriet Grote, The Personal
Life of George Grote [London: Murray, 1873], 257.) When the Examination
appeared, Grote wrote to say: “it has completely answered my
expectations, and that is saying as much of it as I can say. It is full
of valuable expansions of the doctrines more briefly adumbrated in your
Logic, and of contributions to the most obscure and recondite
expositions of Psychological Science. . . .

“I am certainly very glad that poor Sir W. H. did not live to read such
a crushing refutation. It is really so terrible, that I shall be almost
pleased if either Mansel or T. S. Baynes are able, on any particular
points, to weaken the force of it, and make something of a defence.”
(Ibid., 275, letter of June, 1865.)

On 20 November, 1865, while writing his review of the Examination, Grote
praised in particular Mill’s treatment of Matter as a Permanent
Possibility of Sensation, and his vindication of the derivation of
belief in coexistent parts of extension from successive conscious
phenomena of motion; here also he notes his pleasure at being able to
record his homage to James Mill. (Yale University Library; partly
printed in ibid., 278.) Grote’s interest in Hamilton continued: not only
did he review the Examination in the Westminster, saying some
complimentary things about Hamilton, but also sent Bain a paper on “what
Sir William Hamilton says in reference to Aristotle’s views of common
sense,” used by Bain in his Mental and Moral Science (1868). (Ibid.,
290, letter to Bain of October, 1867.)

20
LL, CW, XV, 809 (14/12/62). The “something” is undoubtedly what became
part of Chapter xxi below.

21
John Stuart Mill, 119. Cf. n.30 below.

22
LL, CW, XV, 817 (7/1/63) and 836-7 (13/2/63), both to Bain.

23
Ibid., 866.

24
Ibid., 889.

25
Ibid., 900. For the use made of Bain, see 216-19, 226-7, and 231-6
below.

26
Ibid., 907.

27
Autobiography, 163.

28
John Stuart Mill, 119. See also Mill’s response (124n) to the defence by
the “Inquirer” of inconsistencies in Hamilton. It is at the least
ironical that Mill himself has been so much assailed for
inconsistencies; of course, no one escapes hanging, if not on this
charge, then on its opposite, purblind single-mindedness. And some
critics wish Mill were alive to answer other of his critics.

29
LL, CW, XV, 901-2. Mill was undoubtedly right in his concluding
conjecture (and cf. the regret he expresses in his “Introductory
Remarks,” 2-3 below); Veitch comments, understating the case, that
Hamilton “was fond of controversial writings, and enjoyed the learned
railings of the Scioppian style” (46).

30
LL, CW, XV, 901-2. Such insights as we have into Mill’s habits of
composition, being rare, are worth citing. See, for example, Mill’s
letter to Bain of 7/1/63, where he mentions going “deliberately through
the whole writings of Hamilton, writing down in the form of notes, the
substance of what I as yet find to say on each point. This will make it
comparatively easy to write the book when I have finished the
preparatory work.” (LL, CW, XV, 816.) See also a footnote added in 1867,
where Mill (presumably ironically) thanks Mansel for reminding him of
two passages he would “not have failed to quote” in the first edition,
if he “had kept references to them” (22n). What he sometimes did (as did
his father) was to list page numbers in the backs of books, presumably
to return to them later to make notes; there are surviving only a very
few (and none of them here relevant) of what must have been voluminous
copied quotations. There is no evidence that (here unlike his father) he
kept a Commonplace Book containing quotable passages.

31
He returned to London in mid-February, went back to Avignon in April,
travelled back to London in June, stayed there until early September,
and then passed the rest of 1864 and most of January, 1865, in Avignon.

32
LL, CW, XV, 926, 929.

33
Ibid., 945 (26/6/64).

34
John Stuart Mill, 120. Cf. Mill to Gomperz: “My book on Hamilton is now
finished, with the exception of a final revision which I shall give it a
few months hence before sending it to press” (LL, CW, XV, 954; 22/8/64).

35
LL, CW, XV, 963 (28/10/64). He here is looking forward to De Morgan’s
paper on Infinity, because, as he says, the topic is touched on in the
Examination (where De Morgan’s paper is not mentioned).

36
Longman Chronological Register, 1860-77, f. 56, in the Longman Archive,
University of Reading. On 11 March, he told Herbert Spencer he would
soon offer him a copy of the work which (he vainly hoped) would contain
“little or nothing to qualify the expression of the very high value I
attach to your philosophical labours” (LL, CW, XVI, 1011).

37
LL, CW, XVI, 1041 (to Longman, 30/4/65).

38
Longman Chronological Register, 1860-77, f. 60. (Longman Impression Book
15, f. 158, gives August, but the Division Book for the period, also in
the Longman Archive, confirms the July dating.) See also LL, CW, XVI,
1090-1 (to Spencer, 12/8/65), which concerns the note dealing with
Spencer’s repudiation of part of Mill’s account of his views, the note
being appended to the second edition of the Examination (Mill saw
Spencer’s review too late for other treatment), and then placed where it
belongs in the third edition (see 143 below).

39
Autobiography, 163-4. Not all of Hamilton’s students, it may be noted,
were unequivocally opposed to Mill’s views, for Fraser and Masson, as
Mill indicates in his Preface, were not in agreement with most of the
Edinburgh alumni.

40
See LL, CW, XVI, 1223 (25/12/66), which refers to Mill’s desire to
identify Grote as the author of the Westminster article on the
Examination, and also to Bolton’s Inquisitio Philosophica. And cf.
ibid., 1068 (18/6/65).

41
John Stuart Mill, 124.

42
LL, CW, XVI, 1161 (to Longman, 28/4/66); only 150 copies were then still
in hand (Longman to Mill, 25/4/66; British Library of Political and
Economic Science, Mill-Taylor Collection, I, #96, f. 226). By June the
stock was down to 117 copies (Division Book).

43
Longman to Mill (30/4/66), Mill-Taylor Collection, I, #95, ff. 223-4.

44
LL, CW, XVI, 1223 (to Grote, 25/12/66).

45
On 26 May he promised to send J. E. Cairnes a copy on publication
(ibid., 1271), but Longman Chronological Register, f. 79, gives 16 May
as the date of publication, and is supported in the May dating by the
Division Book.

46
Ibid., 1238 (9/2/67), and 1239 (11/2/67).

47
Ibid., XVII, 1879 (6/4/72), and Longman Impression Book 18, f. 238.

48
John Stuart Mill, 128.

49
The format and type sizes remained constant through the editions, which
were all printed by the same firm, Savill and Edwards (Savill, Edwards
and Co. for the third and fourth editions). The principals in the firm
of Longmans were, as might be expected, playing managerial chairs during
these years: the first edition (1865) was published by Longman, Green,
Longman, Roberts, and Green; the second edition (a few months later in
1865), by Longmans, Green, and Co.; the third—and, surprisingly, the
fourth—(1867 and 1872) by Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer.

50
Actually, the note concerning Spencer, mentioned above, appears on page
561 of the second edition, but became, as Mill intended, an incorporated
footnote in subsequent editions.

51
The count is also misleading because each of the editions was totally
reset and, even though the type sizes were maintained, the proportions
of text and footnotes were in some cases altered, resulting, with some
changes to and from long and short pages, in different amounts of blank
space at the ends of chapters. And, of course, with the additions, those
blank spaces varied in size from edition to edition.

52
See also xci-xciii below.

53
These essays are in Essays on Philosophy and the Classics, Collected
Works, XI (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1978), 245-69, and
449-71.

54
One may also infer that this double consideration kept the matter in
Mill’s mind when one looks at “Berkeley’s Life and Writings,” 455 and n.

55
Here one sees another example of a softened tone: in the first edition
the sentence began: “Mr. Mansel, entirely missing the point of this
argument . . .” (see 85t, and cf. u-u).

56
LL, CW, XVI, 1108 (25/10/65). The method (described below) of recording
variants in this edition meets Mill’s criteria, but one dare not infer
that he would therefore approve of it.

57
In this edition the passages appear at 45n, 72n-4n, 216n-17n, 463n,
where they are signalled (as are all variants) by superscript letters
keyed to variant notes on the page. Much as one would have liked to
adopt Mill’s method, it is, as the account above will hint, and any
attempt to apply it will show, woefully inadequate.

58
See 72n-4n, 74n, 93n-4n, 107n, 421n.

59
This passage is even more confusing, for Mill adds a mention (without
title or page) to Mansel’s “rejoinder,” while retaining the original
reference (with title and page), which appears to apply to the
(unsignalled) new citation.

60
It could be argued that the added part of the note is a type (3) change;
as will be evident, the categorization is more useful than certain.

61
The change in the text would be treated as type (3) (a qualification)
were it not for the explanation in the note.

62
Calderwood was given a LL.D. by Glasgow in 1865 (subsequent to Mill’s
first edition). The case of Ward is somewhat more puzzling, for the
honorary degree of Doctor of Philosophy had been conferred on him by
Pope Pius IX in 1854, long before the first edition of the Examination.
How or when Mill became aware of the dignity is not known (he addressed
Ward in letters simply as “Dear Sir”), and we are forced to fall back on
R. H. Hutton’s amusing animadversions on the matter: “ ‘Ideal’ Ward was
his Oxford nickname; ‘Squire Ward’ was his title in the Isle of Wight,
where he had estates; ‘Dr. Ward’ was the description by which he was
best known to the Catholic theologians; while his friends knew him
simply as Mr. Ward.” Later, Hutton says of the Metaphysical Society
(founded in 1869), “There, indeed, he was ‘Dr.’ Ward . . .” (quoted in
Wilfrid Ward, William George Ward and the Catholic Revival [London and
New York: Macmillan, 1893], 375 and 378). But Mill refused to join the
Metaphysical Society, and one cannot suggest that he ceased to regard
Ward as a friend.

63
Changes of the contrary kind occur in other of Mill’s works, for example
in the Logic (CW, VIII, 649e-e) where “Mr. Mill” became “Mr. James Mill”
in 1868, presumably to make what had become a necessary distinction;
were it not for these changes elsewhere, one might assume that the
revision in the Examination was simply a third edition correction of the
erroneously maintained courtesy (a Freudian slip?) to the living in the
first edition.

64
Perhaps it was no longer needed, because Bain—though still at
Aberdeen—had gained, in Mill’s view, national (at least) celebrity.

65
The addition is to part of a note added in 1867, which could just as
easily at that date have concluded with the reference. The 1867 change
is in one of those additions marked off by square brackets in a
footnote; here again the diligent reader of the fourth edition will be
confused, for the brackets were retained in 1872, with the further
addition placed inside them.

66
It is just possible—illustrating the problems of a nearly
impressionistic classification—that we have here a type (2) change: was
there some discussion (unknown to us) of the reliability of Pasteur’s
work that came to Mill’s attention in the brief period between the first
and second editions?

67
This is seen as a type (3) rather than a type (1) variant because it
does not evidently indicate either a change of judgment or new
information; it will be evident, of course, that a very indistinct line
divides the two classes.

68
Since Mill is reporting others’ views, the change is prima facie less
significant than the variant in the People’s Edition of On Liberty where
the shift from species to individual has a much more marked effect on
the sense. See Essays on Politics and Society, CW, XVIII, 224.37, and
XIX, 657.

69
An explanation of the decisions made here will be found in the headnote
to Appendix B.

70
Mill’s square brackets indicating (though he does not explain that they
do so) tampering with Hamilton’s text were placed correctly in the first
and second editions: i.e., the text read as it is here printed, “that I
[believe]” and “conscious of [the”. In the third edition the reading
(retained in the fourth) was “that [I believe]” and “conscious [of the”.

71
In the first and second editions (the reading here accepted), Archbishop
Whately is noted to have said that Logic is both a Science and an Art
“in an intelligible sense.” In the third and fourth editions, in what at
first glance is acceptable, the sentence ends, “is an intelligible
sense.”

72
The reading in the first three editions (the final colon introduces a
quotation from Hamilton) is: “Sir W. Hamilton, therefore, needs another
kind of argument to establish the doctrine that the Laws of Identity,
Contradiction, and Excluded Middle, are laws of all existence: and here
we have it:” but in the fourth edition “leave” replaces “have” in the
last clause. Here again at first glance the final reading is plausible
(partly because of the uncertain reference of “it,” which, if taken to
refer to “doctrine,” would make the final reading more intelligible, but
which, if—as seems right—taken to refer to “argument” makes the original
reading more likely), but is rejected in our text.

73
Only slightly less plausible than the previous two examples is the
mistaken substitution here in 1867 of “qualities” for “quantities.”

74
The omission or misplacing of quotation marks in the passage from
Hamilton concerning Descartes makes it extremely difficult to determine
who is being quoted; the difficulty becomes an impossibility because of
Hamilton’s errors in translation and ascription, until his sources are
consulted.

75
The reason for listing these as variants is consideration for the
reader, hypothesized by Mill in a passage quoted above, who may own an
early edition that he wishes to compare, and might be surprised by the
differences in these two places. In the first, “unnecessarily” appears
rather than the correct “necessarily”; in the second, five lines (in the
original setting) were omitted (both corrections were made in 1867).

76
The first of these is the change, in the second edition, from “coals” to
“coal” in the clause “the water, and the wood or coal, were not
destroyed.” Mill may have carelessly used the plural form (in British
usage, indicating individual bits of coal), or, of course, the
compositor may have misread his hand (cf. the next footnote) or simply
made an error. The second, which occurs within a quotation, looks like a
conscious change by Mill, in the second edition, in an attempt
(unsuccessful by grammatical standards) to improve Hamilton’s sense by
changing “what does this imply?” to “what does it imply?”

77
It may be noted that overall only seven changes reverse changes in
earlier editions.

78
The editions of the works on logic which Mill cites by Aldrich,
Bartholinus, Brerewood, Du Hamel, Fell, Keckermann, Smith, and Wallis,
at present in the London Library, were very probably given by Mill to
the Library with other of his father’s books. The last two are
autographed “J. Mill” on the title page. Of the others, Ammonius,
Burgersdijck, Du Trieu, and Sanderson are (or were) in his library,
Somerville College.

79
In many of his review essays, however, quotation bulks very large
indeed, because the great periodicals saw, as one of their functions,
making reviewed works known by their contents to their subscribers; in
the Examination Mill’s intention was to expose rather than reveal.

80
LL, CW, XVII, 1613 (7/6/69).

81
Veitch, Memoir, 196n-7n, quoting Examination, 492-3 and 438-9.

82
Veitch, 381-3, quoting Examination, 499.

83
Veitch, 429-48, referring to Examination, 498n-9n, 499-500 and 501-21,
and 503.

84
Veitch, 404 and 404n (the whole discussion occupies 404-20).

85
He and Calderwood (who was second on Hamilton’s prize list in 1847) were
classmates in Hamilton’s logic class of 1850.

86
Veitch, 379 and 435. Mill also compares the Lectures to Hamilton’s
“later speculations” (372); in objecting to Mill’s use of the Lectures,
Veitch bears out this comparison, pointing out that they were prior to
“nearly all” the footnotes and all the “Dissertations on Reid”—indeed to
everything but the early Edinburgh articles in the Discussions (209-10).

87
Veitch, 446.

88
Ibid., 421-8. Since Mill chose not to notice so much, it may be
mentioned that Veitch chose not to mention one instance of Mill’s
expressing a judgment that Veitch would have appeared to accept. In
discussing Hamilton’s odd and unoriginal treatment of mathematics, Mill
mentions that Hamilton is much inferior to Dugald Stewart on the matter,
and that the “cloud of witnesses” Hamilton summons makes us no wiser
(470). Veitch does not quote Mill, but includes the following passage
from a letter to Hamilton from Napier about Hamilton’s article on its
first appearance: “One criticism [of the article, by various people], I
confess, I was not quite prepared for—viz., that the argument is injured
by the ‘cloud of witnesses,’ which, it is said, has been huddled
together without discrimination, and without any rational view of the
value of authorities. Lord Brougham, in a letter I received yesterday
among others, makes this remark, and adds, that he is sorry the writer,
whom he praises for ability and learning, should have adopted a tone in
regard to mathematics so different from that of the cautious and
philosophical D. Stewart.” (174; 1/2/36.) Lest it be thought that
Brougham and Napier are quoting Mill thirty years in advance, it should
be noted that Hamilton himself refers in his article to the “cloud of
witnesses”—and, indeed, they are all quoting St. Paul (Hebrews, 12:1).

89
Moral Causation, 2nd ed., iv. Alexander’s works may be recommended to
connoisseurs of what—were it not for Sir William Hamilton—might be
thought of as the Edinburgh style.

90
It may be noted that McCosh calls forth some of Mill’s most acerb
remarks, among them this: “I must add, that the chapter of Dr M‘Cosh
from which I am now quoting, that headed ‘The Logical Notion,’ contains
much sound philosophy, and little with which I disagree except the
persistent illusion which the author keeps up throughout the chapter
that I do disagree with him” (317n). Hamilton does not escape this kind
of comment, of course: see, e.g., “Sir W. Hamilton . . . thus, as is
often the case (and it is one of the best things he does), saved his
opponents the trouble of answering his friends . . .” (445).

91
Cambridge: Deighton, Bell; London: Bell and Daldy, 1865.

92
Mansel, of course, is dealt with frequently in other places, most
extensively in the first quarter of the work, but also in Chapters xvi
and xvii. It may be noted also that xiv, on Association, was
particularly enlarged in 1872, perhaps because Mill had edited his
father’s Analysis in the preceding years.

93
It should be mentioned that the majority of these additions come in the
appended notes to xi and xii (combined), xiii, and xiv.

94
Mill’s consummate expository skill, his level tone, and the speed with
which he enters into topics all disguise what are sometimes rather weak
transitions in the Examination. Much detail would be here inappropriate,
but one may note briefly that, while Mill moves generally from
metaphysics to logic (thereby, as a glance at his footnotes will show,
following Hamilton’s Lectures), with the final five chapters dealing
with special topics, the flow is not always smooth. The first six
chapters, constituting the main assault on Hamilton’s metaphysics, hold
together well enough, but Chapter vii, on Mansel (whose ideas admittedly
are involved from iii-vi), is interpolated. There is no lead from it to
viii, and the opening of viii (which suggests Mill’s uneasiness over the
arrangement) refers back to the matter of ii ff. and vi, and hints at
what will come later. From viii through x we have exposition and
criticism of some of Hamilton’s psychological views; x is paired with
xi, which gives Mill’s views, the empirical position being continued
through xiii, by which time one is quite far from Hamilton, to whom (and
to Mansel) the argument returns in xiv. No persuasive transitions occur
between xiv and xv, xv and xvi (in xvi it would have been appropriate to
refer back to viii, where this discussion is promised), or xvi and xvii.
Logic is the unifying thread from xvii through xxiii, and the little
structuring help Mill gives is adequate. There is an acknowledged leap
from xxiii to xxiv, as Mill indicates his move from matters purely
psychological and logical to questions relating to the Philosophia Prima
(or better, Ultima), but these are all dealt with in the one chapter,
one must suppose, for xxv reveals a clear signpost, though it is one
that suggests the path behind has been meandering: we are now done with
the main part of Hamilton’s psychology, that on Cognitive Faculties,
leaving Feelings and Conative Faculties. But Hamilton, Mill says, barely
treats of these, and the following discussion in xxv is solely on
pleasure and pain. Only a weaktransition to xxvi, on the freedom of the
will, occurs, and xxvii, on Hamilton’s view of mathematics, is justified
solely on the ground that the examination would be incomplete without
it. The concluding chapter does its work well, giving—as is typical of
Mill—a little ground, only to seize it back again.

95
One special departure from the normal practice deserves mention. At
399n.20 “All A is B” is corrected to “All A is all B” even though the
four editions have the former reading. The justification for this
emendation is that the sense is lost without it, and that elsewhere in
the passage, as well as in the authors referred to, the latter reading
is always found in analogous contexts.

[*]
This preface, in expanded form (see cvi-cviii below), also appears in
the 4th ed. There is no preface in the 1st or 2nd ed.

[†]
Henry Longueville Mansel, The Philosophy of the Conditioned (London and
New York: Strahan, 1866); reprinted from Contemporary Review, I (Jan.,
Feb., 1866), 31-49, 185-219.

[‡]
[Lucy March Phillipps,] The Battle of the Two Philosophies (London:
Longmans, Green, 1866).

[§]
James McCosh, An Examination of Mr. J. S. Mill’s Philosophy (London:
Macmillan, 1866).

[¶]
Henry Calderwood, “The Sensational Philosophy—Mr. J. S. Mill and Dr.
McCosh,” British and Foreign Evangelical Review, XV (April, 1866),
396-412.

[*]
Henry Boynton Smith, “Mill’s Examination of Hamilton’s Philosophy,”
American Presbyterian and Theological Review, IV (Jan., 1866), 126-62.

[†]
Hugh Francis O’Hanlon, A Criticism of John Stuart Mill’s Pure Idealism
(Oxford and London: Parker, 1866).

[‡]
William Henry Smith, “J. S. Mill on Our Belief in the External World,”
Blackwood’s Magazine, XCIX (Jan., 1866), 20-45.

[§]
John Pentland Mahaffy, intro. and trans., Kuno Fischer, A Commentary on
Kant’s Critick of Pure Reason (London: Longmans, Green, 1866).

[¶]
Edinburgh: Nimmo, 1866.

[∥]
Robert Ephrem Guy, “Calderwood and Mill upon Hamilton,” Dublin Review,
n.s. V (Oct., 1865), 474-504; John Cunningham, “Mill’s Examination of
Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy,” Edinburgh Review, CXXIV (July,
1866), 120-50.

[**]
David Masson, Recent British Philosophy (London and Cambridge:
Macmillan, 1865).

[††]
Alexander Campbell Fraser, “Mr. Mill’s Examination of Sir W. Hamilton’s
Philosophy,” North British Review, XLIII (Sept., 1865), 1-58.

[*]
“Mill versus Hamilton,” Fortnightly Review, I (15 July, 1865), 531-50.

[†]
Anon., “Mill on Hamilton,” North American Review, CIII (July, 1866),
250-60.

[‡]
George Grote, “John Stuart Mill on the Philosophy of Sir William
Hamilton,” Westminster Review, n.s. XXIX (Jan., 1866), 1-39.

[§]
M. P. W. Bolton, Inquisitio Philosophica (London: Chapman and Hall,
1866).

[¶]
In Chap. vi, pp. 180-97; the assault is on Mansel’s The Philosophy of
the Conditioned.

[∥]
James Hutchison Stirling, Sir William Hamilton (London: Longmans, Green,
1865).

[**]
Stirling, p. vii.

a-a
cviii + 72

[*]
Mansel, “Supplementary Remarks on Mr. Mill’s Criticism of Sir William
Hamilton,” Contemporary Review, VI (Sept., 1867), 18-31; McCosh, “Mill’s
Reply to his Critics,” British and Foreign Evangelical Review, XVII
(April, 1868), 332-62.

[†]
John Veitch, Memoir of Sir William Hamilton (Edinburgh: Blackwood,
1869), App., Note C, pp. 429-48.

[‡]
Ibid., p. 447.

[§]
See below, pp. 503k-k and 503n.

*
Memoir, pp. 212-13.

[*]
Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, ed. Henry Longueville Mansel and John
Veitch, 4 vols. (Edinburgh and London: Blackwood, 1859-60).

[†]
William George Ward, “Mr. Mill’s Denial of Necessary Truth,” Dublin
Review, n.s. XVII (Oct., 1871), 285-318.

[‡]
See Collected Works, Vols. VII and VIII (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1973), Vol. VIII, pp. 575-7 (a response to Ward’s article added
in the 8th ed., 1872, to Bk. II, Chap. v, §5).

[§]
See the note to Chap. xiv, pp. 267-71 below.

a-a
651, 652 if

b-b
651, 652 not

c-c
651, 652 but

d-d
651, 652 clear-sighted

[*]
See, e.g., Plato, Phædrus, in Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phædo, Phædrus
(Greek and English), trans. H. N. Fowler (London: Heinemann; Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1917), pp. 564-70 (275d-277a).

e-e
+72

[†]
Appended to Reid’s Works, ed. Hamilton (Edinburgh: Maclachlan and
Stewart, 1846), pp. 741-914.

[*]
Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, Education and University
Reform, 2nd ed. (London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans; Edinburgh:
Maclachlan and Stewart, 1853).

*
In particular by Mr. Bain, who habitually uses the phrase “relativity of
knowledge” in this sense. [Cf., e.g., The Senses and the Intellect, 2nd
ed. (London: Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green, 1864), pp.
9-10.]

a-a
651, 652 outside

b-b
651, 652 self-existent

c-c
651, 652 organ

d-d
651, 652 something

e-e
651, 652 should

f-f
651, 652 since

g-g
651, 652 would doubtless be

*
[67] [(London: Williams and Norgate), 1862. See, for possible
illustration, Pt. I, Chap. iii (esp. concerning the Self), pp. 65-6, and
Pt. II, Chap. i, pp. 127ff.] See, however, below, a note near the end of
Chap. ix [pp. 143n-4n below].

[*]
See, e.g., Auguste Comte, Cours de philosophie positive, 6 vols. (Paris:
Bachelier, 1830-42), Vol. I, pp. 4, 8; Vol. IV, p. 529.

h-h
+72

i-i
651, 652, 67 impressing that intelligence in some specific way

j-j
651, 652 the

k-k
651, 652 confused

*
Discussions on Philosophy, [App. I(B),] pp. 643-4.

a-a
651, 652 substantial

*
“Dissertations” appended to Sir W. Hamilton’s Edition of Reid’s Works,
[Note D,] p. 825.

†
Ibid., p. 842.

‡
Ibid.

§
Ibid., p. 844n.

¶
Ibid., p. 846.

∥
Ibid., p. 848.

*
Ibid., pp. 857-8.

†
P. 866n.

[*]
The attribution is mistaken. The notion originates with Aristotle; see
On the Soul, in On the Soul, Parva Naturalia, on Breath (Greek and
English), trans. W. S. Hett (London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1935), pp. 136, 180 (II, xii, 424a19; III,
viii, 432a4). See also p. 155 below.

b-b
651, 652, 67 Berkeley

[†]
See e.g., Lectures on the Philosophy of Mind, 19th ed., 4 vols.
(Edinburgh: Black; London: Longman, 1851), Vol. II, p. 83. Brown does
not use the term very often, but Hamilton uses it in his Discussions to
distinguish Brown’s theory from Reid’s.

c-c
651, 652 [in italics]

*
Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 136-8. [Virgil, Aeneid, in Works, trans. H.
Rushton Fairclough, 2 vols. (London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons,
1916), Vol. II, p. 110 (VIII, 730).]

d
651, 652 : a doctrine, by the way, which, under the name of Cosmothetic
Idealism, is elsewhere the object of some of his most cutting attacks

[*]
See Micromégas, in Œuvres complètes, 66 vols. (Paris: Renouard,
1817-25), Vol. XXXIX, pp. 141-67.

*
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 153.

*
Discussions, Appendix [I(B)], p. 644.

e
651, 652 [paragraph] Perhaps it may be suspected (and some phrases in
the longest of our extracts might countenance the idea) that in calling
our knowledge relative, Sir W. Hamilton was not thinking of the
knowledge of qualities, but of Substances, of Matter and Mind; and meant
that qualities might be cognised absolutely, but that Substances being
only known through their qualities, the knowledge of Substances can only
be regarded as relative. But this interpretation of his doctrine is
again inadmissible. For the relativity of which he is continually
speaking is relativity to us, while the relativity which this theory
ascribes to Substances is relativity to their attributes; and if the
attributes are known otherwise than relatively to us, so must the
substances be. Besides, we have seen him asserting the necessary
relativity of our knowledge of Attributes, no less positively than of
Substances. Speaking of Things in themselves, we found him saying that
we “become aware of their incomprehensible existence only as this is
revealed to us through certain qualities . . . which qualities, again,
we cannot think as unconditioned, irrelative, existent in and of
themselves.” [Discussions, App. I(B), pp. 643-4.] There is no
reservation here in favour of the Primary Qualities. Whatever, in his
theory, was meant by relativity of knowledge, he intended it of
qualities as much as of substances, of Primary Qualities as much as of
Secondary. [cf. 20g-g22 below]

*
Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 141, 153.

†
Ibid., p. 153.

f
651, 652 [paragraph]

g-g
22+67, 72

[*]
Discussions, App. I(B), pp. 643-4; cf. p. 13 above.

*
[67] This is essentially the interpretation put on Sir W. Hamilton’s
meaning by the ingenious reviewer [John Cunningham] of the present work
in the Edinburgh Review [CXXIV (July, 1866), 146-9].

h-h
[manuscript fragment exists; see Appendix A below]

†
[67] Lectures, Vol. I, p. 137.

‡
[67] “Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D,] p. 866n.

§
[67] Foot-note to Reid, [Works, ed. Hamilton (Edinburgh: Maclachlan and
Stewart, 1846,] p. 313n.

*
[67] Ibid., pp. 322n-3n. I am indebted to Mr. Mansel (Philosophy of the
Conditioned, p. 79) for reminding me of the last two passages. I should
not have failed to quote them in the first edition, if I had kept
references to them.

†
[67] I may add that even the Edinburgh Reviewer’s supposition [see
Cunningham, p. 148] does not save either the relativity of human
knowledge to us, or its relativity in the sense in which relative is
opposed to absolute, as doctrines of Sir W. Hamilton: for by the
Reviewer’s interpretation our knowledge of attributes would be relative
only to their substances; absolute in their cognition by us.

i-i
+67, 72

j
651, 652 openly

k-k
+67, 72

‡
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 148.

[*]
See p. 12 above.

*
Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 146-8.

l-l
651, 652, 67 which constitutes knowledge is

m-m
32+67, 72

*
[67] Mansel, [Philosophy of the Conditioned,] p. 64.

*
[67] Ibid., p. 71.

†
[67] Ibid., p. 75.

[*]
“Dissertations on Reid,” Note D, pp. 825 and 857-8; quoted more
extensively above, p. 15.

n-n
67 very fact that

o-o
67 discriminate

p-p
67 shows that he regarded some attributes as

q-q
67 there would be no means

*
[72] Sir W. Hamilton has the appearance of disclaiming the opinion here
attributed to him, and professing the alternative opinion that every
attribute is a joint product of the object and the mind, in the
following foot-note to Reid:

“The distinctions of perception and sensation, and of primary and
secondary qualities, may be reduced to one higher principle. Knowledge
is partly objective, partly subjective; both these elements are
essential to every cognition, but in every cognition they are always in
the inverse ratio of each other. Now, in perception and the primary
qualities, the objective element preponderates; whereas the subjective
element preponderates in sensation and the secondary qualities. See
Notes D and D*.” (Pp. 313n-14n.)

But a reference to the Notes in question will shew, that in admitting a
subjective element in the Primary Qualities, he only meant that a
subjective element accompanies our apprehension of them; that whenever
we perceive the primary qualities we are conscious of a sensation also.
“Sensation proper,” he says, “is the conditio sine qua non of a
Perception proper of the Primary qualities.” And again, “Every
Perception proper has a Sensation proper as its condition.” “The fact of
Sensation proper and the fact of Perception proper imply each other:”
they always co-exist, though “in the degree or intensity of their
existence they are always found in an inverse ratio to one another”
(“Dissertations,” [Note D*,] p. 880). This co-existence does not prevent
the two from being entirely distinct. “The apprehensions of the Primary”
qualities “are perceptions, not sensations; of the Secondary,
sensations, not perceptions; of the Secundo-primary, perceptions and
sensations together” ([ibid., Note D,] p. 858). Perceptions, the
apprehensions of the Primary qualities, are themselves wholly objective.

*
[67] Mansel, [Philosophy of the Conditioned,] p. 79n.

†
[67] Ibid., pp. 82-3.

‡
[67] Such, at least, is the doctrine of Kant in the first edition of the
Kritik, though, in the so-called Refutation of Idealism introduced into
the second, he is sometimes supposed to have intended to explain it away
[see Kritik der Reinen Vernunft, Vol. II of Sämmtliche Werke, ed. Karl
Rosenkranz and Friedrich Schubert, 14 vols. in 12 (Leipzig: Voss,
1838-40), pp. 31-238 (1st ed.), and 772-5 (the Refutation in the 2nd
ed.).]; but Mr. Mahaffy (Intro., Pt. IV [pp. xxxviii-liii], and notes to
Appendix C) seems to have explained away the explanation [cf. George
Gordon Byron, “Dedication ii,” Don Juan, in Works, ed. Thomas Moore, 17
vols. (London: Murray, 1832-33), Vol. XV, p. 101]; and Mr. Stirling, who
holds “the second edition of the Kritik of Pure Reason to supersede the
first,” (p. 30n,) still credits Kant with this doctrine, interpreting in
a sense consistent with it, the externality which Kant ascribes to
objects in space. Kant’s external and internal were both internal to the
mind. Nothing but the noumenon was external to it.

*
[67] If any doubt could remain that Mr. Mansel defends Sir W. Hamilton
by ascribing to him an opinion he never held, the following passage
would dispel it. “If, indeed,” says Mr. Mansel “Hamilton had said with
Locke, that the primary qualities are in the bodies themselves, whether
we perceive them or no, he would have laid himself open to Mr. Mill’s
criticism. But he expressly rejects this statement, and contrasts it
with the more cautious language of Descartes, ‘ut sunt, vel saltem esse
possunt.’ ” ([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] pp. 83-4. [The Locke
reference is to the Essay Concerning Human Understanding, in Works, New
ed., 10 vols. (London: Tegg, et al., 1823), Vol. I, p. 126 (Bk. II,
Chap. viii, §23); the Descartes quotation is from René Descartes,
Principia Philosophiœ, 4th ed. (Amsterdam: Elzevir, 1664), p. 18 (I,
lxx).]) Sir W. Hamilton may never have said, totidem verbis, that the
Primary Qualities are in the bodies even when we do not perceive them:
but can any one who has read his writings doubt that this was his
opinion? The passage which Mr. Mansel refers to as “rejecting” it runs
as follows: “On the doctrine of both philosophers” (Locke and Descartes)
“we know nothing of material existence in itself: we know it only as
represented, or in idea. When Locke, therefore, is asked, how he became
aware that the known idea truly represents the unknown reality, he can
make no answer. On the first principles of his philosophy, he is wholly
and necessarily ignorant whether the idea does or does not represent to
his mind the attributes of matter, as they exist in nature. His
assertion is, therefore, confessedly without a warrant; it transcends,
ex hypothesi, the sphere of possible knowledge. Descartes is more
cautious. He only says, that our ideas of the qualities in question
represent those qualities as they are, or as they may exist; ‘ut sunt,
vel saltem esse possunt.’ The Cosmothetic Idealist can only assert to
them a problematical reality.” (“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D,] p.
839.)

Mr. Mansel actually thinks this an adoption of Descartes’ opinion; and
does not see that Sir W. Hamilton merely pronounces Descartes to be
right and Locke wrong from their own point of view, that of Cosmothetic
Idealism. As Cosmothetic Idealists, they have, he says, no evidence that
the qualities we perceive are in the object itself, and are as we
perceive them. Not admitting that we directly perceive the qualities in
the object, they cannot do more than assert problematically that the
qualities are in the object; and this Descartes saw, and Locke, more
inconsistently, did not see. But what they as Cosmothetic Idealists
could not affirm, Sir W. Hamilton, as a Natural Realist, could; because,
as a Natural Realist, he held that we directly perceive the qualities in
the object. Mr. Mansel mistakes one of the thousand statements by Sir W.
Hamilton of his difference with the Cosmothetic Idealists, for an
adhesion to them. r(Mr. Mansel, in his rejoinder, admits and withdraws
this error [“Supplementary Remarks,” p. 20n].)r Sir W. Hamilton, as
Professor Fraser observes, believed that “the solid and extended
percepts which our sensations reveal to us, exist, whether we are
conscious or not.” ([“Mr. Mill’s Examination,”] p. 22.) He believed that
bodies exist whether we perceive them or not, and that they always carry
their “essential attributes,” the Primary Qualities, with them: if,
therefore, he had thought that the Primary Qualities only exist while we
perceive them, he must have thought so of the bodies likewise, and must
have believed that we create the bodies in the act of perceiving them;
which Kant, who deemed the body we perceive to be really in the mind,
did believe; but if Sir W. Hamilton did, his whole philosophy of
perception is without a meaning.

In the essay in his Discussions, headed “Philosophy of Perception,” Sir
W. Hamilton speaks of the knowledge of external objects claimed by a
Natural Realist, ipsissimis verbis, as knowledge of “things in
themselves.” (Discussions, p. 57, in the statement of the opinion of
Hypothetical Realists.)

For a critical examination of the doctrine ascribed to Sir W. Hamilton
by Mr. Mansel, that of an external object cognizable by us, and an
uncognizable Noumenon besides, I may refer to Mr. Bolton’s able work,
[Inquisitio Philosophica,] pp. 218ff.

sMr. Mansel, in his rejoinder, though he does not give up the theory of
the tertium quid, does not further insist on it; but attempts to shew
that when Sir W. Hamilton speaks of knowing the Primary qualities as
they are in themselves, and as they are in the body, he means knowing
them in immediate relation to the mind, in contradistinction to knowing
them mediately through a mental representation, or merely inferring them
as the hypothetical cause of a mental state. [“Supplementary Remarks,”
pp. 20-1.] I admit, and have already admitted, that Sir W. Hamilton did
mean this, and did say that he meant it. But the “immediate relation to
the mind” which Sir W. Hamilton thus distinguished from the different
modes of mediate relation, is no other than that between perceiver and
perceived: and to say that all our knowledge is relative, meaning only
this relation, is but to say, that we know of external things only what
we perceive of them, and that in order that we may know an object of
sense it must be presented to our senses. The knowledge, when we do get
it, according to Sir W. Hamilton, is not (in the case of Primary
qualities) knowledge of an impression made on our own sensitive faculty,
which would be really relative knowledge; it is knowledge of the Thing
as it exists in itself, independently of our perceptions. It is this
which, as I have pointed out, reduces the pretended Relativity to a
name.

It is a great confirmation of the unmeaningness of the Relativity
Doctrine in Sir W. Hamilton’s hands, that those who have most studied
his philosophy, Dean Mansel and Professor Veitch, are reduced to such
straits in the attempt to find a meaning for it, and do not always find
the same meaning.s

r-r
67 As a specimen of misunderstanding of a philosopher’s opinions by his
commentator and defender, this, it must be acknowledged, stands high.

s-s
+72

*
[67] See Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 113-14; Discussions, p. 16;
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D*,] p. 882; and, in further
illustration, foot-note to Reid, p. 126n; passages strangely overlooked
by Mr. Mansel ([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] p. 138).

†
[67] When Sir W. Hamilton says (“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D,] p.
841) that although Space is a native, necessary, à priori form of
imagination, we yet have an immediate perception of a really objective
extended world, Mr. Mansel imagines that Sir W. Hamilton is maintaining
at once the subjectivity of Space, and the objectivity of bodies as
occupying space. But Sir W. Hamilton himself declares unequivocally that
these two opinions contradict one another, unless reconciled by the
supposition that Space is objective and external to us as well as
subjective: not, therefore, properly a form of our mind, but an outward
reality which has a form of our mind corresponding to it. See the whole
of the passages referred to in the last note.

*
[67] [Anon., “Mill on Hamilton,” North American Review, CIII (July,
1866),] 252-3.

[*]
Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 137, 138.

*
[67] Fraser, [“Mr. Mill’s Examination,”] p. 16.

†
[67] Ibid., p. 15.

‡
[67] Mr. Fraser affirms (p. 20) with me, and contrary to Mr. Mansel and
the North American Reviewer [see pp. 252-6], that in Sir W. Hamilton’s
opinion “there is nothing behind the proper objects of
sense-consciousness, these being the very things or realities themselves
which we call material, external, extended, solid.” Instead of
recognizing three elements, a Noumenal real thing, a Phænomenal real
thing, and the perceiving mind, the middle one of the three being that
which the mind cognizes, Mr. Fraser sees that Sir W. Hamilton recognised
but one real Thing, the very Thing which we perceive; unknown to us in
its essence, but perceived and known through its attributes; and by
means of those attributes, actually brought into what Sir W. Hamilton
calls our consciousness. This Mr. Fraser regards [ibid.] as “a distinct
and important contribution by Sir W. Hamilton to the theory of matter
previously common in this country,” because bringing matter into our
consciousness is part of the way towards making it (what Mr. Fraser
believes it to be) wholly a phænomenon of mind. But Sir W. Hamilton did
not intend his doctrine to lead to this; he admits Matter into our
consciousness because, contrary to the general opinion of philosophers,
he thinks (see below, Chap. viii) that we can be conscious of what is
outside our mind. Sir W. Hamilton, in short, was not a Berkeleian, as
Mr. Fraser is, and as that philosopher almost admits (p. 26) that the
interpretation which he would like to put on Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrine
would make Sir W. Hamilton.

Mr. Fraser seems to me, throughout his defence of Sir W. Hamilton, to
have yielded to the natural tendency of a consistent thinker when
standing up for an inconsistent one, to interpret ambiguous utterances
twhicht face two ways, as if they looked only one way; though the part
of their author’s philosophy towards which those expressions face on
their other side, is thereby set at nought and abolished.

uSince the publication of the third edition of this work, my attention
has been drawn to a passage (unfortunately left unfinished) in the
posthumous continuation of Sir W. Hamilton’s “Dissertations on Reid,”
which strikingly confirms the opinion I have expressed, that the
relativity of human knowledge, as understood by him, is a mere identical
proposition.

“That all knowledge consists in a certain relation of the object known
to the subject knowing, is self-evident. What is the nature of this
relation, and what are its conditions, is not, and never can be, known
to us; because we know only the qualities of our own faculties of
knowledge, as relations to their objects, and we only know the qualities
of their objects, as relations to our minds. All qualities both of mind
and of matter are therefore only known to us as relations; we know
nothing in itself. We know not the cause of this relation, we know
nothing of its conditions, the fact is all. The relation is the relation
of knowledge. We know nothing consequently of the kind of the relation;
we have no consciousness and no possible knowledge whether the relation
of knowledge has any analogy to the relations of similarity,
contrariety, identity, difference—we have no consciousness that it is
like any other, or any modification of any other: these are all
relations of a different kind between object and object; this between
subject and object: we can institute no point of comparison.” (Reid,
[Note N,] p. 965.)

That is to say, we know nothing except in relation to us, but that
relation is simply the relation of being known by us, and this is the
only relation cognizable by us which exists between the knower and the
known. Our knowledge is relative, but only in the sense that knowing is
itself a relation. Would Cousin, or Hegel, or Schelling, have had the
slightest objection to admit that our knowledge even of the Absolute is
relative, in the sense that it is we that know it?u

t-t
67 intended to

u-u
+72

v-v
651, 652 thus

[*]
“On the Philosophy of the Unconditioned,” in Discussions, pp. 1-38, a
review of Victor Cousin, Cours de philosophie: Introduction à l’histoire
de la philosophie (Paris: Pichon and Didier, 1828); subsequent
references are to the edition in Mill’s library (Brussels: Hauman,
1836).

*
Bampton Lectures. The Limits of Religious Thought. 4th ed. [London:
Murray, 1859], p. 42.

†
[67] Mr. Mansel denies the correctness of the representations made in
this paragraph ([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] pp. 90-6); and at least
seems to assert, that the question between M. Cousin and Sir W. Hamilton
did not relate to the possibility of knowing the Infinite Being, but to
a “pseudo-concept of the Infinite,” [p. 93,] which Sir W. Hamilton
believed to be not a proper predicate of God, but a representation of a
non-entity. And Mr. Mansel affirms (p. 92) that to substitute the name
of God in the place of the Infinite and the Absolute, is exactly to
reverse Sir W. Hamilton’s argument. We have here a direct issue of fact,
of which every one is a judge who will take the trouble to read Sir W.
Hamilton’s Essay. I maintain thata what M. Cousin affirms and Sir W.
Hamilton denies, is the cognoscibility not of an Infinite and Absolute
which is not God, but of the Infinite and Absolute which is God. [See
below pp. 35-6.] I might refer to almost any page of the Essay; I will
only quote the application which Sir W. Hamilton himself makes of his
own doctrine. “True, therefore, are the declarations of a pious
philosophy: ‘A God understood would be no God at all.’ ‘To think that
God is, as we can think him to be, is blasphemy.’ The Divinity, in a
certain sense, is revealed; in a certain sense, is concealed: he is at
once known and unknown. But the last and highest consecration of all
true religion, must be an altar Ἀγνώστῳ θεῷ—‘To the unknown and
unknowable God.’ ” (Discussions, p. 15n. [For the quotation, see Acts,
17:23.]) When this is what the author of the Essay presents as its
practical result, it is too much to tell us that the Essay is not
concerned about God but about a “Pseudo-Infinite,” and that we are not
entitled, when we find in it an assertion about the Infinite, to hold
the author to the assertion as applicable to God. We shall next be told
that Mr. Mansel himself, in his Bampton Lectures, is not treating the
question of our knowledge of God. It is very true that the only Infinite
about which either Sir W. Hamilton or Mr. Mansel proves anything, is a
Pseudo-Infinite; but they are not in the least aware of this; they fancy
that this Pseudo-Infinite is the real Infinite, and that in proving it
to be unknowable by us, they prove the same thing of God.

The reader who desires further elucidation of this point, may consult
the sixth chapter of Mr. Bolton’s Inquisitio Philosophica. That acute
thinker also points out [see, e.g., pp. 190-4] various inconsistencies
and other logical errors in Mr. Mansel’s work, with which I am not here
concerned, my object in answering him not being recrimination, but to
maintain my original assertions against his denial.

bMr. Mansel, in his rejoinder, quotes from his Bampton Lectures [Limits
of Religious Thought] some passages in which he says, and others in
which he implies, that “our human conception of the Infinite is not the
true one,” and that “the infinite of philosophy is not the true
Infinite:” and thinks it very unfair that, with these passages before
me, I should accuse him of mistaking a pseudo-infinite for the real
Infinite. [“Supplementary Remarks,” p. 23, where Mansel gives the
references in his Limits of Religious Thought for the passages he
cites.] But the mistake from which he clears himself is not that which I
charged him with. I maintained, that the abstraction “The Infinite,” in
whatever manner understood, as distinguished from some particular
attribute possessed in an infinite degree, has no existence, and is a
pseudo-infinite. [See pp. 94ff. below.] Mr. Mansel, on the contrary,
affirmed throughout, and affirms in the very passages which he quotes,
that “The Infinite” has a real existence, and is God: though when we
attempt to conceive what it is, we only reach a mass of contradictions,
which is a pseudo-infinite. Mr. Mansel did not suppose his
pseudo-infinite to be the true Infinite; but my assertion, which stands
unrefuted, is, that his “true Infinite” is a pseudo-infinite; and that
in proving it to be unknowable by us, he mistakenly fancied that he had
proved this of God.b

a
67 there is not a shadow of ground for this statement of Mr. Mansel; and
that

b-b
+72

*
Discussions, p. 9. [Mill’s square brackets.]

[*]
Ibid.

c
651, 652 with Sir W. Hamilton

d-d
651, 652 good

e-e
651, 652 all

f-f
651, 652 Though the idea of Absolute is thus contrasted with that of
Infinite, the one is equally fitted with the other to be predicated of
God; but not in respect of the same attributes. There is no
incorrectness of speech in the phrase Infinite Power: because the notion
it expresses is that of a Being who has the power of doing all things
which we know, or can conceive, and more. But in speaking of knowledge,
Absolute is the proper word, and not Infinite. The highest degree of
knowledge that can be spoken of with a meaning, only amounts to knowing
all that there is to be known: when that point is reached, knowledge has
attained its utmost limit. So of goodness, or justice: they cannot be
more than perfect. There are not infinite degrees of right. The will is
either entirely right, or wrong in different degrees: downwards there
are as many gradations as we choose to distinguish, but upwards there is
an ideal limit. Goodness (unlike time or space) can be imagined
complete—such that there can be no greater goodness beyond it.

Such is the signification of the term Absolute, when coupled and
contrasted with Infinite. But the word has other meanings

*
[67] In the first edition of this work it was maintained, that though
Power admits of being regarded as Infinite, Knowledge does not; because
“the highest degree of knowledge that can be spoken of with a meaning,
only amounts to knowing all that there is to be known.” [See 37f-f
above.] But Mr. Mansel [Philosophy of the Conditioned, p. 105] and the
“Inquirer” (author of The Battle of the Two Philosophies [see pp. 24-6])
have justly remarked, that on the supposition of an Infinite Being, “all
that there is to be known” includes all which a Being of infinite power
can think or create; consequently, the power being infinite, the
knowledge, if supposed complete, must be infinite too. In regard to the
moral attributes, it was said in the first edition, that Absolute is the
proper word for them, and not Infinite, since those attributes “cannot
be more than perfect. There are not infinite degrees of right. The will
is either entirely right, or wrong in different degrees.” [See 37f-f
above.] In this I did not properly distinguish between moral rightness
or justice gas predicated of acts or mental states, and the same
regarded as attributes of a person. Conformity to the standard of right
has a positive limit, which can only be reached, not surpassed; but
persons, though all exactly conforming to the standard, may differ in
the strength of their adherence to it: influences (temptations for
example) might detach one of them from it, which would have no effect
upon another. There are thus, consistently with complete observance of
the rule of right, innumerable gradations of the attribute considered as
in a person. But, on the other hand, there is an extreme limit to these
gradations—the idea of a Person whom no influences or causes, either in
or out of himself, can deflect in the minutest degree from the law of
right. This I apprehend to be a conception of absolute, not of infinite,
righteousness. The doctrine, therefore, of the first edition, that an
Infinite Being may have attributes which are absolute, but not infinite,
still appears to me maintainable. But as it is immaterial to my
argument, and was only the illustration nearest at hand of the meaning
of the terms, I withdraw it from the discussion.g

g-g
[manuscript fragment exists; see Appendix A below]

h-h
651, 652 this

i-i
651, 652 liable to be predicated of God

j-j
651, 652 third sense as in the second

k-k
651, 652 a] 67 the

l
651, 652 [footnote:] *Sir W. Hamilton (Discussions, p. 14n)
distinguishes and defines the first two of these meanings: Absolute in
the sense of “finished, perfected, completed,” and Absolute as opposed
to Relative. The third meaning he does not expressly notice, but seems
to confuse it with the second. The meaning, however, with which it is
really allied, and to which it may in a certain sense be reduced, is the
first: as will be seen hereafter.

m-m
651, 652 Sir W. Hamilton (after Kant) unites the Infinite and the
Absolute under a larger abstraction, the Unconditioned, regarding it as
a genus of which they are the two species.† [footnote:] †See the same
note. [text:] Having often occasion to speak of the two in conjunction,
he is entitled to a form of abridged expression: let us hope he takes
due care that it shall be nothing more. But when the Absolute and the
Infinite are thus spoken of as two species of the Unconditioned, it is
necessary to know in which of the senses just discriminated the word
Absolute is to be understood. Sir W. Hamilton professes that it is in
the first sense; that of finished, perfected, completed. He adds that
this is the only sense in which, for himself, he uses the term.‡
[footnote:] ‡Note, ut supra. [text:] If we should find, then, that he
does not strictly keep to this resolution, we may conclude that the
falling off is not intentional.

In accordance with his professions he

*
Discussions, p. 13.

n-n
651, 652 and which is far from conveying so distinct a meaning, as,
considering its great importance in Sir W. Hamilton’s philosophy, it
ought. Indeed, throughout his writings, he uses the word Condition, and
its derivatives, Conditioned and Unconditioned, as if it was impossible
to understand them in more than one meaning, and as if nobody could
require to be told what that meaning is: though in English metaphysics
two of the three phrases, until he introduced them, were new, and though
there are no expressions in all philosophy which require definition and
illustration more.* [the footnote, without any change in its wording,
was moved in 67 to 55 below]

[*]
See, e.g., Sextus Empiricus, Against the Logicians, II, in Sextus
Empiricus (Greek and English), trans. R. G. Bury, 4 vols. (London:
Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1933-49), Vol. II, p. 380 (273), and
Plotinus, Operum philosophicorum omnium (Basil: Lecythus, 1580), Ennead
VI, §§18 and 22, pp. 582-3 and 586-7.

[†]
See Aristotle, The Metaphysics (Greek and English), trans. Hugh
Tredennick, 2 vols. (London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1923),
Vol. I, p. 280 (V, xxvi, 1023b27ff.), p. 266 (V, xv, 1021b13ff.).

*
[67] Discussions, p. 14n.

†
[67] And, in consequence, erroneously charged Sir W. Hamilton with
having, in one of his arguments against Cousin, departed from his own
meaning of the term. I have freed the text from everything which
depended on this error, the only serious misrepresentation of Sir W.
Hamilton which has been established against me. [See, e.g., pp. 39l and
39m-m above, and 52-3e-e and 91b-b below, apparently in response to
Mansel, Philosophy of the Conditioned, pp. 103ff.]

‡
[67] Mansel, [Philosophy of the Conditioned,] p. 104.

§
[67] But the assimilation with τὸ ὅλον and τὸ τέλειον again throws us
out; for τὸ ὅλον, with all Greek thinkers, meant either the completed
aggregate of all that exists, or an abstract entity which they conceived
as the Principle of Wholeness—in virtue of which, and by participation
in which, that universal aggregate and all other wholes are wholes.
Either of these would be an additional meaning for the word Absolute,
different from all which have yet been mentioned.

*
[67] I demur, however, to Sir W. Hamilton’s assertion, that for himself
he exclusively uses the term in this meaning. In the whole of the
discussion respecting the relativity of our knowledge, Absolute, with
Sir W. Hamilton, is simply the opposite of relative, and contains no
implication of “finished, perfected, completed.” Moreover, in this very
Essay, when arguing against M. Cousin, who uses Absolute in a sense
compatible with Infinite, Sir W. Hamilton continually falls into M.
Cousin’s sense.

o-o
651, 652 Unconditioned is

†
Discussions, p. 13.

‡
Ibid., p. 17.

p-p
651, 652, 67 “only a

q-q
651, 652 unnecessarily [printer’s error; Source agrees with 67, 72]

[*]
John Milton, Paradise Lost, in The Poetical Works of Mr. John Milton
(London: Tonson, 1695), p. 62 (III, 12).

*
Discussions, pp. 14-15. [The quotation is mistakenly attributed to St.
Augustine by Hamilton.]

r-r
651, 652 , whatever be meant by it,

*
Ibid., p. 25.

s-s
651, 652 Under the first head; that the Unconditioned is not a possible
object of thought, because it includes both the Infinite and the
Absolute, and these are exclusive of one another.† [footnote:] †Ibid.,
p. 28ff. [text:] [paragraph:] Under the second;

[*]
Ibid., p. 30, translating Cousin, Cours de philosophie: Introduction,
Leçon v, p. 129.

†
Ibid., p. 33.

t-t
651, 652 We now arrive at the third head.

*
Ibid., p. 35. uIn the first edition three points of our author’s
argument were discussed, instead of two only: but I now perceive that
the remaining argument is ad hominem merely, and has reference to M.
Cousin’s confusion of the Absolute with the Infinite.u

u-u
+67, 72

v-v
651, 652 where is the necessity for supposing

†
[Cf. Job, 38:41, for the concluding image.] A passage follows, which
being only directed against a special doctrine of M. Cousin, (that God
is determined to create by the necessity of his own nature—that an
absolute creative force cannot but pass into creative activity [see
Cours de philosophie: Introduction, Leçon v, pp. 139-40])—I should have
left unmentioned, were it not worth notice as a specimen of the kind of
arguments which Sir W. Hamilton can sometimes use. On M. Cousin’s
hypothesis, says our author, “One of two alternatives must be admitted.
God, as necessarily determined to pass from absolute essence to relative
manifestation, is determined to pass either from the better to the
worse, or from the worse to the better. A third possibility, that both
states are equal, as contradictory in itself and as contradicted by our
author, it is not necessary to consider. The first supposition must be
rejected. The necessity in this case determines God to pass from the
better to the worse, that is, operates to his partial annihilation. The
power which compels this must be external and hostile, for nothing
operates willingly to its own deterioration; and as superior to the
pretended God, is either itself the real deity, if an intelligent and
free cause, or a negation of all deity, if a blind force or fate. The
second is equally inadmissible: that God, passing into the universe,
passes from a state of comparative imperfection into a state of
comparative perfection. The divine nature is identical with the most
perfect nature, and is also identical with the first cause. If the first
cause be not identical with the most perfect nature, there is no God,
for the two essential conditions of his existence are not in
combination. Now, on the present supposition, the most perfect nature is
the derived; nay, the universe, the creation, the γινόμενον, is, in
relation to its cause, the actual, the ὄντως ὄν. [See, e.g., Plato,
Sophist, in Theætetus, Sophist (Greek and English), trans. H. N. Fowler
(London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1921),
p. 370 (245d3), p. 378 (247d7-e4).] It would also be the divine, but
that divinity supposes also the notion of cause, while the universe, ex
hypothesi, is only an effect.” (P. 36.)

This curious subtlety, that creation must be either passing from the
better to the worse or from the worse to the better (which, if true,
would prove that God cannot have created anything unless from all
eternity) can be likened to nothing but the Eleatic argument that motion
is impossible, because if a body moves it must either move where it is
or where it is not; an argument, by the way, for which Sir W. Hamilton
often expresses high respect; and of which he has here produced a very
successful imitation. If it were worth while expending serious argument
upon such a curiosity of dialectics, one might say it assumes that
whatever is now worse must always have been worse, and that whatever is
now better must always have been better. For, on the opposite
supposition, perfect wisdom would have begun to will the new state at
the precise moment when it began to be better than the old. We may add
that our author’s argument, though never so irrefragable, in no way
avails him against M. Cousin; for (as he has himself said, only a
sentence before) on M. Cousin’s theory the universe can never have had a
beginning, and God, therefore, never was in the dilemma supposed.

wOn this Mr. Mansel remarks, “Hamilton is not speaking of states of
things, but of states of the Divine nature, as creative or not creative:
and Mr. Mill’s argument, to refute Hamilton, must suppose a time when
the new nature of God begins to be better than the old.” ([Philosophy of
the Conditioned,] p. 107n.) This is not a happy specimen of Mr. Mansel’s
powers of confutation. If God made the universe at the precise moment
when it was wisest and best to do so—and if the universe was made by a
perfectly wise and good being, this must have been the case—who besides
Mr. Mansel, or, according to him, Sir W. Hamilton, would assert that
God, in doing so, acquired a new nature? or passed out of one state into
another state of his own nature? Did he not simply remain in the state
of perfect wisdom and goodness in which he was before?

Mr. Mansel makes the odd assertion [ibid.], that this argument of Sir W.
Hamilton is taken from Plato. There is very little in common between it
and the passage in the Republic in which Socrates, to disprove the
fabulous metamorphoses of the gods into the forms of men, animals, or
inanimate things, argues that no being would voluntarily change itself
from better to worse. I cannot be mistaken in the passage of Plato which
Mr. Mansel has in view, for he had himself cited a part of it, with the
same intention, in the notes to his Bampton Lectures ([Limits of
Religious Thought,] p. 209).w [See Plato, Republic (Greek and English),
trans. Paul Shorey, 2 vols. (London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1946), Vol. I, pp. 190-2 (II, 381b-c).]

w-w
+67, 72

*
[67] Mr. Mansel considers this sentence a curious specimen of my reading
in philosophy, and informs me that “Plato expressly distinguishes
between ‘the beautiful’ and ‘things that are beautiful’ as the One in
contrast to the Many—the Real in contrast to the Apparent.” ([Philosophy
of the Conditioned,] pp. 108-9 [referring to Republic, pp. 516-18 (V,
476a-e)].) Mr. Mansel will doubtless be glad to hear that I already
possessed the very elementary knowledge of Plato which he seeks to
impart to me; indeed (if it were of any consequence) I have elsewhere
given an account of this theory of Plato, and made the excuses which may
justly be made for such a doctrine in Plato’s time. [See “Grote’s
Plato,” in Essays on Philosophy and the Classics, Collected Works, Vol.
XI (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1978), pp. 421ff.] But to
recognize it as a theory which it is necessary to take into
consideration now, is to follow the example of the later German
transcendentalists in putting philosophy back to its very incunabula.

†
[67] The “Inquirer” objects, that merely negative predicates should be
excluded from the account; and that many of those here mentioned are
merely negative: absolute littleness being but the negation of
greatness; weakness, of strength; folly, of wisdom; evil, of good (p.
22). But (without meddling with the very disputable position, that all
bad qualities are merely deficiency of good ones) the question is, not
whether the qualities which the “Inquirer” enumerates are negative, but
whether they are capable of being predicated as absolute. If they are,
the general or abstract Absolute logically includes them. And, surely,
negations are still more susceptible of being absolute than positive
qualities. The “Inquirer” will hardly deny that “absolutely none” is as
correct an employment of the word absolute as “absolutely all.” With
regard to Infinite, the same writer says, “To talk of infinite
littleness—infinite non-extension or non-duration—is to talk of infinite
nothing. Which is indeed to talk, we must not say infinite, but absolute
nonsense.” [Ibid.] It is hardly fair to refer a pupil of Sir W. Hamilton
to mathematics; but the “Inquirer” might have learnt from Sir W.
Hamilton himself that it is not nonsense to talk of infinitely small
quantities.

*
Quoted by Mr. Mansel, The Limits of Religious Thought, p. 30 [translated
by Mansel from Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Vorlesungen über die
Geschichte der Philosophie, ed. Carl Ludwig Michelet, in Werke, 20 vols.
(Berlin: Duncker and Humblot, 1834-54), Vol. XV, p. 275].

*
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 375.

x-x
651, 652, 67 “fasciculus of negations?”

*
[67] The answer of Mr. Mansel and the “Inquirer” [pp. 20-6] to the
preceding argument, is, that it confounds the infinite with the
indefinite. They could not have understood the argument worse if they
had never read it. Indefinite, in its ordinary acceptation, is that
which has a limit, but a limit either variable in itself, or unknown to
us. Infinite is that which has no limit. In what Mr. Mansel calls the
metaphysical use of the word indefinite, he affirms it to mean
“indefinitely increasable.” ([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] p. 114.)
Elsewhere he says “An indefinite time is that which is capable of
perpetual addition: an infinite time is one so great as to admit of no
addition.” ([Ibid.,] p. 50n.) I now ask, which of these is the correct
expression for that which is greater than everything finite. Is this a
property which can be affirmed of anything which has an undetermined
limit? or of anything which is indefinitely increasable? or of anything
which is capable of perpetual addition? Is a merely indefinite time
greater than every finite time? Is a merely indefinite space greater
than every finite space? Is a merely indefinite space greater than every
finite space? Is a merely indefinite power greater than every finite
power? The property of being greater than everything finite belongs, and
can belong, only to what is in the strictest sense of the term, both
popular and philosophical, Infinite.

yMr. Mansel, in his rejoinder, defends himself by saying that Descartes
and Cudworth agree with him in giving the name indefinite to what I (and
as he acknowledges, the mathematicians) understand by infinite.
[“Supplementary Remarks,” pp. 24-5.] I cannot affirm that Descartes and
Cudworth have nowhere done this; but they certainly have not done it in
the passages which Mr. Mansel quoted, either in his first reply
[Philosophy of the Conditioned, pp. 112-13,] or in this. All that either
Descartes or Cudworth says in those passages is that the indefiniteness,
to our minds, of the possible extension of the physical universe, is not
tantamount to, nor a proof of, its infinity; as of course it is not. [In
the Philosophy of the Conditioned, Mansel refers to René Descartes,
Principia Philosophia, pp. 6-7 (I, xxvi-xxvii) and 27-8 (II, xxi), and a
letter of Descartes to Henry More, in Lettres de Mr Descartes, ed.
Claude Clerselier, 3 vols. (Paris: Angot, 1657-67), Vol. I, pp. 360-1;
and to Ralph Cudworth, The True Intellectual System of the Universe,
trans. John Harrison, 3 vols. (London: Tegg, 1845), Vol. III, p. 131. In
his “Supplementary Remarks,” Mansel adds a reference to Leibniz, but
does not cite any further passages from Descartes or Cudworth.]

Mr. Mansel adds that even supposing me to be in the right, it would only
follow, not that Sir W. Hamilton is wrong, but that he and I do not mean
the same thing by the same term. Whoever has read the present note must,
however, be aware, that I maintain my position to be true even in what
Mr. Mansel affirms to be Sir W. Hamilton’s meaning of the term.y

y-y
+72

z
651, 652 that the Unconditioned is inconceivable, because it includes
both the Infinite and the Absolute, and these are contradictory of one
another. This is not an argument against the possibility of knowing the
Infinite and the Absolute, but against jumbling the two together under
one name. If the Infinite and the Absolute are each cognisable
separately, of what importance is it that the two conceptions are
incompatible? If they are so, the fault is in lumping up incompatible
conceptions into an incomprehensible and impossible compound. The
argument is only tenable as against the knowability and the possible
existence of something which is at once “The Infinite” and “The
Absolute,” abstractions which do contradict one another, but not more
flagrantly than each of them contradicts itself. When, instead of
abstractions, we speak of Things which are infinite and absolute in
respect of given attributes, there is no incompatibility. There is
nothing contradictory in the notion of a Being infinite in some
attributes and absolute in others, according to the different nature of
the attributes.

The next argument is,

[*]
Mill would appear to be referring to the ideas expounded by Thomas
Hobbes in “Physics, or the Phenomena of Nature,” Part IV of Elements of
Philosophy: The First Section, Concerning Body, in The English Works,
ed. William Molesworth, 11 vols. (London: Bohn, 1839-45), Vol. I, pp.
393-6 (Chap. xxv, §§5-6).

a
651, 652 : and in the case of Sir W. Hamilton the shadow of this other
Relativity always floats over his discussion of the doctrine of
Relativity in its more special sense, and at times (as in the paper
“Conditions of the Thinkable” forming an Appendix [I(A), pp. 601-33] to
the Discussions) entirely obscures it

b-b
651, 652 Since when have the One and the Many been

c-c
651, 652 Plurality likewise

d-d
651, 652 “The Absolute”] 67 The Absolute

*
[67] Mr. Mansel, as I have mentioned [see p. 34n above], vehemently
objects to testing what Sir W. Hamilton says of the Infinite by its
applicability to God, affirming that the Infinite which Sir W. Hamilton
is speaking of, namely the Infinite as we conceive it, is a
“pseudo-infinite.” [Philosophy of the Conditioned, p. 93.] This is a
curious inversion of the parts of Sir W. Hamilton and of his critic. It
is I who assert that Sir W. Hamilton’s Infinite is a pseudo-infinite; it
is he who maintains that it is the real. At least he substitutes this
pseudo-infinite which is really inconceivable, for an intelligible
infinite, a concrete Deity, and proving the inconceivability of the one,
thinks he has sufficiently proved the inconceivability of the other. It
was his business, it is what he professes, to prove that God, considered
as Infinite, is inconceivable by us. Instead of this, he proves the
inconceivability of an Infinite which is not and cannot be God, and
which does not and cannot exist, and leaves it to Mr. Mansel to discover
(after others have pointed it out) that this is a pseudo-infinite.

Mr. Mansel is still more indignant that I should try what Sir W.
Hamilton says of the Absolute, by the test of applicability to God, and
says that this is actually inverting Sir W. Hamilton’s meaning, since
his definition of the Absolute, “the unconditionally limited,” is
contradictory to the nature of God. [Hamilton, Discussions, p. 13;
Mansel, Philosophy of the Conditioned, p. 106.] But Sir W. Hamilton is
here arguing with M. Cousin, who does not mean by Absolute the limited,
but the complete, and who does predicate it of God. As Mr. Bolton truly
remarks “In discussing the doctrines of Schelling and Cousin, Hamilton
uses the word Absolute in conformity with their usage, according to
which the Infinite and the Absolute are not opposed, or contraries, as
in Hamilton’s own terminology.” (P. 159n.) Nor for this does he deserve
any blame; for if the Absolute which he affirms to be unknowable,
because it cannot be known under the conditions of Plurality, is
Absolute only in his own sense of the term, and not in M. Cousin’s, he
has not refuted M. Cousin.

[*]
See Discussions, p. 33, directed against Cousin, Cours de philosophie:
Introduction, Leçon v, pp. 149-50.

e-e
651, 652 Here, surely, is one of the most unexpected slips in logic ever
made by an experienced logician. At the beginning of the discussion we
noted three meanings of the word Absolute. Two of them Sir W. Hamilton
himself discriminated with precision. Of these, we thought that the one
concerned in the present discussion was that of “finished, perfected,
completed.” Sir W. Hamilton said so; and added, that it is the meaning
which, for himself, he exclusively employs: and, up to this time, he has
really kept to it. But now, suddenly and without notice, that meaning is
dropped, and another substituted, that in which absolute is the reverse
of relative. We are told, as a sufficient refutation of M. Cousin’s
doctrine, that his Absolute, since it is defined as a Cause, is only a
Relative. But if Absolute means finished, perfected, completed, may
there not be a finished, perfected, and completed Cause? i.e. the most a
Cause that it is possible to be—the cause of everything except itself?

f-f
[manuscript fragment exists; see Appendix A below]

[*]
Discussions, p. 14n; cf. p. 39l above.

g-g
651, 652 absolute in the only sense relevant to the question, it is not
absolute in another and a totally different sense; since what is known
as a cause,

[†]
See Cours de philosophie: Introduction, Leçon v, pp. 140-1.

h-h
651, 652 of the essence

[‡]
Discussions, p. 14; cf. p. 42 above.

i-i
651, 652, 67 the First Cause

*
In page 8 of the Discussions, speaking of the one of M. Cousin’s three
elements of Consciousness which that author “variously expresses by the
terms unity, identity, substance, absolute cause, the infinite, pure
thought, &c.,” Sir W. Hamilton says, “we will briefly call it the
Unconditioned.” What M. Cousin “denominates plurality, difference,
phænomenon, relative cause, the finite, determined thought, &c.,” Sir W.
Hamilton says, “we would style the Conditioned.” [See, e.g., Cousin,
Cours de philosophie: Introduction, Leçon iv, pp. 108ff., and Leçon v,
pp. 122-4.] This, I think, is as near as he ever comes to an explanation
of what he means by these words. It is obviously no explanation at all.
It tells us what (in logical language) the terms denote, but not what
they connote. An enumeration of the things called by a name is not a
definition. If the name, for instance, were “dog,” it would be no
definition to say that what are variously denominated spaniels,
mastiffs, and so forth, “we would style” dogs. The thing wanted is to
know what attributes common to all these the word signifies,—what is
affirmed of a thing by calling it a dog. [For the placing of this
footnote in 651, 652, see 39-41n-n above.]

j
651, 652 But now, will either of these two meanings of Condition—the
condition which means a correlative, or the conditions the aggregate of
which composes the cause,—will either of them give a meaning to the
proposition, “To think is to condition?” The second we may at once
exclude. Our author cannot possibly mean that to think an object is to
assign to it a cause. But he may, perhaps, mean that to think it is to
give it a correlative. For this is true, and true in more senses than
one. Whoever thinks an object, gives it at least one correlative, by
giving it a thinker; and as many more as there are objects from which he
distinguishes it. But is this any argument against those who say that
the Absolute is thinkable? Did any of them ever suggest the possibility
of thinking it without a thinker? Or did any of them profess to think it
in any other manner than by distinguishing it from other things? If to
do this is to condition, those who say that we can think the Absolute,
say that we can condition it: and if the word Unconditioned is employed
to make an apparent hindrance to our doing so, it is employed to beg the
question.

k-k
57651, 652 : but the doctrine is of as little use for our author’s
purpose in this interpretation as in the two preceding. What he aims at
proving against Cousin is, that the Absolute is unthinkable. His
argument for this (if I have interpreted him right) is, that we can only
think anything, in conformity to the laws of our thinking faculty. But
his opponents never alleged the contrary. Even Schelling was not so
gratuitously absurd as to deny that the Absolute must be known according
to the capacities of that which knows it—though he was forced to invent
a special capacity for the purpose. And M. Cousin holds that the
Absolute is known by the same faculties by which we know other things.
They both maintained, not that the Absolute could be thought, apart from
the conditions of our thinking faculty, but that those conditions are
compatible with thinking the Absolute: and the only answer that could be
made to them would be to disprove this: which the author has been trying
to do; by what inconclusive arguments, I have already endeavoured to
show.

[*]
Philosophy of the Conditioned, pp. 66-7.

l-l
[manuscript fragment exists; see Appendix A below]

[*]
See pp. 48ff. above.

*
[67] “To be conceived as unconditioned,” says Mr. Mansel, “God must be
conceived as exempt from action in time: to be conceived as a person, if
his personality resembles ours, he must be conceived as acting in time.”
([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] pp. 17-18.) Exempt from action in
time, as much as you please; in other words, not necessitated to it, nor
restricted by its conditions; but did any one ever conceive the Deity as
not acting in time? Nay, even if he is not conceived as a person, but
only as the first principle of the universe, “one absolutely first
principle on which everything else depends,” [p. 7,] a belief which is
held by Mr. Mansel along with the Christian doctrine of the Divine
Personality (pp. 7-18); even so, the first principle of everything which
takes place in Time, must, from the very meaning of the words, not only
be conceived as acting in Time, but must really act in Time, and in all
Time. Action in Time does not belong to the Deity as a Person, but quite
as much to the Deity as the first principle of all things, which is what
Mr. Mansel means by the Unconditioned.

*
[67] On this Mr.Mansel’s remark is that Sir W. Hamilton did not assert
these to be unmeaning abstractions. ([Ibid.,] pp. 110-11.) I never
pretended that he did; the gist of my complaint against him is, that he
did not perceive them to be unmeaning. “Hamilton,” says Mr. Mansel,
“maintains that the terms absolute and infinite are perfectly
intelligible as abstractions, as much so as relative and finite.”
[Ibid., p. 110.] Quis dubitavit? It is not the terms absolute and
infinite that are unmeaning; it is “The Infinite” and “The Absolute.”
Infinite and Absolute are real attributes, abstracted from concrete
objects of thought, if not of experience, which are at least believed to
possess those attributes. “The Infinite” and “The Absolute” are
illegitimate abstractions of what never were, nor could without
self-contradiction be supposed to be, attributes of any concrete. I
regret to differ, on this point, from my distinguished reviewer [George
Grote] in the Westminster Review, who considers these to be intelligible
abstractions, though of a higher reach of abstraction than the preceding
(p. 14). The distinction is seized by one of my American critics, Dr. H.
B. Smith, who regards it as the difference between talking “about the
Infinite and Absolute as entities,” and considering them “simply as
modes or predicates of real existences.” ([“Mill’s Examination,”] p.
134.) That there are persons “in Laputa or the Empire” (as Sir W.
Hamilton phrases it [Discussions, p. 21]) who do talk about them as
entities, up to any pitch of wild nonsense, I am quite aware; and
against these Sir W. Hamilton’s Essay, as the protest, though the
insufficient protest, of a rival Transcendentalist, has its value.

m
651, 652 His own favourite abstraction “The Unconditioned,” considered
as the sum of these two, necessarily shares the same fate. If, indeed,
it be applied conformably to either of the received meanings of the word
condition—if it be understood either as denoting a First Cause, or as a
name for all Noumena—it has in each case a signification which can be
understood and reasoned about. But as a phrase afflicted with incurable
ambiguity, and habitually used by its introducer in several meanings,
with no apparent consciousness of their not being the same, it seems to
me a very infelicitous creation, and a useless and hurtful intruder into
the language of philosophy. [paragraph]

[*]
See Cours de philosophie: Introduction, Leçon v, passim.

a-a
651, 652 source

b-b
651, 652 in

*
Letter to Mr. Calderwood, in Appendix [iii], to Lectures, Vol. II, pp.
530-1.

†
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note A,] p. 760. [For St. Augustine, see De
Utilitate credendi ad Honoratum liber unus, in Opera Omnia, Vols.
XXXII-XLVII of Jacques Paul Migné, ed., Patrologiæ cursus completus,
Series latina (Paris: Migné, 1841-49), Vol. XLII, col. 83 (Cap. xi). The
attribution of “Intellige ut credas” to Peter Abelard is mistaken. For
St. Anselm, see Proslogion seu Alloquium de Dei Existentia, in Opera
Omnia, Vols. CLVIII-CLIX of ibid. (1853-54), Vol. CLVIII, col. 227 (Cap.
i).]

‡
[Note A,] p. 750.

c-c
651, 652 higher source of evidence

d-d
651, 652 of

[*]
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 136; cf. p. 16 above.

*
Discussions, p. 86.

e-e
+67, 72

*
[67] Accordingly Sir W. Hamilton himself, in one of the “Dissertations
on Reid,” says that “the principles of our knowledge must be themselves
knowledge.” ([Note A,] p. 763.) And there are few who will not approve
this use of language, and condemn the other.

f-f
651, 652 the chief source

g-g
65+67, 72

†
[67] There is much dispute among philosophers as to the difference
between Knowledge and Belief; and the strife is not likely to terminate,
until they perceive that the real question is, not what the distinction
is, but what it shall be; what one among several differences already
known and recognised, the words shall be employed to denote. “The word
belief,” says Dr. M‘Cosh, in this more discerning than the generality,
“is unfortunately a very vague one, and may stand for a number of very
different mental affections. When I am speaking of first or intuitive
principles, I use the term to signify our conviction of the existence of
an object not now present, and thus I distinguish primitive faith from
primitive knowledge, in which the object is present.” (Examination, pp.
36-7.) This distinction agrees well with usage in the cases to which Dr.
M‘Cosh applies it: we know that which we perceive by the senses, and
believe that which we only remember: we know that we ourselves, and
(while we look at them) our house and garden, exist, and believe the
existence of the Czar of Russia and the island of Ceylon. Every
definition of Belief, as distinguished from Knowledge, must include
these cases, because in them the conviction which receives the name of
Belief falls short of the complete assurance implied in the word
knowledge: our memory may deceive us; the Czar or the island may have
been swallowed up by an earthquake. But if we attempt to carry out Dr.
M‘Cosh’s distinction through the entire region of thought, the whole of
what we call our scientific knowledge, except the primary facts or
intuitions on which it is grounded, has to pass into the category of
Belief; for the objects with which it is conversant are seldom present.

Mr. Mansel might be supposed to be adopting Dr. M‘Cosh’s distinction,
when he says, “We believe that the true distinction between knowledge
and belief may ultimately be referred to the presence or absence of the
corresponding intuition.” ([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] p. 126n.)
But his criterion of the distinction, and, according to him, Sir W.
Hamilton’s also, is the following: we believe that a thing is, but do
not know even that it is, unless we can conceive how, or in what manner,
it is. “When I say that I believe in the existence of a spiritual being
who can see without eyes, I cannot conceive the manner in which seeing
co-exists with the absence of the bodily organ of sight” (ibid.). “We
cannot conceive the manner in which the unconditioned and the personal
are united in the Divine Nature; yet we may believe that, in some manner
unknown to us, they are so united. To conceive the union of two
attributes in one object of thought, I must be able to conceive them as
united in some particular manner: when this cannot be done, I may
nevertheless believe that the union is possible, though I am unable to
conceive how it is possible.” [Ibid., pp. 18-19.] This may be more
briefly expressed by saying that we can believe what is inconceivable,
but can know only what is conceivable; and undoubtedly both these
contrasted propositions are maintained by Sir W. Hamilton. But to regard
them as a clue to the distinction in his mind between knowledge and
belief, would be to misunderstand his opinions: for the convictions
which he most emphatically characterized as beliefs, in
contradistinction to knowledge, are what he calls our natural and
necessary beliefs, “the original data of reason,” [“Dissertations on
Reid,” Note A, p. 760,] which, far from being inconceivable, are usually
tested by being themselves conceivable while their negations are not. If
knowledge were distinguished from belief by our being aware of the
manner as well as the fact, we could not believe and know the same fact;
our knowledge could not rest, as he says it does, on a belief that it is
itself true.

But indeed, this notion of Sir W. Hamilton that we have two convictions
on the same point, one guaranteeing the other—our knowledge of a truth,
and a belief in the truth of that knowledge—seems to me a piece of false
philosophy, resembling the doctrine he elsewhere rejects, that we have
both a feeling and a consciousness of the feeling. We do not know a
truth and believe it besides; the belief is the knowledge. Belief,
altogether, is a genus which includes knowledge: according to the usage
of language we believe whatever we assent to; but some of our beliefs
are knowledge, others are only belief. The first requisite which, by
universal admission, a belief must possess, to constitute it knowledge,
is that it be true. The second is, that it be well grounded; for what we
believe by accident, or on evidence not sufficient, we are not said to
know. The grounds must, moreover, be sufficient for the very highest
degree of assurance; for we do not consider ourselves to know, as long
as we think there is any possibility (I mean any appreciable
possibility) of our being mistaken. But when a belief is true, is held
with the strongest conviction we ever have, and held on grounds
sufficient to justify that strongest conviction, most people would think
it worthy of the name of knowledge, whether it be grounded on our
personal investigations, or on the appropriate testimony, and whether we
know only the fact itself, or the manner of the fact. And I am inclined
to think that the purposes of philosophy, as well as those of common
life, are best answered by making this the line of demarcation.

[*]
Lectures, Vol. II, App. iii, p. 531; cf.p. 61 above.

*
Discussions, [App. I (A),] p. 624.

[*]
Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, 2 vols. (London: Baldwin
and Cradock, 1829).

[*]
See Logic, Bk. II, Chap. v, §6, and Bk. V, Chap. iii, §3, in Collected
Works, Vol. VII, pp. 238ff.; Vol. VIII, pp. 752ff.

[†]
See William Whewell, History of the Inductive Sciences, 3rd ed., 3 vols.
(London: Parker, 1857); History of Scientific Ideas, 3rd ed., 2 vols.
(London: Parker, 1858); Novum Organon Renovatum, 3rd ed. (London:
Parker, 1858); and On the Philosophy of Discovery (London: Parker,
1860).

a-a
651, 652 were it granted

*
“To conceive, to imagine, to apprehend, when taken in the proper sense,
signify an act of the mind which implies no belief or judgment at all.
It is an act of the mind by which nothing is affirmed or denied, and
which, therefore, can neither be true nor false. But there is another
and a very different meaning of these words, so common and so well
authorized in language that it cannot be avoided; and on that account we
ought to be the more on our guard, that we be not misled by the
ambiguity. . . . When we would express our opinion modestly, instead of
saying, ‘This is my opinion,’ or ‘This is my judgment,’ which has the
air of dogmaticalness, we say, ‘I conceive it to be thus—I imagine, or
apprehend it to be thus;’ which is understood as a modest declaration of
our judgment. In like manner, when anything is said which we take to be
impossible, we say, ‘We cannot conceive it:’ meaning that we cannot
believe it. Thus we see that the words conceive, imagine, apprehend,
have two meanings, and are used to express two operations of the mind,
which ought never to be confounded. Sometimes they express simple
apprehension, which implies no judgment at all; sometimes they express
judgment or opinion. . . . When they are used to express simple
apprehension they are followed by a noun in the accusative case, which
signifies the object conceived; but when they are used to express
opinion or judgment, they are commonly followed by a verb in the
infinitive mood. ‘I conceive an Egyptian pyramid.’ This implies no
judgment. ‘I conceive the Egyptian pyramids to be the most ancient
monuments of human art.’ This implies judgment. When they are used in
the last sense, the thing conceived must be a proposition, because
judgment cannot be expressed but by a proposition.” (Reid, [Essays] on
the Intellectual Powers [of Man], p. 223 of Sir W. Hamilton’s edition
[Edinburgh: Maclachlan and Stewart, 1846], to which edition all my
references will be made.)

b-b
651, 652, 67 or

c-c
651, 652 conceive

*
[72] It has been remarked to me by a correspondent, that a round square
differs from a hard square or a heavy square in this respect, that the
two sensations or sets of sensations supposed to be joined in the
first-named combination are affections of the same nerves, and
therefore, being different affections, are mutually incompatible by our
organic constitution, and could not be made compatible by any change in
the arrangements of external nature. This is probably true, and may be
the physical reason why when a thing begins to be perceived as round it
ceases to be perceived as square; but it is not the less true that this
mere fact suffices, under the laws of association, to account for the
inconceivability of the combination. I am willing, however, to admit, as
suggested by my correspondent, that “if the imagination employs the
organism in its representations,” which it probably does, “what is
originally unperceivable in consequence of organic laws” may also be
“originally unimaginable.”

*
That the reverse of the most familiar principles of arithmetic and
geometry might have been made conceivable, even to our present mental
faculties, if those faculties had coexisted with a totally different
constitution of external nature, is ingeniously shown in the concluding
paper of a recent volume, anonymous, but of known authorship, Essays, by
a Barrister.

“Consider this case. There is a world in which, whenever two pairs of
things are either placed in proximity or are contemplated together, a
fifth thing is immediately created and brought within the contemplation
of the mind engaged in putting two and two together. This is surely
neither inconceivable, for we can readily conceive the result by
thinking of common puzzle tricks, nor can it be said to be beyond the
power of Omnipotence. Yet in such a world surely two and two would make
five. That is, the result to the mind of contemplating two two’s would
be to count five. This shows that it is not inconceivable that two and
two might make five: but, on the other hand, it is perfectly easy to see
why in this world we are absolutely certain that two and two make four.
There is probably not an instant of our lives in which we are not
experiencing the fact. We see it whenever we count four books, four
tables or chairs, four men in the street, or the four corners of a
paving stone, and we feel more sure of it than of the rising of the sun
to-morrow, because our experience upon the subject is so much wider and
applies to such an infinitely greater number of cases. Nor is it true
that every one who has once been brought to see it, is equally sure of
it. A boy who has just learnt the multiplication table is pretty sure
that twice two are four, but is often extremely doubtful whether seven
times nine are sixty-three. If his teacher told him that twice two made
five, his certainty would be greatly impaired.

It would also be possible to put a case of a world in which two straight
lines should be universally supposed to include a space. Imagine a man
who had never had any experience of straight lines through the medium of
any sense whatever, suddenly placed upon a railway stretching out on a
perfectly straight line to an indefinite distance in each direction. He
would see the rails, which would be the first straight lines he had ever
seen, apparently meeting, or at least tending to meet at each horizon;
and he would thus infer, in the absence of all other experience, that
they actually did enclose a space, when produced far enough. Experience
alone could undeceive him. A world in which every object was round, with
the single exception of a straight inaccessible railway, would be a
world in which every one would believe that two straight lines enclosed
a space. In such a world, therefore, the impossibility of conceiving
that two straight lines can enclose a space would not exist.” [James
Fitzjames Stephen, “Mr. Mansel’s Metaphysics,” in Essays by a Barrister
(London: Smith, Elder, 1862), pp. 333-4.]

In the “Geometry of Visibles” which forms part of Reid’s Inquiry into
the Human Mind, it is contended that if we had the sense of sight, but
not that of touch, it would appear to us that “every right line being
produced will at last return into itself,” and that “any two right lines
being produced will meet in two points.” [In Works, ed. Hamilton,] Chap.
vi, §9 (p. 148.) The author adds, that persons thus constituted would
firmly believe “that two or more bodies may exist in the same place.”
For this they would “have the testimony of sense,” and could “no more
doubt of it than they can doubt whether they have any perception at all,
since they would often see two bodies meet and coincide in the same
place, and separate again, without having undergone any change in their
sensible qualities by this penetration.” (Ibid., p. 151.)

dHardly any part of the present volume has been so maltreated, by so
great a number of critics, as the illustrations here quoted from an able
and highly instructed cotemporary thinker; which, as they were neither
designed by their author nor cited by me as anything more than
illustrations, I do not deem it necessary to take up space by defending.
When a selection must be made, one is obliged to consider what one can
best spare.

eSome of my correspondents, looking upon the illustrations by “A
Barrister” as (what they are not) an essential part of my argument,
think me bound either to defend them or to give them up. As they are, in
my opinion, perfectly defensible, I am ready, thus challenged, to stand
up for them. And I select, among the attacks made on them, that of Dr.
M‘Cosh (Examination of Mr. J. S. Mill’s Philosophy, pp. 209-11), as one
of the fairest, and including what is most worthy of notice in the
others. Of the first illustration, Dr. M‘Cosh says:

“Were we placed in a world in which two pairs of things were always
followed by a fifth thing, we might be disposed to believe that the
pairs caused the fifth thing, or that there was some prearranged
disposition of things producing them together; but we could not be made
to judge that 2 + 2 = 5, or that the fifth thing is not a different
thing from the two and the two. On the other supposition put, of the two
pairs always suggesting a fifth, we should explain their recurrence by
some law of association, but we would not confound the 5 with the 2 + 2,
or think that the two pairs could make five.” [P. 210.]

This passage is a correct description of what would happen if the
presentation of the fifth thing were posterior, by a perceptible
interval, to the juxtaposition of the two pairs, so that we should have
time to judge that the two and two make four previously to perceiving
the fifth. But the supposition is that the production of the fifth is so
instantaneous in the very act of seeing, that we never should see the
four things by themselves as four: the fifth thing would be inseparably
involved in the act of perception by which we should ascertain the sum
of the two pairs. I confess it seems to me that in this case we should
have an apparent intuition of two and two making five.

To the second illustration, Dr. M‘Cosh replies: “I allow that this
person as he looked one way, would see a figure presented to the eye of
two straight lines approaching nearer each other; and that as he looked
the other way he would see a like figure. But I deny that in combining
the two views he would ever decide that the four lines seen, the two
seen first and the two seen second, make only two straight lines. In
uniting the two perceptions in thought, he would certainly place a bend
or a turn somewhere, possibly at the spot fromwhich he took the two
views. He would continue to do so till he realized that the lines seen
on either side did not in fact approach nearer each other. Or, to state
the whole phenomenon with more scientific accuracy: Intuitively, and to
a person who had not acquired the knowledge of distance by experience,
the two views would appear to be each of two lines approaching nearer
each other; but without his being at all cognisant of the relation of
the two views, or of one part of the lines being further removed from
him than another. As experience told him that the lines receded from him
on each side, he would contrive some means of combining his
observations, probably in the way above indicated; but he never could
make two straight lines enclose a space.” [Pp. 210-11.]

Now it seems to me that the supposed percipient could not account for
his apparent perceptions in the manner indicated; he could not believe
that there was a turn or a bend anywhere. “At the spot from which he
took the two views” he would have the evidence of his senses that there
was no bend. Looking along the interval between the lines, he would
again have the evidence of sense that they were not deflected either
way, but maintained an uniform direction. Until therefore, experience of
the laws of perspective had corrected his judgment, he would have the
apparent evidence of his senses that two straight lines met in two
points. This appearance, until shown by further experience to be an
illusion, would probably decide his belief: and any doubts that might be
raised by a contemplation of straight lines which were nearer to him,
would be silenced by the supposition that two straight lines will
inclose a space if only they are produced far enough.

Dr. M‘Cosh may himself be cited as a witness to the intrinsic
possibility of conceiving combinations which I should have thought were
universally regarded as inconceivable. When distinguishing between the
two meanings of inconceivable (in pp. 235-6 of his book) he says: “We
cannot be made to decide or believe that Cleopatra’s Needle should be in
Paris and Egypt at the same time; yet with some difficulty we can
simultaneously image it in both places.” Now when we consider that in
order really to image the same Needle (and not two Needles exactly
similar) in two places at once we must actually imagine the two places,
Paris and Alexandria, superposed upon one another and occupying the same
portion of space, it seems to me that this conception is quite as
impossible to us as the reverse of a geometrical axiom; and is, indeed,
of much the same character.e

The “Geometry of Visibles” has been noticed only by Dr. M‘Cosh (pp.
211-13), who rejects it, as founded on the erroneous doctrine (as he
considers it) that we cannot perceive by sight the third dimension of
space. I regard this, on the contrary, as not only a true doctrine, but
one from which Dr. M‘Cosh’s own opinion does not materially differ: and
if it be true, it is impossible to resist Reid’s conclusion [see
Inquiry, pp. 149-50], that to beings possessing only the sense of sight,
the paradoxes here quoted, and several others, would be truths of
intuition—selfevident truths.d

fDr. Ward, in the Dublin Review, contests this doctrine [“Mr. Mill’s
Denial of Necessary Truth,” pp. 304-5]; and an argument against it has
been sent to me by the intelligent and instructed correspondent already
once referred to. For a reply I might refer them to the chapter on the
Geometry of Visibles, in Reid’s work; but I will point out, in few
words, where I think they are in error. They contend that Reid’s
Idomenians would not possess the notion which we attach to the term
straight line, but would call by that name what they would really image
to themselves as a circular arc. But Reid’s position (and he assigns
good reasons for it) is the reverse of this; that what we, who have the
sense of touch, perceive as a circular arc with ourselves in the centre,
Idomenians could only perceive as a straight line; and that,
consequently, all the appearances which Reid enumerates would be by them
apprehended, and, as they would think, perceived, as phenomena of
straight lines.

Dr. M‘Cosh also returns to the charge, but holds a different doctrine
from my other two critics, being of opinion that the Idomenians would
really have the notion of a straight line. [See “Mill’s Reply,” p. 356.]
For the consequences of this I refer him back to Reid. He adds, that as
touch alone can reveal to us impenetrability, the Idomenians could argue
nothing as to bodies penetrating one another. [See Inquiry, pp. 150-2.]
But, they could have the conception of the only penetration Reid
contended for, namely, of bodies meeting and coinciding in the same
place, and separating again without alteration. And for this they would
have the evidence of sense. The fact is literally true of the visual
images, which to them would be the whole bodies; and as they could form
no notion of one thing passing behind another, their only impression
would be of penetration.f

d-d
74+67, 72

e-e
+72

f-f
+72

*
[72] I do not mean, which is really incredible, as Mr. Mansel, in his
rejoinder, supposes I do, and consequently charges me with imputing to
Sir W. Hamilton that in the Law of the Conditioned he maintains that of
two incredible alternatives one must be believed. [“Supplementary
Remarks,” p. 27.]

g
651, 652 it

[*]
See On the Intellectual Powers, pp. 375-9.

*
[67] It is curious that Dr. M‘Cosh, with this volume before him, and
occupied in criticizing it, did not find out until his book was passing
through the press, and then only from the sixth edition of my System of
Logic, that I was aware of the difference between these two meanings of
“to conceive.” (M‘Cosh, [Examination,] p. 241n. [See System of Logic,
Bk. II, Chap. vii, §3, in Collected Works, Vol. VII, p. 269.]) He
consequently thought it necessary to tell me, what I had myself stated
in the text, that Antipodes were inconceivable only in the second sense.
[McCosh, Examination, pp. 240-1.]

hDr. M‘Cosh continually charges me with confounding the two meanings,
and arguing from one of them to the other. [See “Mill’s Reply,” pp.
357-8.] But he must be well aware that intuitional philosophers in
general (I do not say that Dr. M‘Cosh) assign as the sufficient, and
conclusive proof of inconceivability in the one sense, inconceivability
in the other. They argue that a proposition must be true, and ought to
be believed—on the ground that we cannot conceive its opposite, meaning
that we cannot frame a mental representation of it. It is therefore
quite pertinent to show (when it can be done) that this inability to
join the ideas together is not inherent in our constitution, but is
accounted for by the conditions of our experience; for to shew this, is
to destroy the argument principally relied on as a proof that the
judgment is a necessary one.h

h-h
+72

i-i
+67, 72

*
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 102.

†
Ibid., p. 100.

‡
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note A,] p. 745.

§
[67] Mr. Mansel refuses to admit ([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] pp.
131ff.) that Sir W. Hamilton confounds these different senses of the
word Conception, and asserts that he always adheres to the meaning
indicated by him in a foot-note to Reid (p. 377n), and answering to the
first meaning of inconceivable, namely, unimaginable. Of the second
meaning Mr. Mansel says, “When Hamilton speaks of being ‘unable to
conceive as possible,’ he does not mean, as Mr. Mill supposes,
physically possible under the law of gravitation or some other law of
matter, but mentally possible as a representation or image; and thus the
supposed second sense is identical with the first.” (P. 132n.) According
to this interpretation, when Sir W. Hamilton says of anything that it
cannot be conceived as possible, he does not mean possible in fact, but
possible to thought, in other words, that it cannot be conceived as
conceivable. I, however, do Sir W. Hamilton the justice of believing,
that when he added the words “as possible” to the word conceive, he
intended to add something to the idea. Accordingly he uses the phrases
“to understand as possible,” “to comprehend as possible,” as equivalents
for “to conceive as possible.” [See, e.g., Discussions, p. 15; Lectures,
Vol. III, p. 101.] I believe that by “possible” he meant, as people
usually do, possible in fact. And I have the authority of Mr. Mansel
himself for so thinking. Mr. Mansel, in another place expresses what was
probably the real meaning of Sir W. Hamilton, and laments that Sir W.
Hamilton did not state it distinctly. “To conceive a thing as possible,”
says Mr. Mansel, “we must conceive the manner in which it is possible;
but we may believe in the fact without being able to conceive the
manner.” ([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] p. 36n.) jThis makes no sense
if understood as Mr. Mansel, in his rejoinder, says that it ought to
be—“mentally possible as a notion, not physically possible as a fact.”
[“Supplementary Remarks,” p. 27.] There is no manner of being possible
as a mere notion: the elements of the notion can be put together in the
mind, or they cannot. A manner of being possible can only refer to
possibility as a fact.j When people say that they cannot conceive how a
thing is possible, they always mean, that but for evidence to the
contrary, they should have supposed it impossible. And this I always
find to be the case when Sir W. Hamilton uses the phrase. I know not of
any manner of a possibility that would enable us to conceive the thing
“as possible” unless it removed some obstacle to believing that the
thing is possible. Such, for instance, would be the case, if we have
found or imagined something which is capable of causing the thing; or
some means or mechanism by which it could be brought about (the
desideratum in Mr. Mansel’s illustration of a being who sees without
eyes [Philosophy of the Conditioned, p. 126n]); or if we have had an
actual intuition of the thing as existing: which, when sufficiently
familiar, makes it no longer seem to require any ground of possibility
beyond the fact itself. In short, the how of its existence, which
enables us to conceive it as possible, must be a how which affords at
least a semblance of explanation of Mr. Mansel’s that. This is
distinctly recognised by Sir W. Hamilton in one of the passages I have
quoted, in which “to conceive the possibility” of a thing is defined
“conceiving it as the consequent of a certain reason.” By conceiving a
thing as possible, he meant apprehending some fact, or imagining some
hypothesis, which would explain its possibility; which would be, in the
Leibnitzian sense, its Sufficient Reason. For, an explanation, even
hypothetical, of a thing which previously seemed to admit of none,
removes a difficulty in believing it. kWe have a natural tendency to
disbelieve anything which, while it has never been presented in our
experience, also contradicts our habitual associations: but the
suggestion to our mind of some possible conditions which would be a
Sufficient Reason for its existence, takes away its incredibility, and
enables us to “conceive it as possible.” This view of Sir W. Hamilton’s
meaning explains, though it does not justify, his using the term in its
third signification; which Mr. Mansel also endeavours to reduce to the
first ([ibid.,] p. 132n), but which may be better identified with the
second: for of First Truths also it is impossible to assign any
Sufficient Reason.k

j-j
67 This is reducible to my second meaning of inconceivable, that which
is synonymous with incredible.

k-k
[manuscript fragment exists; see Appendix A below.]

l-l
651, 652 we may disregard, not only as inadmissible, but as avowedly
compatible with belief

*
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 99.

*
Ibid., p. 113.

†
Discussions, [App. I (A),] p. 624.

‡
Ibid., p. 15.

*
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D***,] p. 911.

†
To save words in the text, I shall simply indicate in foot-notes the
places at which the author passes from one of the three meanings of the
word Inconceivable to another. In this place he is using it in the first
or second meaning, probably in the first.

‡
First mand second senses confused togetherm.

m-m
651, 652 sense

§
First sense.

¶
First sense.

∥
Third sense.

*
Third sense, gliding back into the first.

†
Here the return to the first sense is completed.

‡
nSecond sensen.

n-n
651, 652 Here the second sense makes its appearance

§
Second sense.

¶
First sense.

∥
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 100-4.

[*]
See ibid., Vol. II, pp. 404-13.

o
651, 652 I think he has failed to make out either point. [Cf. 87-8c-c
and 88n below.]

p
651, 652 it

q-q
+67, 72

r-r
651, 652 infinite

s-s
+67, 72

t-t
651, 652 other

*
[67] Mr. Manselu replies that our system of numeration enables us to
“exhaust any finite number, by dealing with its items in large masses,”
but that no such process can “exhaust the infinite.” ([Philosophy of the
Conditioned,] p. 134.) vMy argument isv that we need not exhaust the
infinite to be enabled to conceive it; since, in point of fact, we do
not exhaust the finite numbers which it is admitted that we can and do
conceive. wMr. Mansel says we do [“Supplementary Remarks,” p. 27]; which
reduces the question to a difference in the meaning of the word exhaust.
In the only sense that is of importance to the argument, we do not
mentally exhaust any large number, since we do not acquire an adequate
idea of it.w

u
67 , entirely missing the point of this argument,

v-v
67 If Mr. Mansel had considered a little, he would have seen my argument
to be

w-w
+72

x
651, 652 completely

y-y
651, 652 time [printer’s error?]

z-z
651, 652 It is not vague and indeterminate, as a merely negative notion
is.

a-a
651, 652 does not seem to have

b-b
651, 652 power

c-c
651, 652 or, if some à priori metaphysical prejudice prevented us from
believing it, we should at least be enabled to conceive it

*
See the catalogue at length, in the Appendix [iii] to the second volume
of the Lectures, pp. 527-9.

d-d
651, 652 We have now to examine the second half of the “Law of the
Conditioned,” namely, that although the pair of contradictory hypotheses
in each Antinomy are both of them inconceivable, one or the other of
them must be true.

I should not, of course, dream of denying this, when the propositions
are taken in a phænomenal sense; when the subjects and predicates of
them are interpreted relatively to us. The Will, for example, is wholly
a phænomenon; it has no meaning unless relatively to us; and I of course
admit that it must be either free or caused. Space and Time, in their
phænomenal character, or as they present themselves to our perceptive
faculties, are necessarily either bounded or boundless, infinitely or
only finitely divisible. The law of Excluded Middle, as well as that of
Contradiction, is common to all phænomena. But it is a doctrine of our
author that these laws are true, and cannot but be known to be true, of
Noumena likewise. It is not merely Space as cognisable by our senses,
but Space as it is in itself, which he affirms must be either of
unlimited or of limited extent. Now, not to speak at present of the
Principle of Contradiction, I demur to that of Excluded Middle as
applicable to Things in themselves. . . . [Here appear, in immediate
succession, the two passages JSM quotes from himself in the footnote
above.] As already observed, the only contradictory alternative of which
the negative side contains nothing positive is that between Entity and
Non-entity, Existing and Non-existing; and so far as regards that
distinction, I admit the law of Excluded Middle as applicable to
Noumena; they must either exist or not exist. But this is all the
applicability I can allow to it.

If the preceding arguments are valid, the “Law of the Conditioned”
breaks down in both its parts. It is not proved that the Conditioned
lies between two hypotheses concerning the Unconditioned, neither of
which hypotheses we can conceive as possible. And it is not proved,
that, as regards the Unconditioned, one or the other of these hypotheses
must be true. Both propositions

*
[67] In the first edition, besides denying the inconceivability of the
pairs of contradictory hypotheses in Sir W. Hamilton’s Antinomies, I
also contested the assertion that one or other of them must be true;
arguing, that the law of Excluded Middle, though true of all phænomena,
and therefore of Space and Time in their phænomenal character, is not a
law of Things. “The law of Excluded Middle is, that whatever predicate
we suppose, either that or its negative must be true of any given
subject: and this I do not admit when the subject is a Noumenon;
inasmuch as every possible predicate, even negative, except the single
one of Non-entity, involves, as a part of itself, something positive,
which part is only known to us by phænomenal experience, and may have
only a phænomenal existence.” This, being an overstatement, and, when
reduced to its proper bounds, not necessarily conflicting with anything
said by Sir W. Hamilton on the present subject, I abandon. But I retain
a portion of my remarks, illustrative of the abusive application of
which the Principle of Excluded Middle is susceptible. “The universe,
for example, must, it is affirmed, be either infinite or finite: but
what do these words mean? That it must be either of infinite or finite
magnitude. Magnitudes certainly must be either infinite or finite, but
before affirming the same thing of the Noumenon Universe, it has to be
established that the universe as it is in itself is capable of the
attribute magnitude. How do we know that magnitude is not exclusively a
property of our sensations—of the states of subjective consciousness
which objects produce in us? Or if this supposition displeases, how do
we know that magnitude is not, as Kant considered it eto bee, a form of
our minds, an attribute with which the laws of thought invest every
conception that we can form, but to which there may be nothing analogous
in the Noumenon, the Thing in itself? The like may be said of Duration,
whether infinite or finite, and of Divisibility, whether stopping at a
minimum or prolonged without limit. Either the one proposition or the
other must of course be true of duration and of matter as they are
perceived by us—as they present themselves to our faculties; but
duration itself is held by Kant to have no real existence out of our
minds; and as for matter, not knowing what it is in itself, we know not
whether, as affirmed of matter in itself, the word divisible has any
meaning. Believing divisibility to be an acquired notion, made up of the
elements of our sensational experience, I do not admit that the Noumenon
Matter must be either infinitely or finitely divisible.” [Cf. 87d-d
above.]

e-e
+67, 72

a-a
651, 652 a bad

*
Limits of Religious Thought, 4th edition, pp. 29-30.

b-b
651, 652 means in the greater part of his argument against Cousin, that
which is completed or finished. He means what Sir W. Hamilton means only
once (as we have already seen)

[*]
Ibid., p. 30.

†
Discussions, p. 14n. [Cf. pp. 39-40 above.]

c-c
651, 652 first words of his definition, “that which exists in and by
itself,” would serve for the description of a Noumenon: but Mr. Mansel’s
Absolute is only meant to denote one Being, identified with God, and God
is not the only Noumenon. This, however, I will not dwell upon. But the
remaining words, “having no necessary relation to any other Being,”
bring him into a much greater difficulty. For they

d-d
651, 652 Mr.

*
Limits of Religious Thought, p. 200. [See Henry Calderwood, The
Philosophy of the Infinite (Edinburgh: Constable; London: Hamilton and
Adams, 1854), pp. 18-38.]

†
Limits of Religious Thought, p. 31.

‡
[67] Mr. Mansel, in his reply accuses me of mutilating his argument.
([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] p. 151.) I therefore add the remainder
of it. “We attempt to escape from this apparent contradiction by
introducing the idea of succession in time. The Absolute exists first by
itself, and afterwards becomes a Cause. But here we are checked by the
third conception, that of the Infinite. How can the Infinite become that
which it was not from the first? If Causation is a possible mode of
existence, that which exists without causing is not infinite; that which
becomes a cause has passed beyond its former limits.” (Limits of
Religious Thought, pp. 31-2.)

This alleged inconsistency of thought in supposing the Infinite to
become a cause, because to do so would be to become something which it
was not from the first, applies, like nearly all the rest of Mr.
Mansel’s argumentation, only to the self-contradictory fiction, “The
Infinite,” which is supposed either infinite without reference to any
attributes, or infinite in all possible attributes. Substitute for this
the notion of a Being infinite in given attributes, and the
incompatibility disappears. Surely the most familiar form of the notion
of an infinite being, is that of a Being infinite in power. Power is not
only compatible with, but actually means, capability of causing. Can we
be told that a Being infinite in its capability of causing, cannot to
our conceptions, consistently with its infinity, actually cause
anything, but the power, because infinite, must remain dormant through
eternity? or, as the opposite alternative, that this Being must be
conceived as having exercised from all eternity the whole of its
infinite power of causing, because any later exercise of that power
would be passing into causation? Either hypothesis Mr. Mansel affirms
(Limits of Religious Thought, p. 204) to be inconceivable of an Infinite
Being. But if an Infinite Being means a Being of infinite wisdom and
goodness as well as power, the conception of that infinite power as only
partly exercised is so far from being a contradiction, that it is not
even a paradox.

*
Limits of Religious Thought, p. 32.

†
[67] How does Mr. Mansel reconcile this argument with the definition of
the Absolute which he himself accepts from Dr. Calderwood [The
Philosophy of the Infinite, pp. 18-38]? “The Absolute is that which is
free from all necessary relation, that is, which is free from every
relation as a condition of existence; but it may exist in relation,
provided that relation be not a necessary condition of its existence,
that is, provided the relation may be removed without affecting its
existence.” (Mansel, Limits of Religious Thought, p. 200.) A better
definition of an Absolute Being could scarcely be devised; and that Mr.
Mansel should borrow it, and then deny the latter half of it, proves him
to be greatly inferior to Dr. Calderwood in the important accomplishment
of understanding his own meaning. For before it can be maintained that
to be a conscious being contradicts the notion of the Absolute, because
consciousness is a relation, the power just admitted in the Absolute of
existing in relation provided it is not bound to any relation, must be
either denied or forgotten.

eMr. Mansel, in his rejoinder [“Supplementary Remarks,” p. 28n], says
that he did not mean to admit the second half of Dr. Calderwood’s
definition; and he holds to the doctrinee “The absolute, as such,f must
be out of all relation” (not merely capable of existing out of relation)
“and consequently cannot be conceived in the relation of plurality.”
(Philosophy of the Conditioned, p. 117.)

e-e
67 In Mr. Mansel’s reply, the denial or forgetfulness still continues.

f
67 ” he says, “

[*]
See pp. 47ff. above

*
[67] Mr. Mansel protests against this passage, as attributing to him the
use of the word “Absolute” in the sense attached to it by Sir W.
Hamilton, which includes perfection, though he had expressly stated that
he used the term in a different sense. “When Mr. Mill charges Mr. Mansel
with undertaking to prove the impossibility of conceiving a Being
absolutely just or absolutely wise (i.e. as he supposes, perfectly just
or wise) he actually forgets that he has just been criticising Mr.
Mansel’s definition of the Absolute, as something having a possible
existence out of relation.” ([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] pp.
153-4.) And he asks what I can mean by goodness or knowledge “out of all
relation.” If I have, in this passage, exchanged Mr. Mansel’s definition
of the Absolute for Sir W. Hamilton’s, by including in it the notion of
“finished, perfected, completed,” [Discussions, p. 14n,] Mr. Mansel had
set me the example. As long as he kept to his own definition, I did the
same: I only followed him when he himself imported the idea of
perfection from the other meaning of the term, and reasoned from it as
one of the characteristics of the Absolute. Does the reader doubt this?
He shall see. We cannot, says Mr. Mansel, reconcile the idea of the
Absolute with that of a Cause, because “if the condition of causal
activity is a higher state than that of quiescence, the Absolute,
whether acting voluntarily or involuntarily, has passed from a condition
of comparative imperfection to one of comparative perfection, and
therefore was not originally perfect. If the state of activity is an
inferior state to that of quiescence, the Absolute, in becoming a cause,
has lost its original perfection.” (Limits of Religious Thought, pp.
34-5. The italics are my own.) Again “While it is impossible to
represent in thought any object except as finite, it is equally
impossible to represent any finite object, or any aggregate of finite
objects, as exhausting the universe of being. Thus the hypothesis which
would annihilate the Infinite is itself shattered to pieces against the
rock of the Absolute.” (Ibid., p. 38.) In spite, therefore, of his own
definition, Mr. Mansel thinks it part of the notion of the Absolute that
it is the Perfect, and that it exhausts the universe of being, i.e., is
the completed whole of existence.

It thus appears that if I am chargeable with anything, it is with having
neglected to point out one confusion of ideas the more in Mr. Mansel,
and, this time, a confusion between two ideas which he had expressly
discriminated. But even if I had really committed the blunder he imputes
to me, it would not have affected the question between us: for he always
(and, as I think, rightly) assumes that the Being whose conceivability
by us is the subject of discussion, has to be conceived both as absolute
and as infinite (the Infinito-Absolute of Sir W. Hamilton); and if he
had escaped untouched from my criticism of Sir W. Hamilton in respect of
the Absolute, he would still have been inextricably involved in it as
regards the Infinite.

g-g
+67, 72

*
Limits of Religious Thought, p. 30.

†
Ibid., p. 31.

*
Ibid., p. 33.

[*]
Ibid.

†
Ibid., p. 30.

‡
Ibid., p. 48.

*
[67] By the time Mr. Mansel gets to this place, he grows tired of giving
relevant answers, and thinks that any verbal repartee will suffice. To
the first half of my statement, his answer is this: “Is becoming bad a
higher perfection?” ([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] p. 158.) I reply,
that Mr. Mansel seems to think so; inasmuch as he says “If the infinite
can be that which it is not, it is by that very possibility marked out
as incomplete, and capable of a higher perfection.” [Ibid., p. 155.] If
the infinite is God, and, as such, good, to become bad would be to
become what it is not, and consequently, according to Mr. Mansel, to
attain a higher perfection. To the second half he replies by identifying
the manner in which the Infinite, by being anything in particular, is
excluded from being any other thing, with the manner in which a thing,
by being a horse, is excluded from being a dog. Let me remind him that a
horse and a dog are substances, and that we are talking about
attributes. A substance cannot become another substance, but it may put
on any number of additional attributes. Does not the whole of the
discussion turn upon attributes? Does the question, what the Infinite
can or cannot be or become, mean anything but what attributes it can
have or acquire? As a Substance the Infinite is the Infinite, and cannot
become anything else. Does it follow from this that by possessing one
attribute, it is excluded from possessing any other? Or is it possible
that Mr. Mansel means, that the “Infinite, if it is to be conceived at
all,” must be conceived as capable of changing its substance, and
becoming a finite dog, thereby excluding itself from being a horse? That
would indeed be a stretch beyond anything I have charged him with.

†
“A thing—an object—an attribute—a person—or any other term signifying
one out of many possible objects of consciousness, is by that very
relation necessarily declared to be finite. An infinite thing, or
object, or attribute, or person, is therefore in the same moment
declared to be both finite and infinite. . . . And on the other hand, if
all human attributes are conceived under the conditions of difference,
and relation, and time, and personality, we cannot represent in thought
any such attribute magnified to infinity; for this again is to conceive
it as finite and infinite at the same time. We can conceive such
attributes, at the utmost, only indefinitely; that is to say, we may
withdraw our thoughts, for the moment, from the fact of their being
limited; but we cannot conceive them as infinite; that is to say, we
cannot positively think of the absence of the limit; for, the instant we
attempt to do so, the antagonist elements of the conception exclude one
another, and annihilate the whole.” (Limits of Religious Thought, p.
60.)

*
Ibid., p. 39.

†
Ibid., p. 45.

h-h
651, 652 definitions

i-i
651, 652 words

‡
[67] Mr. Mansel’s summary of his reply on this portion of the case is as
follows: “The reader may now, perhaps, understand the reason of an
assertion which Mr. Mill regards as supremely absurd, namely, that we
must believe in the existence of an absolute and infinite Being, though
unable to conceive the nature of such a Being. To believe in such a
Being is simply to believe that God made the world: to declare the
nature of such a Being inconceivable, is simply to say that we do not
know how the world was made. If we believe that God made the world, we
must believe that there was a time when the world was not, and when God
alone existed, out of relation to any other being. But the mode of that
sole existence we are unable to conceive, nor in what manner the first
act took place by which the absolute and self-existent gave existence to
the relative and dependent.” ([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] pp.
161-2.)

I know not how Mr. Mansel discovers that I regard as supremely absurd
the notion that we may believe, and may have good grounds for believing,
things which are inconceivable to us. As he most truly says, there is no
one with whose mode of thinking such an opinion would more flagrantly
conflict. But I venture to think that one may deem it possible to have a
real and positive, though inadequate, conception of an infinite Being,
without supposing oneself to know how God made the world. Mr. Mansel
resumes “Where is the incongruity of saying, I believe that a being
exists possessing certain attributes, though I am unable in my present
state of knowledge to conceive the manner of that existence?” ([Ibid.,]
p. 163.) Assuredly, nowhere: provided that you do not invest the object
of your belief with contradictory attributes; for my admission of the
believability of what is inconceivable, stops at the self-contradictory:
consequently I do not admit the believability of such an Absolute and
Infinite as Mr. Mansel has been mystifying us with. The sum of what I am
maintaining against him is, that the Absolute and Infinite which are
believable, and the Absolute and Infinite which are inconceivable, are
different things: That the Absolute and Infinite of which, as he has
shown, the conception annihilates itself by the contradictions it
involves, is that which possesses absolutely and infinitely all
attributes, and that this is as unbelievable as it is inconceivable:
That the Absolute and Infinite which is believable is that which
possesses absolutely and infinitely some given attributes, which in
their finite degrees are known to us, and is therefore conceivable; and
involves no contradiction, unless we include amongthe attributes some
that contradict one another, in which case it is indeed inconceivable,
but also unbelievable.

When Mr. Mansel maintains ([ibid.,] pp. 14-18, and 142) that being
infinite is, to our conceptive faculty, inconsistent with being a
Person, I answer, that it is being “The Infinite” which is so. When he
insists (if he does insist) that the Creator must, in some manner
inconceivable to us, be this non-entity; when he identifies the Creator
with something which we must believe to be “the sole existence, having
no plurality beyond itself,” and “simple, having no plurality within
itself,” ([ibid.,] p. 100,) thus literally annihilating all plurality in
the universe; when he says “we believe that” God’s “own nature is simple
and uniform, admitting of no distinction between various attributes, nor
between any attribute and its subject,” but yet conceivable by us “only
by means of various attributes, distinct from the subject and from each
other,” ([ibid.,] p. 28,) i.e. conceived by us as he is not; it appears
to me that in thus following the old theologians in the mystical
metaphysics which is always at the service of mystical theology, he
encumbers Theism and Christianity with (to say the least) very
unnecessary difficulties.

j-j
651, 652 the

k-k
+67, 72

[*]
See Limits of Religious Thought, Lecture iii, pp. 45-66, esp. 55-6.

*
Ibid., Preface to the fourth edition, p. xiii.

†
Ibid., p. 26.

‡
Ibid., p. 28.

l-l
651, 652 as Infinite (or more properly as Absolute)

[*]
See ibid., Preface to the 4th ed., pp. xiii-xvi.

[*]
Ibid., p. xiii.

*
[72] Mr. Mansel, in his rejoinder, says that this means that I will call
no being good “the phenomena of whose action in any way differ from
those of a good man.” [“Supplementary Remarks,” p. 30.] This is a
misconstruction; he should have said “no being, the principle or rule of
whose action is different from that by which a good man endeavours to
regulate his actions.”

[†]
Cf. Samuel Johnson, London, A Poem, in Works, 14 vols. (London:
Buckland, Rivington, et al., 1787-88), Vol. XI, p. 324 (l. 116).

*
[67] I quote in Mr. Mansel’s words nearly the whole of his answer to the
preceding remarks.

“Mr. Mansel asserts, as many others have asserted before him, that the
relation between the communicable attributes of God and the
corresponding attributes of man is one not of identity but of analogy;
that is to say, that the Divine attributes have the same relation to the
Divine nature that the human attributes have to human nature. Thus, for
example, there is a Divine justice and there is a human justice; but God
is just as the Creator and Governor of the world, having unlimited
authority over all his creatures, and unlimited jurisdiction over all
their acts; and man is just in certain special relations, as having
authority over some persons and some acts only, so far as is required
for the needs of human society. So, again, there is a Divine mercy and
there is a human mercy; but God is merciful in such a manner as if
fitting compatibly with the righteous government of the universe; and
man is merciful in a certain limited range, the exercise of the
attribute being guided by considerations affecting the welfare of
society or of individuals. Or to take a more general case: Man has in
himself a rule of right and wrong implying subjection to the authority
of a superior (for conscience has authority only as reflecting the law
of God); while God has in himself a rule of right and wrong, implying no
higher authority, and determined absolutely by his own nature. The case
is the same when we look at moral attributes not externally in their
active manifestations, but internally, in their psychological
constitution. If we do not attribute to God the same complex mental
constitution of reason, passion, and will, the same relation to motives
and inducements, the same deliberation and choice of alternatives, the
same temporal succession of facts in consciousness, which we ascribe to
man,—it will follow that those psychological relations between reason,
will, and desire, which are implied in the conception of human action,
cannot represent the Divine excellences in themselves, but can only
illustrate them by analogies from finite things. And if man is liable to
error in judging of the conduct of his fellow-men, in proportion as he
is unable to place himself in their position, or to realize to himself
their modes of thought and principles of action—if the child, for
instance, is liable to error in judging the actions of the man, or the
savage of the civilised man—surely there is far more room for error in
men’s judgment of the ways of God, in proportion as the difference
between God and man is greater than the difference between a man and a
child. . . . We will simply ask, whether Mr. Mill really supposes the
word good to lose all community of meaning when it is applied, as it
certainly is, to different persons among our fellow creatures with
express reference to their different duties and different qualifications
for performing them? The duties of a father are not the same as those of
a son; is the word therefore wholly equivocal when we speak of one
person as a good father, and another as a good son? Nay, when we speak
generally of a man as good, has not the epithet a tacit reference to
human nature and human duties? and yet is there no community of meaning
when the same epithet is applied to other creatures? Ἡ ἀρετὴ πρὸς τὸ
ἔργον τὸ οἰκει̑ον [Aristotle, The Nichomachean Ethics (Greek and
English), trans. H. Rackham (London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons,
1926), p. 326 (VI, i, 1139a18)],—the goodness of any being whatever has
relation to the nature and office of that being. We may therefore test
Mr. Mill’s declamation by a parallel case. A wise and experienced father
addresses a young and inexperienced son: “My son,” he says, “there may
be some of my actions which do not seem to you to be wise or good, or
such as you would do in my place. Remember, however, that your duties
are different from mine; that your knowledge of my duties is very
imperfect; and that there may be things which you cannot now see to be
wise and good, but which you may hereafter discover to be so.” “Father,”
says the son, “your principles of action are not the same as mine; the
highest morality which I can conceive at present does not sanction them;
and as for believing that you are good in anything of which I do not
plainly see the goodness”—we will not repeat Mr. Mill’s alternative; we
will only ask whether it is not just possible that there may be as much
difference between man and God as there is between a child and his
father?” ([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] pp. 164-70.)

There is a mode of controversy which I do not remember to have seen in
any enumeration of Fallacies, but which will some day find a place
there, under some such name as the Inversion of Parts. It consists in
indignantly vindicating as against your adversary the very principle
which he is asserting against yourself. Would not any reader of the
above passage suppose that it is Mr. Mansel who is contending against me
for the “community of meaning” of the word good, to whatever being it is
applied; instead of me against him? It is I who say that as goodness in
a good father is the very same quality with goodness in a good son, so
goodness in a good God must be, in all but degree, the same quality as
goodness in a good man, or we are not entitled to call it goodness. It
is Mr. Mansel who denies this, affirming that there is more than a
difference of degree. And unless he is to be understood as surrendering
this point by the illustrations he now employs, his defence is no
defence at all; for it confounds a difference in the outward
circumstances in which a moral quality has to be exercised, with a
difference in the quality itself. In his imaginary dialogue between a
son and a father, does the son really think the father’s conduct
inconsistent with such goodness as, under the father’s teaching, he has
realized in himself, or learnt to recognise in others? Does he not think
that it is the same goodness, but acting under a knowledge of facts, and
an appreciation of means, such as he does not himself possess? Does the
son think that the father’s conduct is not justifiable by the same moral
law which he prescribes to the son, and that in order to justify the
father it is necessary to suppose him actuated by another kind of
morality, not the same, but merely having the same relation to the
father’s nature that the other goodness has to the son’s nature? If the
son has implicit confidence in the father, he will not answer, in the
words put into his mouth by Mr. Mansel, “your principles of action are
not the same as mine.” He will say, “your principles of action I well
know: they are those which you have taught to me—those by which, in my
best moments, I endeavour, though with inferior strength, to guide my
conduct. You are incapable of acting on any others. Knowing your
principles, and not knowing what conduct, in your different position,
the principles require, but being convinced that you do know, I am
certain that you act on those principles.” All the allowance for human
ignorance which can be demanded on similar grounds in judging of what is
ascribed to God, I have amply granted.

On the latter part of the paragraph in the text, Mr. Mansel makes some
further remarks. To the statement that “the doubt whether words applied
to God have their human signification, is only felt when the words
relate to his moral attributes—it is never heard of in regard to his
power,” Mr. Mansel makes answer, “We meet Mr. Mill’s confident assertion
with a direct denial, and take the opportunity of informing him that the
conception of infinite Power has suggested the same difficulties, and
has been discussed by philosophers and theologians in the same manner,
as those of infinite Wisdom and infinite Goodness. Has Mr Mill never
heard of such questions as, Whether Omnipotence can reverse the
past?—Whether God can do that which he does not will to do?—Whether
God’s perfect foreknowledge is compatible with his own perfect
liberty?—Whether God could have made a better world than the existing
one?” ([Ibid.,] p. 172.) In return for the information thus liberally
bestowed, I humbly reply, that I have “heard of such questions:” but I
see in them (with the exception of the second, which relates to the
meaning of Power, not of Infinite power) only enquiries, mostly
frivolous, how much more power God has than man. There is no difference
in the conception of the power itself, which is in both cases the same,
namely, the conformity of the event to the volition. The divine
omnipotence is always supposed to mean an infinite degree of this, and
not of anything else. But infinite goodness, according to Mr. Mansel,
means not an infinite degree, but a different kind, not admitting of any
common definition with human goodness.

mMr. Mansel’s answer to this is a curious one. He says that “if power,
as predicated of man, means the conformity of the event to the volition,
man assuredly can do no more than he actually wills to do; for there can
be no conformity except where there is a volition and an event.”
[“Supplementary Remarks,” p. 30n.] We may know that the event would
conform to our volition although it has not actually taken place. Most
people, I believe, if they said that they had the power of throwing
themselves into a well, would mean that if they willed so to throw
themselves, the effect would follow. And if it were asked whether there
are any limits to God’s power, the question would mean, Is there
anything which if willed by him, nevertheless would not take place. What
else can be meant when we speak of a living being as having power, I
cannot divine.m

The concluding sentence Mr. Mansel censures as attributing discreditable
motives to opponents. Had it not been for this proof, I should have
thought it unnecessary to say, that no imputation was intended on the
sincerity either of classes or of individuals. But the effect of men’s
necessities of position on their opinions as well as on their conduct,
is far too widely reaching and influential an element in human affairs,
to be always passed over in silence for fear of offending personal
susceptibilities.

m-m
+72

*
[67] Mr. Mansel says, “The question really at issue is not whether the
Rationalist argument is licit or illicit, but whether, in its lawful
use, it is to be regarded as infallible or fallible.” ([Philosophy of
the Conditioned,] p. 175.) If this were all, there would be nothing for
him and the Rationalists to quarrel about; for who ever asserted, of any
human reasoning, that it is infallible? Neither, I believe, would any
“Rationalist” dissent from Mr. Mansel’s view of the “lawful use” of the
argument, which he declares throughout his Eighth Lecture [Limits of
Religious Thought, pp. 152-75] to be only admissible (as one argument
among others) on the question of the authenticity of a Revelation. No
Rationalists, I should suppose, believe that what they reject as
inconsistent with the Divine Goodness was really revealed by God. They
do not both admit it to be revealed and believe it to be false. They
believe that it is either a mistaken interpretation, or found its way by
human means into documents which they may nevertheless consider as the
records of a Revelation. They concede, therefore, to Mr. Mansel (and
unless the hypothesis were admitted of a God who is not good, they
cannot help conceding) that the moral objections to a religious doctrine
are only valid nagainst its truthn if they are strong enough to outweigh
whatever external evidences there may be of its having been divinely
revealed. But when the question is, how much weight is to be allowed to
moral objections, the difference will be radical between those who think
that the Divine Goodness is the same thing with human goodness carried
to the infinite, and Mr. Mansel, who thinks that it is a different
quality, only having some analogy to the human. Indeed it is hard to see
how any one, who holds the latter opinion, can give more than a nominal
weight to any such argument against a religious doctrine. For, if things
may be right according to divine goodness which would be wrong according
to even an infinite degree of the human, and if all that is known is
that there is some analogy between the two, while no one pretends to
have any knowledge how far the analogy reaches, and it may be presumed
to be as distant as the remainder of the Divine Nature is from the
human, it is impossible to assign any determinate weight to an argument
grounded on contradiction of such an analogy. It becomes a mere
dialectical locus communis: an argument to be taken up and laid down as
suits convenience, and which different men will hold valid in different
cases, according to their fancies or prepossessions.

n-n
+72

*
This, for example, is the secret of most of the apparent triumphs which
are so frequently gained over the population theory of Malthus, and the
political economy of Ricardo.

†
Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 193 and 201.

*
Ibid., p. 212.

†
Ibid., pp. 228-9.

[*]
On the Intellectual Powers, p. 339.

‡
Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 218-19.

[*]
Ibid., pp. 219-21.

*
Ibid., Vol. II, p. 153. [Reid, On the Intellectual Powers, p. 284.]

†
[Ibid., pp. 153-4 (i.e., “another place” is the sentence immediately
following the passage previously quoted).] And elsewhere: “It is
self-evident that if a thing is to be an object immediately known, it
must be known as it exists. Now, a body must exist in some definite part
of space, in a certain place; it cannot, therefore, be immediately known
as existing, except it be known in its place. But this supposes the mind
to be immediately present to it in space.” (Foot-note to Reid, p. 302n.)

I do not guarantee the conclusiveness of this reasoning; but it has been
an error of philosophers in all times to flank their good arguments with
bad ones.

*
Discussions, p. 51.

†
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 221n; and Vol. IV, p. 73.

a-a
651, 652 though he does not call it a consciousness

[*]
See On the Intellectual Powers, pp. 258-60.

b-b
651, 652 has

‡
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note B,] p. 810.

[*]
Ibid.

[†]
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 219.

[‡]
Ibid., p. 218.

c-c
651 implied

d-d
651, 652 just as

[*]
Ibid., p. 193.

e-e
651, 652 relation

[†]
See ibid., pp. 193-5.

*
James Mill, Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, Vol. I, pp.
170-2.

†
Discussions, p. 48.

‡
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 193.

f
651, 652 Mr.

*
Ibid.

†
Ibid., pp. 194-5.

‡
Supplement to Reid [i.e., “Dissertations on Reid,” Note H], p. 932. The
qualification here first introduced, of “rising above a certain degree
of intensity,” has reference to a doctrine of our author to be fully
considered hereafter, that of latent mental states. It makes no
abatement from the doctrine that consciousness of a feeling is the
feeling; for mental states which are not intense enough to rise into
consciousness, are, according to the same theory, not intense enough to
be felt: and if felt, the feeling, and the consciousness of the feeling,
are one and the same.

It was not without some difficulty, and after considerable study, that I
was able to satisfy myself that Sir W. Hamilton held the sound and
rational theory with which I have credited him in the text. For he often
states and defends his doctrine in a manner which might lead one to
think, that in saying that to know, and to know that we know, are but
one fact, he does not mean one fact, but two facts which are
inseparable. This misapprehension of his meaning is favoured by gtheg
repeated use of (what we seldom meet with in his writings) a false
illustration; that of the sides and angles of a triangle. “The sides
suppose the angles—the angles suppose the sides,—and, in fact, the sides
and angles are in themselves, in reality, one and indivisible.”
(Lectures, Vol. I, p. 194.) “The sides and angles of a triangle (or
trilateral) as mutually correlative—as together making up the same
simple figure—and as, without destruction of that figure, actually
inseparable from it, and from each other, are really one; but inasmuch
as they have peculiar relations, which may, in thought, be considered
severally and for themselves, they are logically twofold.”
(“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note B,] p. 806n.) According to this, the
sides are in reality the angles looked at in a particular point of view;
and the angles the same thing as the sides, regarded in a particular
relation to something else. When this was the illustration selected of
the identity between Consciousness and Knowledge, it was natural to
suppose that the writer regarded these two as no otherwise one than the
sides and angles of a triangle are. But a closer examination has
satisfied me that Sir W. Hamilton was only wrong respecting sides and
angles, and not respecting Consciousness and Knowledge. On the former
subject he has against him not only the reason of the case, but his own
authority; for he says, when discoursing on another subject: “It is not
more reasonable to identify sense with judgment, because the former
cannot exist without an act of the latter, than it would be to identify
the sides and angles of a mathematical figure, because sides and angles
cannot exist apart from each other.” (Foot-note to Reid, p. 590n.) [A
draft of the latter part of this note exists in manuscript; see Appendix
A below.]

g-g
651, 652, 67 his

[*]
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 153.

h-h
+67, 72

[†]
Ibid., Vol. I, p. 212.

[‡]
Ibid., p. 211.

[§]
Ibid., p. 212; the square brackets, which are Mill’s, contain his
substitutions.

[*]
Ibid., p. 228.

[†]
Ibid., p. 212.

*
Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 70.

*
Ibid., p. 73.

†
Ibid., p. 62.

*
Ibid., p. 73.

*
iMr. Mansel gets over this criticism on Sir W. Hamilton very easily.
“Hamilton,” he says, “maintains that we cannot be conscious of a mental
operation without being conscious of its object. On this Mr. Mill
retorts, that if, as Hamilton admits, we are conscious of a belief in
the Infinite and the Absolute, we must be conscious of the Infinite and
the Absolute themselves; and such consciousness is knowledge. The
fallacy of this retort is transparent. The immediate object of Belief is
a proposition which I hold to be true, not a thing apprehended in an act
of conception. I believe in an Infinite God; i.e., I believe that God is
infinite. I believe that the attributes which I ascribe to God exist in
him in an infinite degree. Now, to believe this proposition I must, of
course, be conscious of its meaning; but I am not therefore conscious of
the Infinite God as an object of conception; for this would require
further an apprehension of the manner in which these infinite attributes
coexist so as to form one object.” ([Philosophy of the Conditioned,] p.
129n.)

A very simple explanation, if only it be a true one. Sir W. Hamilton had
no need to feel embarrassed in applying his doctrine, that the knowledge
of an operation involves the knowledge of its object, to the operation
called Belief; for the object of Belief is but a proposition, and
knowledge of the proposition is the only knowledge required. Strange,
that when this explanation stood so obvious, Sir W. Hamilton should have
missed it–should not only have felt that there was a difficulty, but
remanded it to the abstruser Metaphysics, as part of “one of the most
difficult problems of which Metaphysics attempts the solution.”
[Lectures, Vol. IV, p. 73.] Sir W. Hamilton was often confused and
inconsistent, but rarely, if ever, on subjects which he had studied,
superficial. He would have brushed away Mr. Mansel’s distinction with
the decisive stroke with which he so often levels a fallacy. The object
of Belief is a proposition; but is not the object of Knowledge
propositions? Is not all knowledge a series of judgments; and is not a
judgment expressed in words, a proposition? It is true that knowledge is
of things; but we know things only by their attributes: our knowledge of
a thing is made up of our knowledge of a certain number of its
attributes, every one of which may be expressed in a proposition. When
we are said to know a Thing, the meaning is either that we know it as
possessing some attribute, or that we know it and its attributes
together as existing. So when we do not know the Thing, but have a
belief respecting it, the belief is either that it possesses some
attribute, or is a belief of its existence, which is called believing in
it. When the question is one of attributes, the object of belief is a
proposition, but so is the object of knowledge. When the question is one
of existence, the object of knowledge is a Thing, but so is the object
of belief.

The “Inquirer” (pp. 31-3), unlike Mr. Mansel, thinks that this is “a
very intricate point;” that there is a real metaphysical difficulty, and
that Sir W. Hamilton was aware of it; that he perceived two facts, both
true, which he could not reconcile with one another, and that he died
without having had time to find the reconciliation. On this I remark,
first, that the difficulty is not in reconciling two facts, but two of
Sir W. Hamilton’s opinions, and that the only solution would be to give
up one of them. Secondly, that, whatever the solution might be, he had
nearly the whole of his philosophical life to find it in; for the
inconsistent opinions are two of the cardinal doctrines of his
philosophy. The “Inquirer” thinks that we ought to look indulgently on
inconsistencies, as being mere incidents of growth; as indeed they are
in a learner, who, independently of his ignorance of Things, is not yet
fully master of his own thoughts: but a teacher is supposed to be full
grown. While admitting (p. 7) that I have proved against Sir W. Hamilton
“continual inconsistencies and discrepancies,” the “Inquirer” maintains
that all sound philosophy, while incomplete, must be liable to the
objection of inconsistency. I confess I cannot see the necessity that
our thoughts should be contradictory because our knowledge is
incomplete; that because there is much that we do not know, we should
not have sufficiently considered what we do know, to avoid holding in
conjunction opinions which conflict with one another. The “Inquirer”
probably confounds two different things: the belief in contradictories,
and the recognition of positive truths which merely limit one another,
but to what extent or at what points we cannot yet determine.i

*
651, 652 In many parts of Sir W. Hamilton’s writings, it seems as if the
distinction which he draws between knowledge and belief was meant to
correspond to the difference between what we can explain by reference to
something else, and those ultimate facts and principles which cannot be
referred to anything higher. He often speaks of knowledge as resting
ultimately on belief, and of ultimate principles as not known, but
believed by a necessity of our nature. The distinction is real, but the
employment of the words knowledge and belief to express it, is arbitrary
and incongruous. To say that we believe the premises, but know the
conclusion, would be understood by every one as meaning that we had
other independent evidence of the conclusion. If we only know it through
the premises, the same name ought in reason to be given to our assurance
of both. Accordingly Sir W. Hamilton himself says, in one of the
“Dissertations on Reid” ([Note A,] p. 763), that “the principles of our
knowledge must be themselves knowledge.” And there are few who will not
approve this use of language, and condemn the other.

*
Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 271-5. [The references to Stewart are to
Philosophical Essays (Edinburgh: Creech and Constable, 1810), pp. 3-11.]

[*]
Ibid., p. 276.

[†]
Ibid., p. 193.

a-a
651, 652, 67 not having been in consciousness from the beginning

*
It is rather more speciously put in a foot-note on Reid: “To doubt that
we are conscious of this or that, is impossible. For the doubt must at
least postulate itself; but the doubt is only a datum of consciousness:
therefore in postulating its own reality, it admits the truth of
consciousness, and consequently annihilates itself.” (P. 231n.) In
another foot-note he says, “In doubting the fact of his consciousness,
the sceptic must at least affirm the fact of his doubt; but to affirm a
doubt is to affirm the consciousness of it; the doubt would, therefore,
be self-contradictory—i.e., annihilate itself.” (P. 442n.) And again:
“As doubt is itself only a manifestation of consciousness, it is
impossible to doubt that what consciousness manifests, it does manifest,
without in thus doubting, doubting that we actually doubt; that is,
without the doubt contradicting and therefore annihilating itself.”
(“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note A,] p. 744.)

[*]
See, e.g., Plato, Apology, in Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phædo, Phædrus
(Greek and English), trans. H. N. Fowler (London: Heinemann; Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1917), p. 82 (21d).

*
In another passage of our author, the same argument reappears in
different words, and for a different purpose. He is speaking of the
Criterion of Truth. This criterion, he says, “is the necessity
determined by the laws which govern our faculties of knowledge, and the
consciousness of this necessity is certainty. That the necessity of a
cognition, that is, the impossibility of thinking it other than as it is
presented—that this necessity, as founded on the laws of thought, is the
criterion of truth, is shown by the circumstance that where such
necessity is found, all doubt in regard to the correspondence of the
cognitive thought and its object must vanish; for to doubt whether what
we necessarily think in a certain manner, actually exists as we conceive
it, is nothing less than an endeavour to think the necessary as the not
necessary or the impossible, which is contradictory.” (Lectures, Vol.
IV, p. 69.)

It is very curious to find Sir W. Hamilton maintaining that our
necessities of thought are proof of corresponding realities of
existence—that things must actually be so and so because it is
impossible for us to think them as being otherwise; forgetful of the
whole “Philosophy of the Conditioned,” and the principle so often
asserted by him, that things may, nay, must be true, of which it is
impossible for us to conceive even the possibility. But we are here only
concerned with his argument, and in that he forgets that to doubt is not
a positive but a negative fact. It simply means, not to have any
knowledge or assured belief on the subject. Now, how can it be asserted
that this negative state of mind is “an endeavour to think” anything?
And (even if it were) an endeavour to think a contradiction is not a
contradiction. An endeavour to think what cannot be thought, far from
being impossible, is the test by which we ascertain its unthinkability.
The failure of the endeavour in the case supposed, would not prove that
what we were endeavouring to think was unreal, but only that it was
unthinkable; which was already assumed in the hypothesis: and our author
has carried us round a long circuit, to return to the point from which
we set out.

[†]
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 275.

[‡]
Ibid., p. 277.

[*]
Cf. ibid., p. 272.

b-b
+72

*
[67] The philosophers who have most insisted on the necessity of a test
for consciousness, have always found that test in consciousness itself.
Hear Mr. Stirling, the latest of them, who in this respect represents
them all: “It is the function of consciousness, though itself
infallible, inviolable, and veracious as nothing else is or can be, to
test and try and question consciousness to the uttermost” (p. 58).

*
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note A,] p. 743.

†
Ibid., p. 745.

c-c
+67, 72

[*]
Ibid., p. 743.

*
Ibid., p. 745.

d-d
651, 652 is

e-e
651, 652 The

[†]
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 275.

*
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note A,] p. 745.

[*]
See, e.g., Lectures, Vol. I, p. 294.

†
Accordingly Sir W. Hamilton says elsewhere: “Religious disbelief and
philosophical scepticism are not merely not the same, but have no
natural connexion.” I regret that this statement is followed by a
declaration that the former “must ever be a matter” not merely “of
regret,” but of “reprobation.” This imputation of moral blame to an
opinion sincerely entertained and honestly arrived at, is a blot which
one would willingly not have found in a thinker of so much ability, and
in general of so high a moral tone. (Lectures, Vol. I, App. i, p. 394.)

f-f
651, 652 fact

[*]
David Hume, “Of the Academical or Sceptical Philosophy,” Section xii of
An Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding, in Essays and Treatises on
Several Subjects, 2 vols. (Edinburgh: Cadell, 1793), Vol. II, p. 169.

[†]
See Kritik der Reinen Vernunft, pp. 238-50.

g-g
+67, 72

[‡]
Hume, “Of the Academical or Sceptical Philosophy,” p. 169.

h-h
+67, 72

i-i
651, 652 we

*
Lectures, Vol. IV, p. 137. There are writers of reputation in the
present day, who maintain in unqualified terms, that we know by
intuition the impossibility of miracles. “La négation du miracle,” says
M. [Auguste] Nefftzer [“La Vie de Jésus par M. Ernest Renan,”] (Revue
Germanique [et Française, XXVIII] for September 1863, p. 183), “n’est
pas subordonnée à l’expérience; elle est une nécessité logique et un
fait de certitude interne; elle doit être le premier article du credo de
tout historien et de tout penseur.”

†
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note A,] p. 749.

‡
Discussions, p. 25.

[*]
Cf. pp. 34-7 above.

*
Reid himself places the “natural belief” which Sir W. Hamilton rejects,
on exactly the level of those which he most strenuously maintains,
saying in a passage which our author himself quotes, “The vulgar are
firmly persuaded that the very identical objects which they perceive
continue to exist when they do not perceive them: and are no less firmly
persuaded that when ten men look at the sun or the moon, they all see
the same individual object.” (On the Intellectual Powers, p. 284.) And
Reid avows that he agrees with the vulgar in both opinions. But Sir W.
Hamilton, while he upholds the former of these as one to deny which
would be to declare our nature a lie, thinks that nothing can be more
absurd than the latter of them. “Nothing,” he says, “can be conceived
more ridiculous than the opinion of philosophers in regard to this. For
example, it has been curiously held (and Reid is no exception) that in
looking at the sun, moon, or any other object of sight, we are, on the
one doctrine, actually conscious of these distant objects, or, on the
other, that these distant objects are those really represented in the
mind. Nothing can be more absurd: we perceive, through no sense, aught
external but what is in immediate relation and in immediate contact with
its organ. . . . Through the eye we perceive nothing but the rays of
light in relation to, and in contact with, the retina.” (Lectures, Vol.
II, pp. 129-30.)

The basis of the whole Ideal System, which it is thought to be the great
merit of Reid to have exploded, was a natural prejudice, supposed to be
intuitively evident, namely, that that which knows, must be of a similar
nature jtoj that which is known by it. “This principle,” says our
author, “has, perhaps, exerted a more extensive influence on speculation
than any other. . . . It would be easy to show that the belief, explicit
or implicit, that what knows and what is immediately known must be of an
analogous nature, lies at the root of almost every theory of cognition,
from the very earliest to the very latest speculations. . . . And yet it
has not been proved, and is incapable of proof,—nay, is contradicted by
the evidence of consciousness itself.” (Foot-note to Reid, p. 300n.)

But though Sir W. Hamilton manifests himself thus thoroughly aware how
wide the differences of opinion may be and are respecting our intuitive
perceptions, I by no means intend to deny that he on certain occasions
affirms the contrary. In the fourth volume of the Lectures (p. 95), he
says, “I have here limited the possibility of error to Probable
Reasoning, for in Intuition and Demonstration, there is but little
possibility of important error.” After a certain amount of reading of
Sir W. Hamilton, one is used to these contradictions. What he here
asserts to be so nearly impossible, that no account needs to be taken of
it in a classification of Error, he is continually fighting against in
detail, and imputing to nearly all philosophers. And when he says that
the “revelation” of consciousness is “naturally clear,” (ibid., Vol. I,
p. 266,) and only mistaken by philosophers because they resort to it
solely for confirmation of their own opinions, he kmerely transportsk
into psychology the dogmatism of theologians.

j-j
651, 652 with

k-k
651, 652 is merely transporting

*
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note A,] p. 752.

[*]
See Victor Cousin, Cours de philosophie. Histoire de la philosophie du
dixhuitième siècle, 2 vols. (Brussels: Hauman, 1836), Vol. II, pp. 114
ff. (17e leçon).

l-l
651, 652 they cannot possibly

[*]
See Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Works, Vol. I, pp. 82-98 (Bk.
II, Chap. i).

m-m
651, 652, 67 at which memory commences

n-n
+67, 72

*
[67] The “Inquirer” thinks he refutes the preceding paragraph when he
says that Consciousness may not have given its full revelation in the
infant, and that it would be “contrary to all analogy” to suppose “that
consciousness alone, of all our natural properties, needs no
development, no education.” (P. 52.) If this supposed improvement of
consciousness by exercise be admitted, it goes even harder with the
Introspective Method than I had maintained. I pointed out an experiment
not realizable, but conceivable, which by ascertaining the contents of
consciousness antecedently to any acquired experience, would
authenticate as the original data of consciousness whatever that
experiment revealed. But if consciousness does not tell its tale at
once, but requires time and practice to tell it, and does not get it
completed until there has been time for impressions originating in
experience to be formed, then there is no period at which the
Introspective Method, applied to the case, would yield a conclusive
result: the natural and acquired testimonies of consciousness are
inseparably blended at every stage, and to separate them by mere
self-observation, and show that any particular item belongs to the one
and not to the other, involves a double impossibility, instead of the
single one I contended for.

[*]
See Descartes, Dissertatio de Methodo, in Opera Philosophica, 4th ed.
(Amsterdam: Elzevir, 1664), pp. 6 ff. (II).

*
Lectures, Vol. IV, p. 92.

†
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D**,] p. 894n.

‡
Ibid., [Note D*,] p. 882.

o-o
651, 652 could not

*
Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 268-70.

p-p
651, 652 we may add, with Kant, and even with Mr. Herbert Spencer [at
the end of the text in 652 (cf. 504m) the following note (partly
reproduced in 143n above) appears:] Addendum./Note to p. 150./After this
page had passed through the press, there appeared in the fifth number of
the Fortnightly Review, a paper by Mr. Herbert Spencer, discussing
several of the philosophical questions which divide me from that
powerful thinker, and especially the question whether inconceivability
is a test of truth. As I have no special controversy with Mr. Spencer in
the present work, some other occasion would be more suitable for an
examination of his arguments; but since he expresses surprise at my
having classed him with Sir W. Hamilton and others, as one of those
whose test for deciding a belief to be an original intuition of the
mind, is the necessity of thinking it, I deem it right that the same
volume in which his opinion has been erroneously stated, should contain
the correction. As I . . . as 72 . . . I had, in truth, confounded . . .
as 72 . . . with that of the intuitive school, which . . . as 72 . . .
refutation by substantially the same arguments.

†
[67] In the first edition I added, “and even with Mr. Herbert Spencer:”
but that powerful thinker, in his paper in the Fortnightly Review,
disclaims the doctrine. [See “Mill versus Hamilton,” Fortnightly Review,
I (15 July, 1865), 536-9.] As I now understand Mr. Spencer, he maintains
that the impossibility of getting rid of a belief is a proof of its
truth, and also of its being a primary, or ultimate, truth, but not of
its being intuitive, since even our primary forms of thought are, in Mr.
Spencer’s opinion, products of experience, either our own, or inherited
by us from ancestors by the laws of the development of organization. I
had confounded the two ideas, of a primary truth and an intuitive truth,
which had never, as far as I know, been distinguished by any one except
Mr. Spencer; and had, therefore, identified his theory with the ordinary
doctrine of the intuitive philosophy; which I now see to be a
misconception, though I think both theories open to refutation by the
same arguments, and the difference between them not material to the test
of truth, though highly important to psychology. [Cf. p-p below.]

I perceive also that I was mistaken, when, in an early chapter of this
work (Chap. ii [p. 10]) I classed Mr. Spencer among the philosophers who
hold, in its widest sense, the doctrine of the Relativity of human
knowledge: for the external things which, he contends, we cannot help
believing to be connected with all our sensations, are not, according to
him, entirely uncognizable by us. [See ibid., pp. 546-8.] On the
contrary, he believes that “the more or less coherent relations among”
one’s “states of consciousness, are generated by experience of the more
or less constant relations in something beyond his consciousness:” i.e.,
that for every proposition which we can truly assert about the
similitudes, successions, and coexistences of our states of
consciousness, there is a corresponding similitude, succession, or
coexistence really obtaining among Noumena beyond our consciousness, and
even that we can have “experience” of the same. (Ibid., p. 548.) This
prodigious amount of knowledge respecting the “Unknowable” is only
consistent with the doctrine of Relativity if we understand that
doctrine in the very limited sense in which Sir W. Hamilton holds it.
This abates nothing from the value of the psychological analyses due to
Mr. Spencer, whose services to philosophy as an applier and defender of
the “experience hypothesis” are beyond all price.

Mr. Spencer, in the same paper, adheres to his doctrine that the test of
truth in the last resort is the inconceivability of its negation, and
maintains that doctrine with his usual argumentative power. In one part
of his argument, he seems to put a sense upon it which would leave
little, if any, difference between his opinion and my own. He seems to
say that the proposition, Things equal to the same thing are equal to
one another, is known to be true by the inconceivability of its
negation, in the same manner in which it might be said that two unequal
lines placed side by side are known to be unequal by the
inconceivability of their being equal, i.e., “I find it impossible,
while contemplating the lines, to get rid of the consciousness” of their
inequality. (Ibid., p. 539.) If the inconceivableness of the negative
only means that I cannot resist the evidence of my senses for the
affirmative, I have no objection to admit this as the test of any truth,
even a geometrical axiom. I believe that my knowledge of the axiom is of
exactly the same kind as my knowledge of the inequality of the two
lines: I know it because I see it; and as I cannot have this positive
intuition together with its negative, this may be called, if any one
pleases, the inconceivability of the negative. But I do not therefore
rest the belief that things equal to the same thing are equal to one
another on an à priori incapacity of my mind to conceive them unequal. I
believe that I am only unable to conceive them unequal because I have
always seen them to be equal, and am renewing that experience at almost
every instant of my life.

Mr. Spencer asks, If an axiom of mathematics is said to be known “only
by induction from personal experiences,” “on what warrant are personal
experiences asserted? The testimony of experience is given only through
memory,” and the “trustworthiness of memory” is open to more doubt than
the “immediate consciousness” of the mathematical truth. (Ibid., p.
549.) Instead, however, of immediate consciousness, let us call it
immediate observation, which is a mode of consciousness, and the
“personal experiences” which it yields become the most certain evidence
which it is possible to have: not depending upon memory, but upon direct
perception, which can be repeated at any moment; corroborated, however,
by a vast mass of memories, both of our own and of other people, which
by their number, ubiquity, and variety operate as a complete insurance
against the possible error of memory in any single instance.

q-q
651, 652 question is

r-r
651, 652 whom

*
[67] Mr. Mahaffy, after distinguishing, as I have done, between the two
kinds of so-called inconceivables [see pp. 69ff. above], the
Unimaginable and the simply Incredible, says, “There seems to be a
definite distinction between them, not of degree, but of kind. We may
safely defy Mr. Mill to point out a case where an unimaginable
(inconceivable) was proved true, or even possible. And the reason is
plain. The latter depends upon the form of the thinking or intuiting
faculty; the former, merely upon empirical association.” (Pp. viii-ix.)
In Mr. Mahaffy’s philosophical system the distinction passes for one of
kind, but he must surely see that it admits of being construed as a
difference only of degree. If an empirical association between two
ideas, not so strong as to be altogether irresistible, makes it
difficult to image in our own minds the corresponding facts as
disjoined, it is but rational to believe that a stronger empirical
association, produced by still more incessant repetition, will convert
that difficulty into a conditional impossibility; an inability only to
be overcome by contrary experience, which experience the conditions of
our terrestrial existence may not permit. And if, as I have before
observed, “a mental association between two facts, which is not intense
enough to make their separation unimaginable, may yet create, and if
there are no counter-associations, always does create, more or less of
difficulty in believing that the two can exist apart; a difficulty often
amounting to a local or temporary impossibility;” [p. 75 above] an
association which is so intense as to make the separation unimaginable,
may surely create an impossibility of belief, not local or temporary,
but as durable as the experience which gave rise to the association.

Mr. Spencer, who is almost willing to rest the claims of
inconceivability as a test of truth on its expressing “the net result of
our experience up to the present time,” has given an excellent
exposition of this point. [“Mill versus Hamilton,” p. 536.] He sees
clearly that the difference between the two kinds of inconceivable is
only one of degree—the degree of strength of the cohesion between the
two ideas. The proposition “the ice was hot” he justly classes as not
unimaginable, but merely unbelievable; the unbelievableness, however,
arising from a difficulty, though not amounting to an impossibility, of
combining the two ideas in a representation. “The elements of the
proposition cannot be put together in thought without great resistance.
Between those other states of consciousness which the word ice connotes,
and the state of consciousness named cold, there is an extremely strong
cohesion—a cohesion measured by the resistance to be overcome in
thinking of the ice as hot.” (Ibid., p. 543.) The merely unbelievable is
thus distinguished from Mr. Mahaffy’s unimaginable, not by a generic
difference, but by a minor degree of unimaginability. And the seeming
incredibility is strictly proportioned to the degree of difficulty in
combining the two thoughts in one representation.

With regard to Mr. Mahaffy’s assertion, that nothing unimaginable has
ever been “proved true, or even possible;” the point would have been
more effectually maintained if he could have said “nothing which seemed
unimaginable;” for whatever has been “proved true” or even “possible”
has thereby become imaginable. People had much difficulty, and most
people have some difficulty still, in representing to themselves sunrise
as a motion not of the sun but of the earth; but no one has called this
notion of sunrise either inconceivable or unimaginable after knowing it
to be the true notion. Let us first, then, state the question correctly:
Has anything which seemed unimaginable been proved true, or possible? It
is hardly practicable to give such an answer to this question as will
silence the retort, that what was called unimaginable was really no more
than incredible; for since unimaginableness, as I have said, exists in
numerous degrees, graduating from a slight difficulty to at least a
temporary impossibility, there is no definite line of demarcation
between the absolutely unimaginable (if there be such a thing) and the
totally incredible, nor even between what is unimaginable by a given
person, and what is merely incredible to him. Most of the questions
which lie on that border land are still disputed. For example: is a
creation a nihilo, or Matter capable of thinking, unimaginable, or only
incredible? Both the one and the other are habitually ranked among the
most unimaginable of all things. Yet the one is firmly believed by all
Materialists, and the other by all Christians. Every Materialist,
therefore, and every Christian, may be called as a witness that things
which are unimaginable are not only possible but true. To take another
instance—an event without a cause. Is that unimaginable, or only
incredible? All who regard the category of Cause and Effect as a
necessity of thought, including Sir W. Hamilton, and Mr. Mahaffy himself
[pp. iii-xvi], maintain it to be unimaginable. Yet most of these believe
it to be both possible and true in the case of human freewill. Not only
therefore what to one man seems unimaginable, another believes to be
true, but the same man believes to be true what to himself seems
unimaginable: witness the whole Philosophy of the Conditioned.

Dr. M‘Cosh thinks that antipodes were unbelievable, not in consequence
of an association, but because “the alleged fact seemed contrary to a
law of nature established by observation. A gathered experience seemed
to show that there was an absolute up and down, and that heavy bodies
tended downwards.” ([Examination,] p. 240.) Of course it was the
apparent experience that generated the association. But if there had
been no more in the matter than an intellectual conviction, the
conviction would have given way as soon as any one made the remark that
the experience was confined to a region in which the direction of down
coincided with direction towards the earth. It is because our
intellectual convictions generate temporarily inseparable associations,
that they give way so slowly before evidence.

s-s
651, 652 could not

t-t
651 the

*
[67] The “Inquirer” thinks that Sir W. Hamilton demanded, as evidence
that a supposed fact of consciousness is not acquired, but original, not
only that it should not be reducible to a generalization from
experience, but that it should lie “at the root of all experience;”
which the “Inquirer” understands to mean “that no experience is possible
unless this belief, this mode of thought, is already present with us.”
(P. 54.) If Sir W. Hamilton meant this, he took no pains to show that he
meant it. The authority quoted is a passing expression: “Whenever in an
analysis of the intellectual phenomenon, we arrive at an element which
we cannot reduce to a generalization from experience, but which lies at
the root of all experience, and which we cannot, therefore, resolve into
any higher principle, this we properly call a fact of consciousness.”
(Lectures, Vol. I, p. 270.) The idea of the words in italics is no
further developed; it is omitted from the definition in the next page,
“A fact of consciousness is thus, that whose existence is given and
guaranteed by an original and necessary belief” (unless the idea is
supposed to be implied in the word “original”); and Sir W. Hamilton
never, as far as I am aware, recurs to it in his attempts to prove the
originality of a belief. This is the more remarkable, because Kant makes
a continual and obtrusive use of this criterion; we are always hearing
from him that this or that mental element cannot be the product of
experience, because its pre-existence is required to render experience
possible; which goes far to show that Sir W. Hamilton’s abstinence was
intentional, and grounded on a sense of the extreme difficulty of
proving, in any of the disputed cases, what Kant so confidently affirms.
It is not unusual with Sir W. Hamilton to adopt, from other
philosophers, single expressions of which the full meaning forms no part
of his own mode of thought.

*
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 277.

†
Ibid., p. 285.

‡
Ibid., pp. 283-4.

[*]
Ibid., p. 288.

[*]
Peter Poiret, according to Hamilton’s editors.

a-a
651, 652, 67 in its primitive state

*
Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 292-4. [See Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Die Bestimmung
des Menschen, in Sämmtliche Werke, ed. J. H. Fichte, 8 vols. (Berlin:
Verlag von Veit, 1845), Vol. II, p. 245.]

*
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 296.

†
Ibid., pp. 295-6.

*
In one of the “Dissertations on Reid” (Note C) Sir W. Hamilton gives a
much more elaborate, and more minutely discriminated enumeration and
classification of the opinions which have been or might be held
respecting our knowledge of mind and of matter. But the one which I have
quoted from the Lectures is more easily followed, and sufficient for all
the purposes for which I have occasion to advert to it. I shall only
cite from the later exposition a single passage which exhibits in a
strong light the sentiments of our author towards philosophers of the
school of Brown.

“Natural Realism and Absolute Idealism are the only systems worthy of a
philosopher; for, as they alone have any foundation in consciousness, so
they alone have any consistency in themselves. . . . Both build upon the
same fundamental fact, that the extended object immediately perceived is
identical with the extended object actually existing;—for the truth of
this fact, both can appeal to the common sense of mankind; and to the
common sense of mankind Berkeley did appeal not less confidently, and
perhaps more logically than Reid. . . . The scheme of Hypothetical
Realism or Cosmothetic Idealism, which supposes that behind the
non-existent world perceived, lurks a correspondent but unknown world
existing, is not only repugnant to our natural beliefs, but in manifold
contradiction with itself. The scheme of Natural Realism may be
ultimately difficult—for, like all other truths, it ends in the
inconceivable; but Hypothetical Realism—in its origin—in its
development—in its result, although the favourite scheme of
philosophers, is philosophically absurd.” (P. 817n.)

Sir W. Hamilton may in general be depended on for giving a perfectly
fair statement of the opinions of adversaries; but in this case his
almost passionate contempt for the later forms of Cosmothetic Idealism
has misled him. No Cosmothetic Idealist would accept as a fair statement
of his opinion, the monstrous proposition that a “non-existent world” is
“perceived.”

b
651, 652, 67 strangely sophistical

*
In the Lehrsatz of the 21st Supplement to the Kritik der Reinen Vernunft
[p. 773]; the Lemma at p. 184 of Mr. Haywood’s Translation. [Critick of
Pure Reason, trans. Francis Haywood, 2nd ed. (London: Pickering, 1848).]
See also, in Haywood, the note at pp. xxxviii-xl of the Second Preface;
being Supplement II [“Vorrede zur zweiten Auflage,”] in Rosenkranz and
Schubert’s edition of the collected works, Vol. II, pp. 684-6. cThis
reasoning of Kant, to my mind, strangely sophistical, nevertheless does
not place the externality of Bodies out of the mind. It is “externality
in Space,” and Space, in his philosophy, does not exist out of the
mind.c

c-c
+72

†
Discussions, p. 57.

[*]
Ibid., p. 72. See p. 15 above. For Descartes, see Principia Philosophia,
p. 188 (IV, clxxxix).

*
Ibid., p. 58. [See Brown, Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 22-90.]

†
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note B,] p. 811.

[†]
See Brown, Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 32-62.

d
651, 652 of supposing

*
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D,] p. 842.

[*]
See Brown, Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 22-90.

†
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D,] p. 846: and the fuller explanation at
pp. 854 and 857.

[*]
See, e.g., Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 430-1; Vol. II, pp. 11, 85-90.

*
Discussions, p. 89.

†
Ibid., p. 86.

e-e
+67, 72

[*]
See Brown, Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 22-63.

f-f
+67, 72

*
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 86.

*
Ibid., p. 106.

†
Ibid., pp. 138-9.

*
Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 219-20.

[*]
See ibid., pp. 295ff.

[†]
See, e.g., Discussions, p. 64.

[*]
See pp. 112ff. above.

[†]
See, e.g., On the Intellectual Powers, pp. 284-5.

*
Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 153-4.

†
Some of the inconsistencies here pointed out in Sir W. Hamilton’s
speculations respecting Perception have been noticed, and ably
discussed, by Mr. Bailey, in the fourth letter of the Second Series of
his Letters on the Philosophy of the Human Mind. [(London: Longman,
Brown, Green, Longmans, and Roberts, 1858), pp. 46-64.]

In treating of Modified Logic, Sir W. Hamilton justifies, after his own
manner, the assumption made alike by himself and by the Cosmothetic
Idealists; and the grounds of justification are as available to them as
to him. “Real truth is the correspondence of our thoughts with the
existences which constitute their objects. But here a difficulty arises:
how can we know that there is, that there can be, such a correspondence?
All that we know of the objects is through the presentations of our
faculties; but whether these present the objects as they are in
themselves, we can never ascertain, for to do this it would be requisite
to go out of ourselves,—out of our faculties,—to obtain a knowledge of
the objects by other faculties, and thus to compare our old
presentations with our new.” The very difficulty which we have seen him
throwing in the teeth of the Cosmothetic Idealists. “But all this, even
were the supposition possible, would be incompetent to afford us the
certainty required. For were it possible to leave our old, and to obtain
a new, set of faculties, by which to test the old, still the veracity of
these new faculties would be equally obnoxious to doubt as the veracity
of the old. For what guarantee could we obtain for the credibility in
the one case, which we do not already possess in the other? The new
faculties could only assert their own truth; but this is done by the
old; and it is impossible to imagine any presentations of the non-ego by
any finite intelligence to which a doubt might not be raised, whether
these presentations were not merely subjective modifications of the
conscious ego itself.” It is a very laudable practice in philosophizing
to state the difficulties strongly. But when the difficulty is one which
in any case has to be surmounted, we should allow others to surmount it
in the same mode which we adopt for ourselves. This mode, in the present
case, is our author’s usual one: “All that could be said in answer to
such a doubt is that if such were true, our whole nature is a lie:” in
other words, our nature prompts us to believe that the modification of
the conscious ego points to, and results from, a non-ego with
corresponding properties. (Lectures, Vol. IV, pp. 67-8.) The Cosmothetic
Idealistsdo but say the same thing: and they have as good a right to say
it as our author.

gIn saying that the Cosmothetic Idealists can make out as good a case
for their opinion as Sir W. Hamilton for his, I do not say that their
case is good against Berkeley, who held that the non-ego we are
compelled to postulate as the cause of our sensations is not matter, but
a mind. Minds, Berkeley would say, we know to exist, in ourselves by
consciousness, in other beings by evidence. Matter we do not know to
exist, for all the indications of it are otherwise explicable: we ought
not, therefore, to assume its existence until it is shown that our
sensations cannot be caused by a Mind. Sir W. Hamilton escapes from this
argument by his doctrine, that Matter with its Primary and
Secundo-primary qualities is directly and immediately perceived.g

g-g
+72

[*]
“Philosophy of Perception,” Discussions, pp. 39-99.

h-h
651, 652 was transcribed from

[†]
See Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 278-83.

i-i
651, 652 reappear. Sir W. Hamilton perhaps had meanwhile become aware of
its inconsistency with his own principles.

*
Discussions, p. 67.

j
651, 652 truly

†
Our belief in the veracity of Memory is evidently ultimate: no reason
can be given for it which does not presuppose the belief, and assume it
to be well grounded. This point is forcibly urged in the Philosophical
Introduction to kDr.k Ward’s able work, On Nature and Grace: a book the
readers of which are likely to be limited by its being addressed
specially to Catholics, but showing a capacity in the writer which might
otherwise have made him one of the most effective champions of the
Intuitive school. [See William George Ward, On Nature and Grace (London:
Burns and Lambert, 1860), esp. Chap. i, §1, pp. 5-6, and 25-9.] Though I
do not believe morality to be intuitive in lDr.l Ward’s sense, I think
his book of great practical worth, by the strenuous manner in which it
maintains morality to have another foundation than the arbitrary decree
of God, and shows, by great weight of evidence, that this is the
orthodox doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church.

mDr. Ward, returning to this subject in the Dublin Review, says that in
declaring our belief in the veracity of Memory to be ultimate, I am
admitting “an exception” to the doctrine of what he calls the
Phenomenist school, and “an exception which no phenomenist had made
before.” The necessity of making this exception, he deems a powerful
argument against the doctrine itself. “If ever there were a paradoxical
position” mine, according to him, “is one on the surface. It is most
intelligible to say that there are no trustworthy intuitions; and it is
most intelligible to say that there are many such; but on the surface it
is the ne plus ultra of paradox, to say that there is just one such, and
no more.” (“Mr. Mill’s Denial of Necessary Truth,” pp. 309-10.)

First, on what account is it more improbable that there should be “just
one” source of intuitive knowledge besides present consciousness, making
two in all, than that there should be three, four, or any other number.
To me it seems that there is no antecedent presumption in the case, but
a mere question of evidence. Dr. Ward, with good reason, challenges me
to explain “where the distinction lies between acts of memory and other
alleged intuitions” which I do not admit as such. The distinction is,
that as all the explanations of mental phenomena presuppose Memory,
Memory itself cannot admit of being explained. Whenever this is shown to
be true of any other part of our knowledge, I shall admit that part to
be intuitive. Dr. Ward thinks that there are various other intuitions
“more favourably circumstanced for the establishment of their
trustworthiness” than Memory itself, and he gives as an example our
conviction of the wickedness of certain acts. [Ibid., p. 310.] My reason
for rejecting this as a case of intuition is, that the conviction can be
explained without presupposing, as part of the explanation, the very
fact itself; which the belief in Memory cannot.

Dr. Ward has been too hasty in saying that no phenomenist ever before
made this “exception.” I doubt if he could point out any phenomenist who
has not made it, either expressly or by implication. All who have
attempted the explanation of the human mind by sensation have postulated
the knowledge of past sensations as well as of present; some of them
have expressly said so. Take Hume, for instance, the most extreme of
Phenomenists: he always excepts Memory from the sources of knowledge of
which he attempts to find an explanation. In his “Sceptical Doubts,” he
says “It may be a subject worthy curiosity, to inquire what is the
nature of that evidence which assures us of any real existence and
matter of fact, beyond the present testimony of our senses, or the
records of our memory.” And again, “all reasonings concerning matter of
fact seem to be founded in the relation of Cause and Effect. By means of
that relation alone can we go beyond the evidence of our memory and
senses.” [“Sceptical Doubts concerning the Operations of the
Understanding,” Section iv of An Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding,
in Essays and Treatises, Vol. II, p. 39.] And in his “Sceptical Solution
of these Doubts,” where he is attempting to explain Belief by the laws
of Association, he asserts that belief “where it reaches beyond the
memory and senses” is amenable to his theory. [Section v in ibid., p.
68.] It would be easy to quote equally decisive passages from other
Phenomenists. How, indeed, could any one make Experience the source of
all our knowledge without postulating the belief in Memory as the
fundamental fact? What is Experience but Memory?

For myself, I do admit other sources of knowledge than sensation and the
memory of sensation, though not than consciousness and the memory of
consciousness. I have distinctly declared that the elementary relations
of our sensations to one another, viz. their resemblances, and their
successions and coexistences, are subjects of direct apprehension. And I
have avowedly left the question undecided whether our perception of
ourselves—of our own personality—is not a case of the same kind. It is
curious that while Dr. Ward [“Mill’s Denial,” pp. 309-10] thinks I am
bound to explain why I acknowledge only one case of intuition, Dr.
M‘Cosh charges me with postulating as great a number of first principles
as are demanded by either the Scotch or the German metaphysicians, and
has devoted a whole chapter of his book to an enumeration of them;
including several which, as he might have known, I regard as truths
indeed, but not as ultimate principles. [See McCosh, Examination, Chap.
iii, pp. 50-69.] I do not know what extreme of supposed psychological
analysis Dr. M‘Cosh thought it incumbent on me to profess. In my
estimation, the doctrine of “all or none” is no more a necessity in
philosophy than in politics.m

k-k
651, 652, 67 Mr.

l-l
651, 652, 67 Mr.

m-m
+72

[*]
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 106.

[†]
See pp. 139ff. above.

n
651, 652, 67 all

*
There is also a difference between Brown and Sir W. Hamilton in the
particular category of intuitive knowledge to which they referred the
cognition of the existence of matter. Brown deemed it a case of the
belief in causation, which again he regarded as a case of our intuitive
belief in the constancy of the order of nature. “I do not,” he says,
“conceive that it is by any peculiar intuition we are led to believe in
the existence of things without. I consider this belief as the effect of
that more general intuition, by which we consider a new consequent, in
any series of accustomed events, as the sign of a new antecedent, and of
that equally general principle of association, by which feelings that
have frequently co-existed, flow together and constitute afterwards one
complex whole.” (Lectures, Vol. II, p. 11; Lecture xxiv.) That is, he
thought that when an infant finds the motions of his muscles, which have
been accustomed to take place unimpeded, suddenly stopped by what he
will afterwards learn to call the resistance of an external object, the
infant intuitively (though perhaps not instantaneously) believes that
this unexpected phænomenon, the stoppage of a series of sensations, is
conjoined with, or as we now say, caused by, the presence of some new
antecedent:o which, not being the infant himself, nor a state of his
sensations, we may call an outward object.

o
651, 652 something

[*]
See Lecture xxiii, Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 63-85; “Dissertations on
Reid,” Note C, pp. 819-24; cf. Brown, Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 22-42.

p
651, 652 , and in the very same manner

*
Discussions, p. 58.

*
Ibid., pp. 56-7.

†
Ibid., p. 60.

‡
Inquiry into the Human Mind, Works (Hamilton’s ed.), p. 122.

§
Ibid.

¶
Ibid., p. 137.

*
Ibid., p. 111.

†
Ibid., p. 121.

‡
Ibid.

§
Ibid., pp. 123-4. [The words in square brackets are Mill’s.]

¶
Ibid., p. 124.

*
Ibid., p. 125.

†
Ibid., p. 131.

‡
Ibid., p. 188.

§
Ibid., pp. 194-5.

¶
Ibid., p. 195.

q
651, 652, 67 (and I might have cited many more)

r-r
651, 652 conviction

*
Foot-note to Reid, p. 129n.

†
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note C,] p. 821.

‡
Essays on the Intellectual Powers, Works, p. 312.

§
Ibid., p. 311.

*
Ibid., p. 310.

[*]
Foot-note to Reid, p. 310n.

†
Essays on the Intellectual Powers, Works, p. 315.

‡
Ibid., p. 320.

§
Ibid., p. 332.

¶
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note C,] pp. 819-24, and [Note D*,] pp. 882-5.

∥
Ibid., [Note D*,] p. 882.

*
Ibid., [Note C,] p. 820.

[*]
See, e.g., Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 80-4.

†
Essays on the Intellectual Powers, Essay II, Chap. v, p. 258.

‡
Same Essay, p. 259.

[†]
See Brown, Lectures, Vol. II, p. 80.

§
Same Essay, [i.e., Reid, Essay II,] Chap. xiii [pp. 295-8]. For Sir W.
Hamilton’s remarks, see Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 50-3; Discussions, pp.
75-7; and “Dissertations on Reid,” [Note C,] p. 823.

s-s
651 different in it

[*]
See Antoine Arnauld, Des vrayes et des fausses idées, contre ce
qu’enseigne l’auteur de la Recherche de la vérité (Cologne: Schouten,
1683), pp. 34-58 (Chaps. v and vi).

*
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note A,] p. 797.

t-t
+652, 67, 72

*
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 432.

u-u
651 counter-doctrine?

[*]
See Samuel Bailey, A Review of Berkeley’s Theory of Vision (London:
Ridgway, 1842), pp. 105-17; cf. Letters on the Philosophy of the Human
Mind, 2nd ser., pp. 46-50.

a-a
+67, 72

b-b
651, 652 when we say that the object we perceive is

c-c
651 is] 652 is involved

d-d
651, 652 perhaps

e-e
651, 652 , and

f-f
651, 652 law

g-g
651, 652 in any case

h-h
651 what

i-i
651, 652 position relatively

j-j
651, 652, 67 our present

k-k
+67, 72

l-l
651 is

[*]
See James Boswell, Life of Johnson, 2nd ed., 3 vols. (London: Dilly,
1793), Vol. I, p. 436.

m-m
651, 652 substance, apart from the impressions it makes

n-n
651, 652 unable to conceive the beginning of anything without an

*
[67] My able American critic, Dr. H. B. Smith, contends through several
pages (pp. 152-7) that these facts afford no proofs that objects are
external to us. I never pretended that they do. I am accounting for our
conceiving, or representing to ourselves, the Permanent Possibilities as
real objects external to us. I do not believe that the real externality
to us of anything, except other minds, is capable of proof. But the
Permanent Possibilities are external to us in the only sense we need
care about; they are not constructed by the mind itself, but merely
recognised by it; in Kantian language, they are given to us, and to
other beings in common with us. “Men cannot act, cannot live,” says
Professor Fraser, “without assuming an external world, in some
conception of the term external. It is the business of the philosopher
to explain what that conception ought to be. For ourselves we can
conceive only—(1) An externality to our present and transient experience
in our own possible experience past and future, and (2) An externality
to our own conscious experience, in the contemporaneous, as well as in
the past or future experience of other minds.” ([“Mr. Mill’s
Examination,”] p. 26.) The view I take of externality, in the sense in
which I acknowledge it as real, could not be more accurately expressed
than in Professor Fraser’s words. Dr. Smith’s criticisms continually go
wide of the mark because he has somehow imagined that I am defending,
instead of attacking, the belief in Matter as an entity per se. As when
he says (pp. 157-8) that my reasoning assumes, contrary to my own
opinion, “an à priori necessity and validity of the law of cause and
effect, or invariable antecedence and consequence.” This might fairly
have been said if I were defending the belief in the supposed hidden
cause of our sensations: but I am only accounting for it; and to do so I
assume only the tendency, but not the legitimacy of the tendency, to
extend all the laws of our own experience to a sphere beyond our
experience.

a-a
+72

b
651, 652 any

c-c
651, 652, 67 a much

d-d
651, 652, 67 reservation of any Primary

*
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 138.

e-e
651, 652 outward circumstances

f
651, 652 [paragraph] The Permanent Possibility of feeling, which forms
my notion of Myself, is distinguished, by important differences, from
the Permanent Possibilities of sensation which form my notion of what I
call external objects. In the first place, each of these last represents
a small and perfectly definite part of the series which, in its
entireness, forms my conscious existence—a single group of possible
sensations, which experience tells me I might expect to have under
certain conditions; as distinguished from mere vague and indefinite
possibilities, which are considered such only because they are not known
to be impossibilities. My notion of Myself, on the contrary, includes
all possibilities of sensation, definite or indefinite, certified by
experience or not, which I may imagine inserted in the series of my
actual and conscious states. In the second place, the Permanent
Possibilities which I call outward objects, are possibilities of
sensation only, while the series which I call Myself includes, along
with and as called up by these, thoughts, emotions, and volitions, and
Permanent Possibilities of such. Besides that these states of mind are,
to our consciousness, generically distinct from the sensations of our
outward senses, they are further distinguished from them by not
occurring in groups, consisting of separate elements which coexist, or
may be made to coexist, with one another. Lastly (and this difference is
the most important of all) the Possibilities of Sensation which are
called outward objects, are possibilities of it to other beings as well
as to me: but the particular series of feelings which constitutes my own
life, is confined to myself: no other sentient being shares it with me.

[*]
See, e.g., On the Intellectual Powers, pp. 426-34.

g-g
651 agree

[*]
William Paley, Natural Theology: or, Evidences of the existence and
attributes of the Deity (London: Faulder, 1802); A View of the Evidences
of Christianity, 3 vols. (London: Faulder, 1794).

*
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 394.

*
Mr. Mansel, in his Prolegomena Logica, shows a perception of the
difference here pointed out between the character of the Psychological
explanation of the belief in Matter, and that of the belief in Mind; and
he resolves the question by drawing a distinction between the two
Noumena, not often drawn by philosophers posterior to Berkeley. He
considers the Ego to be a direct presentation of consciousness, while
with regard to the Non-ego he is not far from adopting the Berkeleian
theory. The whole of his remarks on the subject are well worth reading.
See Prolegomena Logica [: An inquiry into the psychological character of
logical processes (Oxford: Graham, 1851)], pp. 123-35.

h-h
208+67, 72

*
[67] This particular series includes volitions in addition to
sensations; but the difference is of no consequence; and the theory
would stand if we suppose ourselves carried into the room instead of
walking into it.

[*]
See, e.g., pp. 182-3 and 192 above.

[†]
Milton, Paradise Lost, in Works, p. 186 (VII, 242).

[‡]
See Descartes, Principia Philosophiæ, pp. 48ff. (III, xxvff.)

*
[67] This objective conception of Time, as holding the successions
instead of being them, is probably suggested by our being able to
measure time, and number its parts. But what we call measuring Time is
only comparing successions, and measuring the length or rapidity of one
series of successions by that of another. Rapidity of succession,
indeed, is a phrase which derives all its meaning from such a
comparison. I say that the words of a person to whom I am listening
succeed one another more rapidly than the tickings of a clock, because,
after I have heard a word and a ticking simultaneously, a second word
occurs before a second ticking. The only ultimate facts or primitive
elements in Time are Before and After; which (the knowledge of opposites
being one) involve the notion of Neither before nor after, i.e.
simultaneous.

[*]
See Analysis, Vol. II, pp. 100-19 (Chap. xiv, §5).

*
[67] M‘Cosh, [Examination,] p. 118. The same observation applies to
another of my critics, the writer in Blackwood’s Magazine, who says “The
qualities by which they [Things] act upon each other, cannot be resolved
into any receptivity or subjectivity of mine.” ([W. H. Smith, “J. S.
Mill on Our Belief in the External World,”] p. 28.)

[*]
McCosh, ibid.; the concluding clauses derive from Locke, Essay
Concerning Human Understanding, Works, Vol. I, p. 236 (Bk. II, Chap.
xxi, §1).

*
[67] Mr. O’Hanlon, in his little pamphlet puts his difficulty on this
subject in the following terms: “Your permanent possibilities of
sensation are, so long as they are not felt, nothing actual. Yet you
speak of change taking place in them, and that independently of our
consciousness and of our presence or absence. . . . If the fire, apart
from any consciousness, be some positive condition or conditions of
warmth and light, if the corn be some positive condition or conditions
of food, my thesis is made out, and your Pure Idealism falls to the
ground. If, on the other hand, the fire be nothing positive apart from
any consciousness, then, since it is nothing at all when so apart, you
can have no right to speak of modifications taking place in it whether
we are asleep or awake, present or absent.” ([A Criticism of John Stuart
Mill’s Pure Idealism,] pp. 12 and 14.)

I give great credit to my young antagonist, not only for the neatness of
his dilemma, but for having gone so directly to the point at which is
the real stress of the dispute. But I think he will perceive, from what
I have said in the text, in what manner one may have a right to speak of
modifications as taking place in a possibility. [See, e.g., p. 181
above.] And I think he will be able to see that the condition of a
phænomenon needs not necessarily be anything positive, in his sense of
the word, or objective; it may be anything, positive or negative,
actuality or possibility, without which the phænomenon would not have
occurred, and which may therefore be justly inferred from its
occurrence.

†
[67] Mr. O’Hanlon says: “Conceding the entire truth of the position,
that there are associations naturally and even necessarily generated by
the order of our sensations, and of our reminiscences of sensation,
which, supposing no intuition of an external world to have existed in
consciousness, would inevitably generate the belief, and would cause it
to be regarded as an intuition;—conceding, I say, for argument’s sake,
the entire truth of this position, it may still be true that though we
have no intuition of the external world, the inference that such a world
exists is a legitimate one.” (P. 14.) Undoubtedly it may. Malebranche,
for instance, according to whose system Matter is not perceived, nor in
any way cognised, nor capable of being cognised, by our minds, all the
things that we see or feel existing only as ideas in the Divine Mind,
nevertheless fully believed in the reality of this superfluous wheel in
the mechanism of the universe, which merely revolves while the machinery
does its work independently of it—because he thought that God himself
had asserted its existence in the Scriptures: and whoever agrees with
Malebranche in his premises is likely to agree with him in his
conclusion. [See Nicolas de Malebranche, Recherche de la vérité, Vol. II
of Œuvres, ed. Jules Simon, 2 vols. (Paris: Charpentier, 1842), pp.
253ff. (Bk. III, Pt. 2, Chap. vi).] But with most people, whether
philosophers or common men, the evidence on which Matter is believed to
exist independently of our minds, is either that we perceive it by our
senses, or that the notion and belief of it come to us by an original
law of our nature. If it be shown that there is no ground for either of
these opinions—that all we are conscious of may be accounted for without
supposing that we perceive Matter by our senses, and that the notion and
belief in Matter may have come to us by the laws of our constitution
without being a revelation of any objective reality, the main evidences
of Matter are at an end; and though I am perfectly willing to listen to
any other evidence, Malebranche’s argument is, I must confess, quite as
conclusive as any that I expect to find.

*
[67] Some of my critics have impugned the arguments of the preceding
chapter on this particular point. They have said (Mr. O’Hanlon [p. 10]
is the one who has said it with the greatest compactness and force) that
persons, equally with inanimate things, may be conceived as mere states
of my own consciousness; that the same processes of thought which,
according to the Psychological theory, can generate the belief in Matter
even if it does not exist, must be equally competent to engender the
belief of the existence of other Minds: and that the principles of the
theory require us, under the law of Parcimony, to conclude that if the
belief may have been, it has been, thus generated: consequently the
theory takes away all evidence of the existence of other minds, or of
other threads of consciousness than our own.

It would undoubtedly do so, if the only evidence of the existence of
other threads of consciousness was a natural belief, as a natural belief
is the only evidence which rational persons now acknowledge of the
existence of Matter. But there is other evidence, which does not exist
in the case of Matter, and which is as conclusive, as the other is
inconclusive. The nature of this has been stated, with sufficient
fulness of development, in the preceding chapter, and Mr. O’Hanlon has
rightly understood it to be a simple extension of “the principles of
inductive evidence, which experience shows hold good of my states of
consciousness, to a sphere without my consciousness.” But he objects:
“The doing so postulates two things: (a) That there is a sphere beyond
my consciousness; the very thing to be proved. (b) That the laws which
obtain in my consciousness, also obtain in the sphere beyond it.” (Pp.
7-8.)

To this I reply, that it does not postulate these two things, but, to
the extent required by the present question, proves them. There is
nothing in the nature of the inductive principle that confines it within
the limits of my own consciousness, when it exceptionally happens that
an inference surpassing the limits of my consciousness can conform to
inductive conditions.

I am aware, by experience, of a group of Permanent Possibilities of
Sensation which I call my body, and which my experience shows to be an
universal condition of every part of my thread of consciousness. I am
also aware of a great number of other groups, resembling the one that I
call my body, but which have no connexion, such as that has, with the
remainder of my thread of consciousness. This disposes me to draw an
inductive inference, that those other groups are connected with other
threads of consciousness, as mine is with my own. If the evidence
stopped here, the inference would be but an hypothesis; reaching only to
the inferior degree of inductive evidence called Analogy. The evidence,
however, does not stop here; for,—having made the supposition that real
feelings, though not experienced by myself, lie behind those phænomena
of my own consciousness which, from their resemblance to my body, I call
other human bodies,—I find that my subsequent consciousness presents
those very sensations, of speech heard, of movements and other outward
demeanour seen, and so forth, which, being the effects or consequents of
actual feelings in my own case, I should expect to follow upon those
other hypothetical feelings if they really exist: and thus the
hypothesis is verified. It is thus proved inductively that there is a
sphere beyond my consciousness: i.e., that there are other
consciousnesses beyond it; for there exists no parallel evidence in
regard to Matter. And it is proved inductively, that so far as respects
those other consciousnesses, linked to as many groups of Permanent
Possibilities of Sensation similar to my own body, the laws which obtain
in my consciousness also obtain in the sphere beyond it; that those
other threads of consciousness are beings similar to myself.

The legitimacy of this process is open to no objections, either real or
imaginary, but such as may equally be made against inductive inferences
within the sphere of our own actual or possible consciousness. Facts of
which I never have had consciousness are as much unknown facts, as much
apart from my actual experience, as facts of which I cannot have
consciousness. When I conclude, from facts that I immediately perceive,
to the existence of other facts such as might come into my actual
consciousness (which the feelings of other people never can) but which
never did come into it, and of which I have no evidence but an induction
from experience; how do I know that I am concluding rightly—that the
inference is warranted, from an actual consciousness to a contingent
possibility of consciousness which has never become actual? Surely
because this conclusion from experience is verified by further
experience; because those other experiences which I ought to have if my
inference was correct, really present themselves. This verification,
which is the source of all my reliance on induction, justifies the same
reliance wherever it is found. The alien threads of consciousness of
which I presume the existence from the analogy of my own body, manifest
the truth of the presumption by visual and tactual effects within my own
consciousness, resembling those which follow from sensations, thoughts,
or emotions felt by myself. The reality beyond the sphere of my
consciousness rests on the twofold evidence, of its antecedents, and its
consequents. It is an inference upwards from the manifestations, and
downwards from the antecedent conditions; and whichever of these
inferences is first drawn, the other is its verification.

I venture to hope that these considerations may remove Mr. O’Hanlon’s
difficulty. But whatever the difficulty may be, it is not peculiar to
the Psychological theory, but has equally to be encountered on every
other. For no one supposes that other people’s feelings or states of
consciousness are a matter of direct intuition to us, or of Natural
Belief. We do not directly perceive other minds: their reality is not
known to us immediately, but by means of evidence. And there is no
evidence by which it can be proved to me that there is a conscious being
within each of the human bodies that I see, without a process of
induction involving the very same assumptions which are required by the
Psychological Theory.

I will delay the reader a few moments more while I reply to a minor
difficulty of Mr. O’Hanlon. He urges, that the Psychological theory
inserts an alien consciousness between two consciousnesses of my own, as
the effect of one of them and the cause of the other. “A boy cuts his
finger and screams. The knife, the blood, and the boy’s body are only
(in Mr. Mill’s view) actual and possible groups of my sensations, and
the scream is an actual sensation. I infer, continuing to accept Mr.
Mill’s theory, that between the scream and the other sensations, namely
between two sets of states of my own consciousness, a foreign
consciousness had the feeling I call pain, and also that the sensations
of cutting its finger, the same sensations, belong as much to it as to
me, combined with certain additions, and in a very peculiar manner. Yet
if I was not by, the boy, the knife, the blood, the scream, would only
exist potentially.” (Pp. 8-9.) Whatever seeming absurdity, and real
confusion, exists here, are only attributable to the fact, that Mr.
O’Hanlon, notwithstanding his acuteness, has not yet sufficiently
thought himself into the theory he denies. On the same evidence on which
I recognise foreign threads of consciousness, I believe that the
Permanent Possibilities of Sensation are common to them and to me; but
not the actual sensations. The evidence proves to me, that although the
knife, the blood, and the boy’s body would, if I were absent, be mere
potentialities of sensation relatively to me, the similar potentialities
which I infer to exist in him have been realized as actual sensations;
and it is as conditions of the sensations in him, and not of sensations
in me, that they form a part of the series of causes and effects which
take place out of my consciousness. The chain of causation is the
following: 1. A modification in a set of Permanent Possibilities of
Sensation common to the boy and me. 2. A sensation of pain in the boy,
not felt by me. 3. The scream, which is a sensation in me.

i-i
67 , there . . . suppose,

[*]
Recent British Philosophy, p. 335.

*
[67] Mr. Mahaffy thinks that the question may be decided in favour of
Kant on the evidence of consciousness itself. “Are you,” he asks,
“conscious of being presented with yourself as a substance? or are you
only conscious that in every act of thought you must presuppose a
permanent self, and always refer it to self, while still that self you
cannot grasp, and it remains a hidden basis upon which you erect the
structure of your thoughts? Which of these opinions will most men adopt?
After all, Kant’s view is the simpler, and the more consistent with the
ordinary language.” (P. lvi.)

*
[72] Dr. M‘Cosh has renewed his attack upon the doctrine of Permanent
Possibilities. [“Mill’s Reply to his Critics,” pp. 340-7; the earlier
attack is in McCosh’s Examination, pp. 112-21.] But I cannot find in his
later remarks, so far as they are to the purpose, much more than a
repetition of his earlier. On some minor points he does present some
novelties. He is severe upon me for hesitating to decide whether the
attribute of succession as between our sensations is given in the
sensations themselves, or annexed to them by a law of the mind. The
first supposition he characterizes as a mere verbal generalization like
those which I have laid to the charge of Condillac [see Mill’s
“Coleridge,” in Essays on Ethics, Religion, and Society, Collected
Works, Vol. X (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1969), p. 129];
forgetting the opinion held by some acute metaphysicians, and which is
no mere verbal generalization, that to have sensations in succession is
only the same thing as having more sensations than one. The other
supposition, that the attribute of succession is annexed to our
sensations by a law of the mind, he says is giving to the mind the
“power of generating in the course of its exercise a totally new idea,”
an opinion, he says, utterly inconsistent with my “empirical theory;” he
does not say with what theory. [“Mill’s Reply,” p. 343.] In any scheme
of human knowledge that I am able to form, the resemblances and the
successions and coexistences of our sensations are real facts, and
objects of direct apprehension. Whether we are said to apprehend them by
our senses or by our minds (which is the real meaning of the alternative
I have left open) affects no theory of mine, and is to me a matter of
indifference.

The most curious part of Dr. M‘Cosh’s reply is that he thinks, according
to my “theory” there is no difference between sensations and thoughts.
According to him, if I am right, the facts of external nature being only
possibilities of sensation, ought to succeed one another according to
“mental laws, say the laws of association.” The reader will scarcely
believe that I am not misrepresenting Dr. M‘Cosh; but I refer him to the
article, pp. 345 and 346.

Dr. M‘Cosh still maintains that the action of bodies on one another
cannot be accounted for on the hypothesis of Immateriality, takes credit
for having, on this point, detected me in an oversight, and seems to
consider the answer I was “obliged” to give him as an afterthought of my
own. [Ibid., pp. 346-8.] This only proves that Dr. M‘Cosh has forgotten,
if he ever knew, the very elements of the Berkeleian controversy.
Whoever knows anything of that, has got far beyond the stage of thought
at which Dr. M‘Cosh remains. Berkeley would indeed have been easily
answered if his doctrine could give no account of the greater part of
all the phænomena of physical nature.

*
[67] In the first edition I said: “But without the notion of not-self,
we cannot have that of self, which is contrasted with it.” [Seea-a
below.] In saying this I overlooked the fact, that my own sensations and
other feelings, as distinguished from what I call Myself, are a
sufficient Not-self to make the Self apprehensible. The contrast
necessary to all cognition is sufficiently provided for by the
antithesis between the Ego and particular modifications of the Ego.

a-a
651, 652 But without the notion of not-self, we cannot have that of self
which is contrasted with it: and independently of this, it is not

b-b
651, 652 (as I believe, with nearly all

*
Sir W. Hamilton thinks that we are conscious of resistance through a
“mental effort or nisus to move,” distinct both from the original will
to move, and from the muscular sensation: “for we are,” he says,
“conscious of it, though, by a narcosis or stupor of the sensitive
nerves we lose all feeling of the movement of the limb; though by a
paralysis of the motive nerves no movement of the limb follows the
mental effort to move; though by an abnormal stimulus of the muscular
fibres, a contraction in them is caused even in opposition to our will.”
(“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D,] pp. 864n-5n.) If all this is
true—though by what experiments it has been substantiated we are not
told—it does not by any means show that there is a mental nisus not
physical, but merely removes the seat of the nisus from the nerves to
the brain.

c-c
651, 652 expected sensation of locomotion

d-d
651, 652 motion

e-e
651, 652 ; whenever

*
Sir W. Hamilton draws a distinction between two kinds of resistance, or
rather, between two senses of the word: the one, that which I have
mentioned, and which is a sensation of our muscular frame; the other,
the property of Matter which the old writers called Impenetrability,
being that by which, however capable of being compressed into a smaller
space, it refuses to part with all its extension, and be extruded from
space altogether. [See “Dissertations,” Note D, pp. 849, 851-2.] But
these two kinds of resistance are merely two modes of regarding and
naming the same state of consciousness; for if the body could be pressed
entirely out of space, the only way in which we should discover that it
had vanished would be by the sudden cessation of all sensations of
resistance. It is always the muscular sensation which constitutes the
presence, and its negation the absence, of body, in any given portion of
space.

f
651, 652, 67 of Aberdeen,

†
The Senses and the Intellect [London: Parker, 1855], pp. 113-17. My
first extract is from the original edition; for in the one recently
published (and enriched by many valuable improvements) the exposition I
now quote is given more summarily, and in a manner otherwise less suited
for my purpose. [2nd ed. (London: Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and
Green, 1864), pp. 111-15.]

gDr. M‘Cosh, without any warrant, speaks of Mr. Bain as having
“elaborated into a minute system the general statements scattered
throughout Mr. Mill’s Logic” ([Examination,] p. 121); and in another
passage refers to him and to Mr. Herbert Spencer (Mr. Herbert Spencer!)
as merely following out an investigation indicated by me. (Ibid., pp.
123-4.) Coleridge reminded one of his critics, that there are such
things in the world as springs, and that the water a man draws does not
necessarily come from a hole made in another man’s cistern. [“Preface to
Christabel,” in Christabel; Kubla Khan, a Vision; The Pains of Sleep
(London: Murray, 1816), p. vi.] Mr. Bain did not stand in need of any
predecessor except our common precursors, and has taught much more to
me, on these subjects, than there is any reasonable probability that I
can have taught to him. Dr. M‘Cosh falls into a corresponding mistake
concerning myself, when he ascribes my regarding it “as impossible for
the mind to rise to first or final causes, or to know the nature of
things,” to “the influence” of M. Comte. (Examination, pp. 7-8.) The
larger half of my System of Logic, including all its fundamental
doctrines, was written before I had even seen the Cours de Philosophie
Positive. That work was indebted to M. Comte for many valuable thoughts,
but a short list would exhaust the chapters, and even the pages, which
contain them. [See the Textual Introduction to System of Logic,
Collected Works, Vol. VII, pp. lxxviii, lxxxii-lxxxiii, and xc-xci.] As
for the general doctrine which Dr. M‘Cosh’s words so imperfectly
express—that our knowledge is only of the coexistences and sequences, or
the similitudes, of phænomena; I was familiar with it before I was out
of boyhood from the teachings of my father, who had learnt it where M.
Comte learnt it—from the methods of physical science, and the writings
of their philosophical predecessors. Ever since the days of Hume, that
doctrine has been the general property of the philosophic world. From
the time of Brown it has entered even into popular philosophy.g hI have
given a brief history of it in Auguste Comte and Positivism.h [See
Collected Works, Vol. X, pp. 265-9.]

g-g
+67, 72

h-h
+72

[*]
See Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 524-48, and Vol. II, pp. 1-22.

*
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D,] p. 869n.

i-i
651, 652 , but an identification of them as one

j-j
651, 652, 67 unquestionably

k-k
651 aware

l-l
+72

m-m
651 distance

*
It is not pretended that all this was clearly seen by Brown. It is
impossible to defend the theory as Brown stated it. He seems to have
thought that the essence of extension consisted in divisibility into
parts. “A succession of feelings” (he says) “when remembered by the mind
which looks back upon them, was found to involve, necessarily, the
notion of divisibility into separate parts, and therefore of length,
which is only another name for continued divisibility.” (Lecture xxiv,
Vol. II, p. 3 of the 19th edition, 1851.) He thought that he had
explained all that needed explanation in the idea of space, when he had
shown how the notion of continued divisibility got into it. This appears
when he says, “It would not be easy for any one to define matter more
simply, than as that which has parts, and that which resists our efforts
to grasp it; and in our analysis of the feelings of infancy, we have
been able to discover how both these notions may have arisen in the
mind.” [Ibid., p. 7.] But if divisibility into parts constitutes all our
notion of extension, every sensation we have must be identified with
extension, for they are all divisible into parts (parts in succession,
which Brown thinks sufficient) when they are prolonged beyond the
shortest instant of duration which our consciousness recognises. It is
probable that Brown did not mean this, but thought that all he had to
account for in the conception of space, was its divisibility, because he
tacitly assumed that all the rest of the notion was already given in the
fact of muscular movement. And this, properly understood, is
maintainable; but Brown cannot here be acquitted of a charge to which he
is often liable, that of leaving an important philosophical question
only half thought out.

n-n
651, 652 experience

[*]
For the term (usually, but mistakenly, attributed to Bacon), see Robert
Hooke, Micrographia (London, 1665), p. 54.

[*]
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 173.

*
Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 174-5. [Hamilton is translating from Ernst
Platner, Philosophische Aphorismen, 2 vols. (Leipzig: Schwicktschen
Verlag, 1793, 1800), Vol. I, pp. 440-1.]

o-o
651 would

*
[67] Mr. Mahaffy thinks (pp. xx-xxi) that Platner omitted to ascertain
whether his patient was capable of recognising simultaneity; and is of
opinion that he could not do so, or that if he could, it must have been
owing to his education among people possessed of sight. “The question
remains: can we postulate a sense of such simultaneity originally,
before any space or extension is given? I am disposed to agree with
Brown, that, although we can afterwards analyse them, all simultaneous
feelings form originally one mental state; which of course excludes
simultaneity until the analysis obtained by the aid of space and
extension give us the elements separately. Hence, until at least one
body was given as extended, we should not obtain the notion.” Brown may
very possibly be right [see Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 294-305], but it does
not follow that the analysis necessary to our distinguishing different
sensations in one mass of simultaneous feeling, can only take place by
means of space and extension. If the simultaneous sensations differ in
kind, as a sound, for instance, and a smell, all that is necessary to
our being able to distinguish them when together is that we should at
some other time have experienced them separate. We should then know the
compound, and also the elements: and since these are not chemically
fused into a product bearing no resemblance to its factors, but retain
when combined their identity with what they are in their separate state,
our knowledge of them separately would enable us to recognise them in
the compound; in other words, to feel two sensations as simultaneous.

Dr. M‘Cosh says that the experience of other observers (and particularly
Mr. Kinghan, Principal of the Institution for the Blind at Belfast) as
well as experiments by Dr. M‘Cosh himself on young children born blind,
do not confirm Platner’s statement, but prove that those born blind have
“a very clear notion of figure and distance, pgot directly from the
sense of touch.” ([Examination,] p. 143n.) This is just what might have
been expected, for I am far from agreeing with Platner that the notions
of figure and distance come originally from sight. The sense of sight is
not necessary to give the perception of simultaneity; but, giving a
prodigious number of simultaneous sensations in one glance, it greatly
quickens all processes dependent on observation of the fact of
simultaneousness. A person born blind can acquire, by a more gradual
process, all that there is in our notion of Space except the visible
picture: but he will be much longer before he realizes it completely,
and in the case of Platner’s patient that point does not seem to have
been reached.p

p-p
[manuscript fragment exists; see Appendix A below]

*
The Senses and the Intellect, pp. 370-4. I now quote from the second
edition (1864). The corresponding passage in the first edition begins at
p. 363. [Mill’s square brackets.]

*
Principles of Psychology [London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans,
1855], p. 224.

†
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 172. [See Jean le Rond d’Alembert, Mélanges de
littérature, d’histoire, et de philosophie, new ed., 5 vols. (Amsterdam:
Chatelain, 1759-67), p. 110.]

‡
Ibid., p. 165.

*
Ibid., pp. 167-8. [The words in square brackets are Mill’s.]

q-q
651 independent

r-r
+67, 72

s-s
+72

[*]
See George Berkeley, An Essay towards a New Theory of Vision, in Works,
3 vols. (London: Priestley, 1820), Vol. I, pp. 261ff. (§§lii ff.).

[†]
Ibid., p. 277 (§lxxix).

*
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 160.

*
[67] The following case, however, which I quote from Dr. M‘Cosh, if
correctly reported, would require a considerable modification of the
preceding doctrine. “The best reported case” of a person born blind, but
who acquired eyesight by means of a surgical operation, “is that of Dr.
[Joann Christoph August] Franz of Leipsig ([“Memoir of the Case of a
Gentleman born blind,”] Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
of London, [CXXXI,] 1841 [59-68]). The youth had been born blind, and
was seventeen years of age when the experiment was wrought which gave
him the use of one eye. When the eye was sufficiently restored to bear
the light, a sheet of paper on which two strong black lines had been
drawn, the one horizontal, the other vertical, was placed before him at
the distance of about three feet. He was now allowed to open the eye,
and after attentive examination he called the lines by their right
tdenominations,” that is, according to Dr. M‘Cosh, horizontal and
vertical.t “ ‘The outline in black of a square, six inches in diameter,
within which a circle had been drawn, and within the latter a triangle,
was, after careful examination, recognised and correctly described by
him.’ ‘At the distance of three feet, and on a level with the eye, a
solid cube and a sphere, each of four inches diameter, was placed before
him.’ ‘After attentively examining these bodies, he said he saw a
quadrangular and a circular figure, and after some consideration he
pronounced the one a square and the other a disc. His eye being then
closed, the cube was taken away and a disc of equal size substituted and
placed next to the sphere. On again opening his eye he observed no
difference in these objects, but regarded them both as discs. The solid
cube was now placed in a somewhat oblique position before the eye, and
close beside it a figure cut out of pasteboard, representing a plane
outline prospect of the cube when in this position. Both objects he took
to be something like flat quadrates. [qy. quadrilaterals?] A pyramid
placed before him with one of its sides towards his eye he saw as a
plain [plane?] triangle. This object was now turned a little, so as to
present two of its sides to view, but rather more of one side than of
the other: after considering and examining it for a long time, he said
that this was a very extraordinary figure; it was neither a triangle,
nor a quadrangle, nor a circle; he had no idea of it, and could not
describe it; in fact, said he, I must give it up. On the conclusion of
these experiments, I asked him to describe the sensations the objects
had produced, whereupon he said, that immediately on opening his eye he
had discovered a difference in the two objects, the cube and the sphere,
placed before him, and perceived that they were not drawings; but that
he had not been able to form from them the idea of a square and a disc,
until he perceived a sensation of what he saw in the points of his
fingers, as if he really touched the object. [A very significant fact,
both psychologically and physiologically.] When I gave the three bodies
(the sphere, cube, and pyramid) into his hand, he was much surprised he
had not recognised them as such by sight, as he was well acquainted with
mathematical figures by his touch.” ([McCosh, Examination,] pp. 163-5
[quoting Franz, pp. 64-5]. [Mill’s square brackets.])

The case as stated looks like an experimental proof, that not only
something which admits of being called extension, but an extension which
is promptly identified with that already known by touch, uthough in two
dimensions only,u may be perceived by sight at the very first use of the
eyes, before the muscular action necessary for directing the eye has
been learnt by practice. There is one suspicious circumstance in the
recital—the youth’s instantaneous perception that the cube and the
sphere were not drawings; for how could one who had never before had any
sensation of sight, vdistinguish without help a drawing from its
objectv? Cheselden’s patient was for a long time deceived by pictures,
and asked which was the lying sense, feeling or seeing. [See William
Cheselden, “An Account of some Observations,” Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London, XXXV (1728), 449.] We ought, moreover,
to have been expressly told whether, previous to the operation, the
blindness was absolutely complete; which in many of the cases cited by
Mr. Samuel Bailey it was not, and, according to Cheselden, in cases of
congenital cataract it seldom is so. [Ibid.,p. 447.] If no material
circumstance is omitted in the report of Dr. Franz’s case, the doctrine
in the text will require a certain amount of correction. What is there
called a rudimentary conception of figure by the eye, must be more than
rudimentary; it must be, in its way, considerably developed; and it must
be such that “after attentive examination” it could be recognised as
corresponding with the circles and quadrangles already known by touch.
On this last point the report does not agree with other recorded cases.
In a recent case, for example, recorded by Mr. Nunneley (I quote at
second hand from Professor Fraser in the North British Review) the boy
could indeed, after couching, “at once perceive a difference in the
shapes of objects,” could see that the cube and the sphere “were not of
the same visible figure,” but could not tell which was which: “it was
not till they had been many times placed in his hands, that he learnt to
distinguish by sight the one which he had just had in his hands from the
other placed beside it. He gradually became more correct in his
judgments, but it was only after several days that he could tell by the
eye alone which was the sphere and which the cube; when asked, he
always, before answering, wished to take both in his hands. Even when
this was allowed, when immediately afterwards the objects were placed
before the eyes, he was not certain of the figure.” [A. C. Fraser,
“Berkeley’s Theory of Vision,” North British Review, XLI (Aug., 1864),
215, who is quoting Thomas Nunneley, On the Organs of Vision (London:
Churchill, 1838), p. 32.]

If Dr. Franz’s case is fairly reported, his patient was probably of more
than ordinary natural quickness of observation, and identified the
figures not by resemblance proper, but by analogy, or resemblance of
relations. Though beholding for the first time a visual square and
circle, he was no doubt aware through the persons who surrounded him,
that the objects shown to his sight were objects which could be
touched—which he already knew by touch. During the “careful examination”
and “consideration” which preceded his recognition of them, he was
probably employed in asking himself to what, in his experience of
tangible objects, these visible objects bore the greatest affinity. Now,
he was “well acquainted with mathematical figures by touch,” and had
therefore acquired a complete idea of a closed figure, and of the
boundary which incloses it—the outline separating object from
not-object. A relation similar to that between a tangible figure and its
boundary, exists between the visual periphery and the mass of colour it
incloses. This mere analogy might be sufficient to direct his choice,
when a visual object had at any rate to be identified with a tangible.
The grand difficulty was in discovering that any visual object was the
same with any tangible: but, this difficulty once surmounted by the
information of others, a small circumstance might give him a hint for
pairing the one class of objects with the other. In his familiarity, by
touch and the muscles, with (let us say) a triangular outline, he had
become aware of sudden and sharp bends in it, and knew that there were
three of these in the tangible periphery. There was the same number of
peculiar points in the visual outline, which might not spontaneously
have reminded him of the bends he knew by touch, but, if a choice had to
be made, were more analogous to them than anything in a circular
outline. Being required therefore to give to this object the name of
something tangible, he was naturally led to calling it a triangle. It is
by no means evident that if left entirely to himself, he would have
found out, except by gradual experience, that the phænomenon analogous
to extension, which he perceived by sight, was the extension which he
already knew by touch. I may add, that since we have from sight
distinctive sensations answering to the various figures, it is no more
than natural that these sensations, however unlike the tactual
sensations which they represent, should have relations among themselves,
resembling the mutual relations of those. wThe same explanation may
probably serve for the lad’s ability to distinguish by sight a vertical
line from a horizontal. He was probably told that one of them was
horizontal and the other vertical, and was only asked which was which;
and without further information we cannot tell what small circumstance
may have determined him to guess the one rather than the other.w To sum
up my view of Dr. Franz’s case, it does not prove that we perceive
extension by sight, but only that we have discriminative sensations of
sight, corresponding to all the diversities of superficial extension:
but, if rightly reported, it greatly widens the range of those
discriminative sensations, and almost shows that by sight alone we might
rise to the height of Reid’s Geometry of Visibles [see Reid’s Inquiry,
pp. 147-52].

t-t
67 denominations”—what?

u-u
+72

v-v
67 know what a drawing is

w-w
+72

*
The Senses and the Intellect, 2nd ed., pp. 376-7; 1st ed., p. 369. To
this passage, Mr. Bain has appended, in his second edition the following
instructive note:

“In following a wide ranging movement, or in expatiating over a large
prospect, we must move the eyes or the head; and probably every one
would allow that, in such a case, feelings of movement make a part of
our sensation and our subsequent idea. The notion of a mountain
evidently contains feelings of visual movement. But when we look at a
circle, say, one tenth of an inch in diameter, the eye can take in the
whole of it without movement, and we might suppose that the sensation
is, in that case, purely optical, there being no apparent necessity for
introducing the muscular consciousness. A characteristic optical
impression is produced; we should be able to discriminate between the
small circle and a square, or an oval, or between it and a somewhat
larger or somewhat smaller circle, from the mere optical difference of
the effect on the retina. Why then may we not say, that, through the
luminous tracing alone, we have the feeling of visible form?

By making an extreme supposition of this nature, it is possible to
remove the case from a direct experimental test. We may still, however,
see very strong grounds for maintaining the presence of a muscular
element even in this instance. In the first place, our notions of form
are manifestly obtained by working on the large scale, or by the survey
of objects of such magnitude as to demand the sweep of the eye, in order
to comprehend them. We lay the foundations of our knowledge of visible
outline in circumstances where the eye must be active, and must mix its
own activity with the retinal feelings. The idea of a circle is first
gained by moving the eye round some circular object of considerable
size. Having done this, we transfer the fact of motion to smaller
circles, although they would not of themselves demand an extensive
ocular sweep. So that when we look at a little round body, we are
already pre-occupied with the double nature of visible form, and are not
in a position to say how we should regard it, if that were our first
experience of a circle.

But, in the second place, the essential import of visible form is
something not attainable without the experience of moving the eye. If we
looked at a little round spot, we should know an optical difference
between it and a triangular spot, and we should recognise it as
identical with another round spot; but that is merely retinal knowledge,
or optical discrimination. That would not be to recognise form, because
by form we never mean so little as a mere change of colour. We mean by a
round form something that would take a given sweep of the eye to
comprehend it; and unless we identify the small spot with the circles
previously seen, we do not perceive it to be a circle. It may remain in
our mind as a purely optical meaning; but we can never cross the chasm
that separates an optical meaning from an effect combining light and
movement, in any other way than by bringing in an experience of
movement.” (Pp. 377n-8n.)

*
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D,] p. 861n.

x-x
651 the

[*]
See Bain, The Senses and the Intellect, 1st ed., p. 178; see also
McCosh, Examination, p. 153, where Bain’s view is discussed.

y-y
651 volume

[*]
See pp. 223-4 above.

[†]
Cheselden, p. 450.

*
I may here observe that Sir W. Hamilton (and the same mistake has been
made by Mr. Bailey [A Review of Berkeley’s Theory of Vision, pp.
166-83]) considers Cheselden’s case as evidence that the “perception of
externality,” as distinguished from that of distance from the eye, is
given by sight as well as by touch, because the young man said that
objects at first seemed “to touch his eyes, as what he felt did his
skin.” [Cheselden, p. 448.] He seems to think that, on the other theory,
the boy should have been metaphysician enough to recognise in the
perception “a mere affection of the organ,” or at least should have
perceived the objects “as if in his eyes.” (Foot-note to Reid, p. 177n.)
But he was not accustomed to conceive tangible objects as if in his
fingers. He conceived them as touching his fingers: and he simply
transferred the experience of touch to the newly-acquired sense. All his
notions of perception were associated with direct contact; and as he did
not perceive any of the objects of sight to be at a distance from the
organ by which he perceived them, he concluded that they must be in
contact with it.

zMr. Nunneley’s case, on this point, agrees with Cheselden’s. The boy
“said everything touched his eyes, and walked carefully about with his
hands held up before him, to prevent things hurting his eyes by touching
them.”z

z-z
+67, 72

[*]
See Marie François Pierre Gonthier Maine de Biran, Nouvelles
Considérations sur les rapports du physique et du moral de l’homme, ed.
Victor Cousin (Paris: Ladrange, 1834), pp. 96-7.

[†]
Rey Régis was a pseudonym for Cazillac; the reference is to his Histoire
naturelle et raisonnée de l’âme, 2 vols. (London [Lyons], 1789), Vol. I,
p. 27.

*
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D,] p. 875n.

[‡]
See pp. 222-3 above.

a
651, 652 fully

†
[67] Dr. M‘Cosh says: “This case is valueless, as evidently the
functions of the nervous apparatus were deranged.” ([Examination,] p.
151n.) I am far from pretending that this single experiment is
conclusive; but I can as little admit that it ought to count for
nothing. The functions of the motor nerves were deranged; but no
derangement appears to have been remarked in those of the nerves of
sensation; unless, by a petitio principii, the incapacity of localizing
the sensations is considered to prove it. We cannot indeed prove that
those nerves were not also in a morbid state: but pathological cases,
which are admitted to be the nearest equivalents in physiology to
experiments in inorganic science, would lose all their scientific value
if it could be assumed without evidence that the disease extended to
other functions than those in which it was observed. Even if a physical
derangement were proved, one not unimportant point would have been
ascertained by the experiment—that a morbid affection may take away the
power of localizing sensations, without taking away the sensations.
Localization, therefore, does not depend on the same conditions with the
sensations themselves, still less is it inseparably involved in them.

*
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D*,] pp. 881-2.

*
Ibid., [Note D,] p. 842.

b-b
651 these

c-c
249+67, 72

*
[67] Mahaffy, pp. xviii-xx. [The first square brackets are Mill’s.
Mahaffy quotes from Bain, The Senses and the Intellect, 1st ed., pp.
113-17 (the same passage Mill quotes, pp. 216-19 above).]

*
[67] The Senses and the Intellect, p. 203 (2nd ed.).

†
[67] With regard to Mr. Abbott’s difficulties, the following is a
specimen of them: “Let us suppose a blind man trying to get the notion
of distance from the motion of his hand. He finds a certain sweep of the
hand brings it into contact with a desk; the distance of which,
therefore, is represented by that effort. But it requires a greater
effort to reach the eyes or the nose; and distance being = locomotive
effort, it is demonstrated that the nose extends beyond the desk. The
top of the head must be conceived as more remote, and the back farthest
of all.” [Sight and Touch, p. 70.] Mr. Abbott seems to suppose that a
blind man’s permanent impression of the distance of objects from him,
will be derived from his very first experiment; and denies him the
common privilege belonging to all experience, of correcting and
completing itself. If the nose is really nearer to his hand than the
desk, will he not soon find a way of reaching the nearer object with
less locomotive effort than the more distant? If it be said, that this
can only be done by bending his arm, and that flexure of the arm is
attended with more sense of effort than protension of it, the answer is
that even if this were true, the effort is of a different kind; and the
blind man would speedily distinguish between the two, and would learn
that objects reached by his bended arm are nearer to his body, by all
the other tests of proximity, than those which can only be reached with
the arm extended. Dr. M‘Cosh falls into a fallacy of the same kind
([Examination,] p. 135.)

Mr. Abbott’s book, a repetition of the attack made by Mr. Bailey on
Berkeley’s Theory of Vision, has sufficient ability to require an answer
by itself, had not this been effectually done by Professor Fraser in an
elaborate and able paper [“Berkeley’s Theory of Vision”] in the North
British Review for August, 1864, which I trust will eventually be
reprinted in a more permanent form.

*
[67] The writer in Blackwood thinks it absurd that the measure should
“measure itself” ([Smith,] p. 32)—that muscular sensation, as a measure
of distance, should be employed in measuring muscular sensation. But are
not quantities usually measured by quantities of the same kind? A foot
rule measures length by its own length. A bushel measures solid contents
by its own contents. The tickings of a clock measure other successions
by their own succession. A weight measures other weights by itself.

†
[67] Ibid., pp. 26-7.

*
[67] If distance and direction are explicable in the way I have pointed
out, place and position follow by obvious consequence. If once it be
admitted that impressions of touch can be cognised as at once
simultaneous and separated by a series of muscular feelings, i.e. at
once distant and simultaneous, and that this amounts to cognising them
as in space; the position of these impressions among one another, which
constitutes their place, will easily result from the different
quantities of muscular sensation required for passing from one to the
other, combined with the distinctive qualities of the muscular sensation
dependent on what we call difference in the direction of the motion.

†
[67] The Senses and the Intellect, 2nd ed., pp. 397-8.

*
[67] M‘Cosh, [Examination,] p. 150.

†
[67] Dr. M‘Cosh says (same page) “It is hard to believe that the
instantaneous voluntary drawing back of a limb when wounded, and the
shrinking of the frame when boiling liquid is poured down the throat,
can proceed from an application of an observed law as to the seat of
sensations.” The obvious solution of this difficulty is, that both the
drawing back and the shrinking, when they take place in an extremely
young infant, are purely automatic; a reflex action, produced, without
the intervention of the will, by the irritation of the motor nerves: a
solution quite conformable to physiology.

‡
[67] Ibid., p. 148. [McCosh is quoting Johannes Peter Müller, Elements
of Physiology, trans. William Baly (London: Taylor and Walton, 1837), p.
695n.]

*
[67] Ibid., p. 149. [Quoted from Müller, p. 697.]

[*]
McCosh, Examination, pp. 167-8, translating from Wilhelm Wundt, Beiträge
zur Theorie der Sinneswahrnehmung (Leipzig and Heidelberg: Winter’sche
Verlagshandlung, 1862), p. 60.

d-d
249+72

[†]
See Gabriel Gustav Valentin, “Ueber die subjectiven Gefühle von
Personen, welche mit mangelhaften Extremitäten geboren sind,”
Repertorium für Anatomie und Physiologie, I (1836-37), 328-37, esp. 330;
McCosh (“Mill’s Reply,” pp. 351-2) takes the reference from an addition
by William Baly to Müller’s text, p. 696.

*
[72] [McCosh, “Mill’s Reply,” pp. 352-3, who takes the passage from
Arthur Schopenhauer,] Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung [2 vols.
(Leipzig; Brockhaus)], ed. 1844, Vol. II, p. 40. [Schopenhauer takes the
case from A. Heuck, “Bemerkungen über ein vierzehnjähriges Mädchen ohne
Extremitäten,” Neue Notizen aus dem Gebiete der Natur- und Heilkunde
(ed. Ludwig Friedrich von Froriep and Robert Froriep), VII (July, 1838),
cols. 1-5.

*
As lately as the year 1864 has been published the first work (I believe)
in the French language, which recognises the Association Psychology in
its modern developments: an able and instructive Etude sur l’Association
des Idées [Paris: Durand, 1864], by M. P. M. Mervoyer. aSince then, the
excellent introductory discourses prefixed by M. Cazelles to his
translations from the English psychologists [see, e.g., “Introduction du
traducteur,” in Herbert Spencer, Les premiers principes, 3rd ed. (Paris:
Germer Baillière, 1883), pp. i-lxxx], and the remarkable work of M.
Taine, De l’Intelligence [2 vols., Paris: Hachette, 1870], have, it is
to be hoped, permanently naturalized the Association Psychology among
French thinkers and students.a

a-a
+72

*
In this Dissertation [D***], which originally broke off abruptly, but
the conclusion of which has recently been supplied from the author’s
papers, he attempts to simplify the theory of Association; reducing
Association by Resemblance, not indeed to Association by Contiguity, but
to that combined with an elementary law, for the first time expressly
laid down by Sir W. Hamilton, though implied in all Association and in
all Memory: viz., that a present sensation or thought suggests the
remembrance of what he calls the same sensation or thought (meaning one
exactly similar) experienced at a former time. This leaves Resemblance
of simple sensations as a distinct principle of association, the
foundation of all the rest, while it resolves resemblance of complex
phenomena into that simple principle combined with the law of
Contiguity.

By virtue of this speculation. Sir W. Hamilton thinks it possible to
reduce Association to a single law: “Those thoughts suggest each other,
which had previously constituted parts of the same entire or total act
of cognition.” (Lectures, Vol. II, p. 238, and the corresponding
passages of the Dissertation [see, e.g., p. 912].) This appears to me, I
confess, far from a happy effort of generalization; for there is no
possibility of bringing under it the elementary case of suggestion,
which our author has the merit of being the first to put into scientific
language. The sweet taste of to-day, and the similar sweet taste of a
week ago which it reminds me of, have not “previously constituted parts
of the same act of cognition;” unless we take literally the expression
by which they are spoken of as the same taste, though they are no more
the same taste than two men are the same man if they happen to be
exactly alike. It is a further objection, that the attempted
simplification, even if otherwise correct, would merely unite two clear
notions into one obscure one; for the notion of feelings which suggest
one another because they resemble, or because they have been experienced
together, is universally intelligible, while that of forming parts of
the same act of cognition involves all the metaphysical difficulties
which surround the ideas of Unity, Totality, and Parts.

After thus, as he fancies, reducing all the phænomena of Association to
a single law, Sir W. Hamilton asks, how is this law itself explained?
and justly observes that it may be an ultimate law, and that ultimate
laws are necessarily unexplainable. But he nevertheless quotes, with
some approbation, an attempt by a German writer, H. Schmid, to explain
it by an à priori theory of the human mind, which may be recommended to
notice as a choice specimen of a school of German metaphysicians who
have remained several centuries behind the progress of philosophical
enquiry, having never yet felt the influence of the Baconian reform. See
Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 240-3 [and Heinrich Schmid, Versuch einer
Metaphysik der inneren Natur (Leipzig: Brockhaus, 1834), pp. 242-4].

b-b
651, 652 contrary?

*
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 144.

*
Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, Vol. I, pp. 68-73. [Quoted
by Hamilton, Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 146-9.]

†
Ibid., p. 75. [Not quoted by Hamilton.]

c-c
651, 652 to

[*]
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 146.

*
Ibid., pp. 168-72.

†
According to the doctrine of all advanced psychologists, to which Sir W.
Hamilton gives an express adhesion, it is impossible to have a
consciousness of darkness without having had a consciousness of light.
Besides, it is a notorious optical fact that a completely black object
occupying the whole sphere of vision is invisible; it reflects no light.
Blackness, therefore, (the complete blackness of absolute darkness,) is
not a sensation, but the total absence of sensation; it is, in fact,
nothing at all; and to say that a person born blind cannot imagine
extension without clothing it with nothing at all, is to assert
something not very intelligible. In the case of a person who has become
blind, it might have a meaning; for blackness to him, like darkness to
us, does not stand for mere inability to see, but for the usual effort
to see, not followed by the usual consequence.

[†]
Dugald Stewart, Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind, 3 vols.,
Vol. I (London: Strahan and Cadell; Edinburgh: Creech, 1792), p. 341;
quoted by Hamilton, Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 161-2.

*
[72] In one of the unfinished dissertations left among his papers, and
intended for his edition of Reid (in which it now stands as Note E) Sir
W. Hamilton did attempt to disprove the doctrine that our incapacity to
conceive colour without extension is an effect of association. His
arguments (pp. 919, 920), are first, that of D’Alembert (discussed in a
former chapter), that when two colours meet we must be conscious of the
line which separates them; and the junction, therefore, of two colours
cannot be conceived apart from extension. But suppose that we are only
perceiving a single colour, which occupies the whole field of vision:
our invariably seeing this as extended cannot be explained by something
which only happens when we see two colours; unless the impression
received from the two adheres to the one by association. Sir W.
Hamilton, therefore, is reduced to say that the field of vision “has a
right and a left, an upper and an under side, and may be divided into
halves, quarters, &c., indefinitely,” an argument which begs the
question, since it assumes that the homogeneously coloured field is
already perceived as composed of parts, that is, as extended.

Sir W. Hamilton’s other argument is that “we cannot be conscious of a
colour without being conscious of that colour in contrast to, and
therefore out of, another colour,—without, therefore, being conscious of
the extended.” This seems an assumption without grounds. If a single
colour occupies the whole field of vision, it can surely be recognised
as colour. The contrast, which is essential to consciousness, needs not
be between one colour and another; it may be between colour and the
absence of sensation, or between colour and a sensation of some other
sense. I am supposing the sensation of colour to be intermittent; for if
it were constant, I admit that it would cease to be felt at all.

The converse incapacity to conceive extension without colour, Sir W.
Hamilton deals with very summarily (p. 917), by saying that there is no
object of vision, either actual or conceivable, which is not coloured.
This is the very explanation given by the Association theory. All
objects of vision are coloured, counting black as a colour, which, when
it stands in contrast with positive colours, we may legitimately do; by
the laws of Association, therefore, what is always seen as coloured is
always conceived as coloured. In combating, as he thinks, the
Association theory, Sir W. Hamilton is obliged to have recourse to it.

[*]
See Francis Bacon, Novum Organum, in Works, ed. James Spedding, Robert
Leslie Ellis, and Douglas Denon Heath, 14 vols. (London: Longman, et
al., 1857-74), Vol. I, p. 205 (Bk. I, Aph. 104).

*
Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 149-50. Those who are acquainted with Mr.
Bailey’s attempt to disprove Berkeley’s Theory of Vision, will be
reminded by this passage of an exactly similar argument employed by that
able thinker and writer, to prove the intuitive character of what
philosophers almost unanimously consider as the acquired perceptions of
sight. [See Bailey, A Review of Berkeley’s Theory of Vision, pp.
105-17.] I have given the same answer to Mr. Bailey on another occasion,
which I give to Sir W. Hamilton here. [See Mill, “Bailey on Berkeley’s
Theory of Vision,” in Essays on Philosophy and the Classics, Collected
Works, Vol. XI, pp. 257 ff.]

[*]
See p. 211 above.

*
See his Inquiry into the Human Mind, Chap. v, §§ 2 and 8; Chap. vi, §§
2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 19; Intellectual Powers, Essay II, Chaps. xvi and xvii.

d-d
651, 652, 67 and a more . . . discourse;

[*]
See Analysis, Vol. I, pp. 40-82 (Chaps. ii-iii).

*
Discussions, Appendix I[A] on Causality, p. 615.

e-e
+72

f-f
+72

[*]
Ibid.

†
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 191.

‡
Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 74.

§
Discussions, [App. I(A),] p. 615.

[†]
See Kritik der Reinen Vernunft, p. 462.

*
[72] Dr. Ward ([“Mr. Mill’s Denial of Necessary Truth,”] p. 291) takes
exception to these instances, as exemplifying not a necessity of thought
but a necessity of feeling—which has never been affirmed to prove an
objective law, or an à priori connexion between ideas. I answer that
what I sought to prove by the instances, was that two ideas may be “so
knit together by association as to be practically inseparable.” And I
added, not that a necessity of feeling proves a necessity of thought,
but that under certain conditions it would generate one. If the person
in whose mind a given spot is associated with terrors, had entirely
forgotten the fact by which it came to be so; and if the rest of
mankind, or even only a great number of them, felt the same terror on
coming to the same place, and were equally unable to account for it;
there would certainly grow up a conviction that the place had a natural
quality of terribleness, which would probably fix itself in the belief
that the place was under a curse, or was the abode of some invisible
object of terror. Feelings common to many persons, which are at once
irresistible and unaccountable, almost always pass into equivalent
judgments and beliefs. Indeed, this is the precise way in which the fact
of our sensations is translated into belief in an external world; and we
should, in the case supposed, seem to have the same evidence of the
terrific quality, which we have of any of the qualities of objects.

†
[67] I find it necessary here to correct a misunderstanding to which I
never should have suspected myself to be liable. Dr. M‘Cosh employs
nearly the whole of his ninth chapter (Judgment or Comparison) in
protesting against the doctrine, that an inseparable association
necessarily produces belief; and concludes with a solemn appeal to the
young to raise themselves above the influence of mere association, and
learn “that it is our duty to found our beliefs on a previous judgment”
and “to base our beliefs on an inspection of realities and actualities.”
([Examination,] pp. 214-15.) In all of which, aimed as it is at myself,
Dr. M‘Cosh is preaching not only to a person already converted, but to
an actual missionary of the same doctrine. I have certainly called
attention [see pp. 75 and 145n above] to the important psychological
truth, not unrecognised by Dr. M‘Cosh, that a strong mental association
between two facts, even short of inseparability, has a great tendency to
make us believe in a connexion between the facts themselves; but I
thought that if there ever had been a writer who was assiduous in
warning people against this tendency (to which, in my Logic [Collected
Works, Vol. VIII, pp. 750ff. (Bk. V, Chap. iii, §3)], I have given a
conspicuous place in the enumeration of Fallacies) and exhorting them to
ground their beliefs exclusively on the evidence, that writer was
myself. Dr. M‘Cosh’s work is unimpeachable in point of candour and
fairness; but this instance shows how little he is to be relied on for
correctly apprehending the maxims and tendencies of a philosophy
different from his own.

gDr. M‘Cosh, in his reply, interprets the phraseology of this Note as if
I had accused him of “preaching” in some disparaging sense. [“Mill’s
Reply,” p. 356.] I was merely alluding to the almost proverbial
expression, “prêcher un converti,” which I thought that Dr. M‘Cosh would
have understood. [Cf. I Corinthians, 1:21.]g

g-g
+72

[*]
See p. 91 above.

*
Prolegomena Logica, beginning of Chap. iv, pp. 90-1.

h-h
651 what are

*
Ibid., pp. 96-7.

†
[67] Mr. Mahaffy has misunderstood the meaning of this statement, which
is certainly too incautiously expressed. (P. xxiv.) The phænomena which
must have been simultaneous or immediately successive to create an
inseparable association, need not have been actual perceptions: an
association, and even an inseparable association, may be created between
two ideas, if they have been habitually present together, or in
immediate succession, merely in thought. This truth is so universally
recognised by writers on Association, that it did not seem to require
statement. But the succession which generates an inseparable
association, must, either in fact or in thought, be an immediate
succession; or rather, one without any conscious or perceptible
interval.

[*]
Prolegomena Logica, p. 97.

*
[67] In an able manuscript critique on “the Experience Hypothesis” which
has been communicated to me, the familiar truth that fire burns is given
as an example of an uniform sequence which does not generate a necessity
of thought. No one (the writer observes) will say that we have a more
frequent perception of the fact that parallel lines do not inclose a
space, than we have of the fact that fire burns: yet we can without
difficulty imagine human beings remaining unburnt in a fiery furnace;
nay, we may even believe it, if we admit the supposition either of magic
or of a miracle. No doubt: but this is fully explained by the
counter-associations. Though we have never seen a human being in the
fire unburnt, being in the fire is not inseparably associated with
destruction, for we have seen abundance of other objects, immersed in
intense fire, yet resisting its action. The conception of a man in the
same position, is within the limits of the power characteristic of
imagination, of varying (only slightly in this instance) our mental
combinations of the elements given by experience. The writer asks, why
then cannot imagination produce all combinations? The only ones it
cannot produce are precisely those which are prevented by associations
really irresistible, associations that have never been counteracted by
counter-associations, and by the operation of which, elements with which
certain combinations in imagination would be incompatible, are forced
into our mental representations.

The same writer says, we believe by a necessity of thought that a
tangent touches a circle at one point only, yet this necessary belief,
far from being the result of uniform experience, is contradicted by
uniform experience, since the tangents and circles of experience touch
one another at more than one point—coalesce in an appreciable portion of
their extent. I answer, that the circle in our imagination is copied
from those only, among the circles of our experience, in which sense can
detect no variation from the definition of a circle, i.e. whose radii
are not perceptibly unequal. Now, if the radii are, to our perception,
equal, a line which is to our perception straight, will touch the circle
in what is to our perception a single point. And there are many such
circles, not perhaps in nature, but certainly in the products of
mechanical art. The belief therefore does not conflict, but accords,
with an uniform experience. And even on the contrary supposition—even if
there were no circles in experience but such as are appreciably
different from the geometrical ideal, our senses would no less inform us
that in the degree in which a visible circle and straight line
approximate to the definitions, the extent of their contact with one
another approximates to a point: which, by the principles of Induction,
makes the ultimate truth as much a truth of experience, as if it were
directly cognised by the senses.

*
Prolegomena Logica, pp. 99-100.

i-i
+67, 72

[*]
Stephen; see above, p. 72n.

*
[67] Mr. Mahaffy says that I need not have gone beyond our present world
for illusions which, according to my doctrine, ought to have made it
possible to conceive something that is contradictory to a mathematical
axiom: and proceeds to mention illusions the illusory character of which
is at once seen, from the immediate accessibility of the evidence which
disproves them; double vision, and the apparent crookedness of a stick
in the water. As a protection against future irrelevances of this kind,
I have inserted in the text the word “persistent” before “illusion.”
[Seei-i above.] Mr. Mahaffy argues as if the illusions in our experience
never got corrected by contrary experience, but would permanently
deceive us unless overridden by an à priori conviction. “Every child,”
he says, “who looks down a long street, sees two parallel right lines
converging, and we very rarely proceed to verify or question the result.
. . . Most assuredly no child has verified for himself that the very
long parallel lines which he has met, and sees to be equidistant, as far
as he can easily judge, and which he sees do not change their direction
suddenly—that these parallel lines do not meet.” (Pp. xxvii-xxviii.)
Does a child, then, never walk down a street? or does Mr. Mahaffy think
it necessary to the child’s enlightenment that he should walk down every
street?

†
Prolegomena Logica, p. 112n.

*
Ibid., pp. 149-50.

†
Ibid., p. 150.

j-j
271+72

[*]
“Mr. Mill’s Denial of Necessary Truth,” pp. 288-9.

[†]
Cf. Alexander Bain, Logic, 2 pts. (London: Longmans, Green, Reader, and
Dyer, 1870), Pt. II, pp. 168-70.

*
[72] The belief, however, when grounded on the conception without a
fresh appeal to experience—when got at, as Dr. Ward expresses it [p.
299], not by observation of external nature, but of our own mind—is only
justified exactly so far as we are entitled to assume that the
conception in our mind represents the facts of outward experience. Only
if space itself is everywhere what we conceive it to be, can our
conclusions from the conception be everywhere objectively true. The
truths of geometry are valid wherever the constitution of space agrees
with what it is within our means of observation. That space cannot
anywhere be differently constituted, or that almighty power could not
make a different constitution of it, we know not. This may serve as an
answer to some other remarks of Dr. Ward (pp. 301-3), to which it would
tax the reader’s patience too much to give a fuller reply.

*
[72] [Ward,] p. 290.

[*]
See pp. 261n-2n above, and the section of Mill’s Logic there cited.

†
[72] [McCosh,] Examination of Mr. J. S. Mill’s Philosophy, pp. 43-4.

*
[72] [Ward,] p. 292.

†
[72] Ibid., pp. 298-9.

[*]
Ibid., p. 298.

*
[72] Ibid., p. 302. [The reference to Mill’s Logic is to Bk. II, Chap.
v, §5, Collected Works, Vol. VII, p. 234.]

[*]
See System of Logic, Bk. II, Chap. vi, §2, Collected Works, Vol. VII,
pp. 255-6.

*
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 338.

a-a
651, 652, 67 isolated expressions

†
[72] “Every act of mind is an act of consciousness” (ibid., Vol. II, p.
277). Another statement to the same effect which I erroneously quoted in
former editions (ibid., p. 73) does not belong to Sir W. Hamilton. [See
272b below.]

b
651, 652, 67 The following is one: “Every act of mind is an act of
consciousness.”† [footnote:] †Ibid., Vol. II, p. 277. [text:] Here is
another:‡ [footnote:] ‡Ibid., p. 73. [text:] “We must say of all our
states of mind, whatever they may be, that it” (a state of mind) “can be
nothing else than it is felt to be. Its very essence consists in being
felt; and when it is not felt, it is not.”

*
Ibid., Vol. I, p. 339.

†
Sir W. Hamilton deliberately rejects this obvious distinction, and in
his Lecture on Memory (Lect. xxx) maintains that all the knowledge we
possess, whether we are thinking of it or not, is at all times present
to us, though unconsciously. “This is certainly,” (he says) “an
hypothesis, because whatever is out of consciousness can only be
assumed; but it is an hypothesis which we are not only warranted, but
necessitated by the phænomena, to establish.” (Ibid., Vol. II, p. 209.)
This confident assertion is supported only by a passage from an author
of whom the reader has already heard something, H. Schmid (Versuch einer
Metaphysik); by whom, however, the conclusion is not elicited from “the
phænomena,” but drawn, à priori, from the assertion that the act of
knowledge is “an energy of the self-active powers of a subject one and
indivisible; consequently a part of the ego must be detached or
annihilated if a cognition once existent be again extinguished.” [Ibid.,
pp. 211-12.] This palpable begging of the whole point in dispute (which
Schmid makes no scruple of propping up by half-a-dozen other arbitrary
assumptions) of course makes it necessary to explain how anything can be
forgotten; which Schmid resolves by declaring that nothing ever is; it
merely passes into latency. Of all this, not a shadow of evidence is
exhibited; anything being set down as fact, which can be educed from the
idea of the Ego evolved by Schmid out of the depths of his moral
consciousness. His style of philosophizing may be judged from the
following specimen: “Every mental activity belongs to the one vital
activity of mind in general; it is, therefore, indivisibly bound up with
it, and can neither be torn from, nor abolished in it.” [Ibid., p. 213.]
Therefore he has only to call every impression in memory a “mental
activity” to prove that when we have once had it, we can never more get
rid of it. If he had but happened to call it a mental act, it would have
been all over with his argument; for there may surely be passing acts of
one permanent activity. Schmid further argues, from the same premises,
that feelings, volitions, and desires, are retained in the mind without
the medium of memory, that is, we retain the states themselves, not the
notions or remembrances of them: from which it follows, that I am at
this moment desiring and willing to rise from my bed yesterday morning,
and every previous morning since I began to have a will. Schmid has an
easy answer to all attempts at explaining mental phænomena by
physiological hypotheses, viz., that “Mind, howbeit conditioned by
bodily relations, still ever preserves its self-activity and
independence.” [Ibid., p. 218.] As if to determine whether it does so or
not, was not the very point in dispute between him and the physiological
hypotheses. These reasonings are quite worthy of Schmid; but it is
extremely unworthy of Sir W. Hamilton to accept and endorse them.

*
Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 339-40.

*
Ibid., pp. 347, 348, 349.

†
Ibid., p. 350.

‡
Ibid., p. 351.

*
“In the internal perception of a series of mental operations, a certain
time, a certain duration, is necessary for the smallest section of
continuous energy to which consciousness is competent. Some minimum of
time must be admitted as the condition of consciousness.” (Ibid., p.
369.) And again: “It cannot certainly be said, that the minimum of
sensation infers the maximum of perception; for perception always
supposes a certain quantum of sensation.” (Ibid., Vol. II, p. 102.)

*
Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 352-3.

*
Ibid., p. 355.

c-c
651, 652 may

[*]
See Stewart, Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind, Vol. I, pp.
103-31.

[†]
See David Hartley, Observations on Man, his Frame, his Duty, and his
Expectations, 2 pts. (Bath: Leake and Frederick; London: Hitch and
Austen, 1749), Vol. I, pp. 108-9.

d-d
651, 652, 67 it is not certain that Hartley meant anything at variance
with Stewart’s theory

†
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 354.

‡
Ibid., p. 355.

*
Ibid., p. 368-9.

e-e
651 the

f-f
651, 652 at all

g-g
+652, 67, 72

*
Ibid., p. 360.

†
Ibid., pp. 238-54.

[*]
Ibid., p. 360.

*
Ibid., p. 254.

[*]
Jean-Jacques Séverin de Cardaillac, Etudes élémentaires de philosophie,
2 vols. (Paris: Firmin-Didot, 1830), Vol. II, pp. 137-8.

†
Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 250-8. From this long exposition I shall only
extract a single passage, but I recommend the whole of it to the
attentive consideration of readers.

“Thus, if we appreciate correctly the phænomena of Reproduction or
Reminiscence, we shall recognise, as an incontestable fact, that our
thoughts suggest each other not one by one successively, as the order to
which language is astricted might lead us to infer; but that the
complement of circumstances under which we at every moment exist,
awakens simultaneously a great number of thoughts; these it calls into
the presence of the mind, either to place them at our disposal, if we
find it requisite to employ them, or to make them co-operate in our
deliberations, by giving them, according to our nature and our habits,
an influence, more or less active, on our judgments and consequent
acts.” (P. 258.)

‡
Ibid., Vol. I, p. 237.

[†]
Ibid., p. 360.

[‡]
See Plutarch, Life of Cæsar, in Lives (Greek and English), trans.
Bernadotte Perrin, 11 vols. (London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons,
1919), Vol. VII, p. 484 (XVII, §4).

*
Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, Vol. I, p. 33.

[*]
Hamilton, Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 147-9; James Mill, Analysis, Vol. I, p.
68; Hartley, Observations on Man, Vol. I, p. 9.

*
[67] These considerations may serve as an answer to Dr. M‘Cosh, when he
maintains, with many other of the intuitive philosophers, that
association cannot generate a mental state specifically distinct from
the elements out of which it is composed; which amounts to a denial of
the possibility of mental chemistry. [Examination, pp. 182-4.] I had
thought that such an experiment as that of the wheel with the seven
colours, in which seven sensations, following one another very rapidly,
become, or at least generate, one sensation, and that one totally
different from any of the seven, sufficiently proved the possibility of
what Dr. M‘Cosh denies; but he writes as if he had never heard of that
experiment. “I can discover,” he says, “no evidence that two sensations
succeeding one another will ever be anything else than two sensations.”
(Ibid., p. 185.) The analogous facts in the case of ideas cannot be
appealed to, for they are the very matter disputed; but there is
abundance of similar instances in sensation. Dropping succession of
colours, let Dr. M‘Cosh look at an ordinary wheel revolving with the
rapidity which is often seen in machinery, and he will have a sensation
which is not one of rotatory motion at all, but a dizzy spectrum
apparently stationary, with the exception of a slight degree of
tremulous movement.

hDr. M‘Cosh, in his reply, says he was perfectly aware of the
experiments of the luminous ring and the wheel with the seven colours.
He does not seem to have known of the other fact which I mentioned, that
a wheel may be in such rapid rotation as to seem stationary; for he
offers instead of it “a wheel in rapid motion appearing stationary when
made visible by instantaneous electric light,” of which he gives the
true explanation that, seeing the wheel only for the instant, we do not
really see it move. [“Mill’s Reply,” p. 354.] The wheel in my example is
rotating in broad daylight.

But these examples of mental chemistry, being taken from sensation, are
(says Dr. M‘Cosh) merely organic. He requires me to produce examples
from purely mental affections. And how do we know that our mental
affections are not also organic, having for their immediate antecedents
states of the nerves and brain? This is not only possible, but the
progress of science has rendered it almost certain, even to those who
are far from being Materialists in the ordinary sense of the term. There
are, however, abundant proofs that association can generate new mental
affections. Let us take, as one of the obvious examples, the love of
money. Does any one think that money has intrinsically, by its own
nature, any more value to us than the first shining pebbles we pick up,
except for the things it will purchase? Yet its association with these
things not only makes it desired for itself, but creates in many minds a
passionate love of it, far surpassing the desire they feel for any of
the uses to which it can be put. Not only the love of money, but the
love of acquisition, of possession, of accumulation, is a feeling
created by association. What is desired for itself is the use and
enjoyment of individual objects: the possession of a store of them is at
first desired as a means to that; but after it has been long pursued as
a means, it becomes itself an end—the object of the passion of
appropriation, or property, a passion sui generis, and (as life has
hitherto been carried on) one of the principal moving powers in human
affairs. These, Dr. M‘Cosh may say, are feelings, and what I want is
intellectual states; I desiderate examples of “the power of association
to generate new ideas, and to produce belief.” [Ibid., p. 353.] As an
example, then, of new ideas, take the idea of infinity. Infinity is not
a fact of intuition, nor of consciousness. We do not perceive space (for
example) to be infinite. But every object we see or touch, and every
portion of space that we cognise, is cognised along with something
beyond it. We hence become incapable of conceiving any object or space
without something beyond; that is, we conceive space as infinite. And
along with this new idea a belief is generated; for it has been, and is,
the general belief of mankind, without any other evidence of it, that
space is actually infinite. As a further example of a belief generated
by association, take the acquired perceptions of sight. On the lowest
estimate of these which is made by any psychologist, we spontaneously
believe that we see much which we only infer: the ideas of the inferred
facts are so blended by the power of association with the sensations
which suggest them, that the ideas are confounded with sensations, and
believed to be direct perceptions of sight.h

h-h
+72

[*]
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 376.

a-a
651 has

*
When I say no one else, I ought perhaps to except Krug, from whom in
another place our author quotes a sentence, containing at least the germ
of his own theory. (Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 135. [See Wilhelm Traugott Krug,
Logik, 2nd ed. (Königsberg: Unzer, 1819), §148.])

[†]
Persius, Satires, in Juvenal and Persius (Latin and English), trans. G.
G. Ramsay (London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1920), p. 352
(III, 84).

[*]
Ovid, Metamorphoses (Latin and English), trans. Frank Justus Miller, 2
vols. (London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1916), Vol. II, p.
376 (XV, 165).

*
Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 377-8.

†
Ibid., p. 397.

*
Ibid., pp. 405-6.

b-b
651 coals

[*]
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 377; cf. p. 286 above.

[*]
See, e.g., ibid., p. 404.

*
The curious notion that potential existence is tantamount to actual
reappears in the Appendix to the Discussions. “The creation a Nihilo
means only, that the universe, when created, was not merely put into
form, an original chaos, or complement of brute matter, having preceded
a plastic energy of intelligence; but that the universe was called into
actuality from potential existence by the Divine fiat. The Divine fiat
therefore was the proximate cause of the creation; and the Deity,
containing the cause, contained, potentially, the effect.” ([App. I(A),]
p. 620n.)

It is so frequent in our author’s writings to find doctrines of a very
decided character laid down in one page, and implicitly or even directly
denied in another, that so strange a doctrine as the one in question
could not be expected to escape that fate. Accordingly, in [App. II(B)]
p. 703 of the same volume, “the Potential” is defined to be, “what is
not at this, but may be at another time.” If so, the universe, when it
only existed potentially, was not: and did not count as part of the
“complement” of present existence.

c-c
651, 652 form

*
Lectures, Vol. II, Appendix [iv] on Causation, p. 538.

†
Ibid., Vol. II, p. 384.

‡
Ibid., Vol. I, p. 59.

*
Ibid., p. 97.

†
Ibid., Vol. II, p. 540.

‡
Ibid., Vol. I, p. 59.

d-d
651, 652 affinities

§
Ibid., p. 97.

¶
On the same shoal is stranded an argument appended to the same
discussion, which our author seems to think of considerable value in the
establishment of a First Cause. The progress from cause to effect, he
says, is from the simpler to the more complex. “The lower we descend in
the series of causes, the more complex will be the product; the higher
we ascend, it will be the more simple.” To prove this, he appeals to his
example, the composition of a salt. (Ibid., pp. 59-60.) Now, the salt is
indeed more complex than either of its chemical ingredients, the acid
and the alkali; but need it be, or is it, more complex than the
remaining “co-efficient,” the human hand, or whatever power, natural or
artificial, brings the acid and alkali together? The event which causes,
may be in any degree whatever a more complex fact, than the event which
is caused by it.

eProfessor Bain (Logic, Pt. II, p. 36) considers Sir W. Hamilton’s
theory of Causation to be an anticipation of the scientific doctrine of
the Conservation of Force. There is, doubtless, some analogy between
them, but they seem to me radically different. Force is the principle of
Change, and is, therefore, really the leading ingredient in causation:
but the conservation in Sir W. Hamilton’s theory is conservation of the
element which has nothing to do with change. It is only equivalent to
the old established fact of the unchangeableness in the quantity of
Matter, in other words, of Resistance.e

e-e
+72

*
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 60. [The words in square brackets are Mill’s.]

*
[72] It has been suggested to me by a correspondent to whom I have more
than once adverted, as an explanation of Sir W. Hamilton’s conflicting
language respecting conceivability as a test of truth, that he probably
distinguished between what may be termed unilateral and bilateral
inconceivableness. I state the distinction in the words of my able
correspondent. “Bilateral inconceivableness is no test of truth, for the
obvious reason that it applies equally to two contradictory
propositions. But Hamilton thought unilateral inconceivableness—an
inconceivableness limited to one side of a question only—a proof of a
positive deliverance of consciousness on the other side. Hamilton
therefore frequently employs the principle that what is unilaterally
inconceivable must be false, while he invariably denies that bilateral
inconceivableness is any test of falsehood.”

Sir W. Hamilton may have had some such distinction in his mind, though
if he had, it would not have been going out of his way to have stated
it, instead of constantly enunciating the doctrine that things
inconceivable to us may be true, in language which recognises no
difference between the two cases. But the distinction, if he made it, is
of no service to him. If it is possible for anything to be true which is
inconceivable to us, the inconceivability of a supposition cannot be a
deliverance of consciousness against it. On the contrary, the fact that
both sides of an alternative which has no third side may be
inconceivable, is a reductio ad absurdum of the opinion that
inconceivability is an evidence of falsehood.

[*]
See p. 261 above.

[†]
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 396.

*
Ibid., p. 397.

*
Ibid., pp. 391-2. The same argument is restated in the “Dissertations on
Reid” with some additional development. “Volition to move a limb, and
the actual moving of it, are the first and last in a series of more than
two successive events, and cannot, therefore, stand to each other,
immediately, in the relation of cause and effect. They may, however,
stand to each other in the relation of cause and effect, mediately. But
then, if they can be known in consciousness as thus mediately related,
it is a necessary condition of such knowledge, that the intervening
series of causes and effects, through which the final movement of the
limb is supposed to be mediately dependent on the primary volition to
move, should be known to consciousness immediately under that relation.
But this intermediate, this connecting series is confessedly unknown to
consciousness at all, far less as a series of causes and effects. It
follows therefore à fortiori, that the dependency of the last on the
first of these events, as of an effect upon its cause, must be to
consciousness unknown. In other words: having no consciousness that the
volition to move is the efficacious force (power) by which even the
event immediately consequent on it (say the transmission of the nervous
influence from brain to muscle) is produced, such event being, in fact,
itself to consciousness occult; multo minus can we have a consciousness
of that volition being the efficacious force by which the ultimate
movement of the limb is mediately determined.” ([Note D,] pp. 866n-7n.)

†
Sir W. Hamilton adds, as a further objection to the theory, that it does
not account for that, in our notion of causation, which is the sole
ground for rejecting the Experience theory of it: its “quality of
necessity and universality.” [Lectures, Vol. II, p. 392.] And this is
true: the philosophers who combat the Experience theory of causation by
the Volitional one, deprive themselves of a very bad, but still the best
argument on their side of the question.

*
Prolegomena Logica, p. 139.

†
Ibid., p. 140.

‡
Ibid., pp. 142-3. [For Descartes, see Principia Philosophiæ, pp. 51, 61
ff. (III, xxx, lxv ff.).]

f-f
651 conceive

g-g
651 suppose

h-h
+652, 67, 72

*
Ibid., p. 148. [The words in square brackets are Mill’s.]

†
Ibid., pp. 149-50.

[*]
See ibid., pp. 149-53.

[†]
See “Of the Idea of Necessary Connection,” Section vii of An Inquiry
Concerning Human Understanding, in Essays and Treatises, Vol. II, p. 82,
and Note C, pp. 601-2.

[*]
Prolegomena Logica, p. 142.

[†]
See, e.g., Auguste Comte, Cours de philosophie positive, Vol. V, pp.
85-7, 383-6, 432n-3n.

[‡]
See System of Logic, Bk. III, Chap. v, in Collected Works, Vol. VII, pp.
323ff.

[*]
See Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Works, Vol. II, pp. 138-9 (Bk.
II, Chap. xxxii, §§6-8).

*
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 296; and foot-note to Reid, p. 412n.

†
Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 287-8.

*
Ibid., pp. 288-90.

†
Ibid., pp. 297-8.

*
Ibid., pp. 298-300. [Hamilton is quoting from Berkeley, A Treatise
Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, Introduction, §§vii, viii,
x, in Works, Vol. I, pp. 5-8.]

[*]
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 125.

†
Ibid., pp. 128-9.

*
Ibid., p. 131.

a-a
+Source, 67, 72 [printer’s error in 651, 652]

*
Ibid., pp. 134-6.

†
Ibid., Vol. II, p. 312.

‡
Ibid., Vol. III, p. 136. The words he means are Begriff and Anschauung.
See foot-note to Reid, p. 412n.

b-b
651 thought

*
Mansel, Prolegomena Logica, p. 15. What a mere play upon words the
distinction is, is shown by Mr. Mansel’s saying, a few pages later, “In
every complete act of conception, the attributes forming the concept are
contemplated as coexisting in a possible object of intuition.” (P. 29.)
So that they are “depicted to imagination;” only they are not depicted
separately.

†
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 128.

[*]
Ibid., Vol. II, p. 312.

[†]
Ibid., Vol. III, p. 129.

[‡]
Ibid., Vol. II, p. 298.

[§]
Ibid., p. 312.

*
Ibid., Vol. III, pp. 132-3.

c-c
651, 652 illustration afforded

*
Ibid., p. 137.

*
One of the best and profoundest passages in all Sir W. Hamilton’s
writings, is that in which he points out (though only incidentally) what
are the conditions of our ascribing Unity to any aggregate. “Though it
is only by experience we come to attribute an external unity to aught
continuously extended, that is, consider it as a system or constituted
whole; still, in so far as we do so consider it, we think the parts as
held together by a certain force, and the whole, therefore, as endowed
with a power of resisting their distraction. It is, indeed, only by
finding that a material continuity resists distraction, that we view it
as more than a fortuitous aggregation of many bodies, that is, as a
single body. The material universe, for example, though not de facto
continuously extended, we consider as one system in so far, but only in
so far, as we find all bodies tending together by reciprocal
attraction.” (“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note D,] pp. 852-3.)

*
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 138-40.

[*]
See Prolegomena Logica, p. 15.

*
Ibid., pp. 15-17.

†
By intuitions Mr. Mansel means the Anschauungen of Kant, or what Mr.
Mansel himself otherwise calls Presentations of Sense, to which he adds
Representations of Imagination [see Prolegomena Logica, pp. 9-14].

*
Ibid., pp. 19-20, and 29-31.

[*]
See Système de politique positive, ou Traité de sociologie, instituant
la religion de l’humanité, 4 vols. (Paris: Mathias, et al., 1851-54),
Vol. I, p. 450.

[*]
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 135, 134; cf. p. 306 above.

*
It is for want of apprehending this view of the matter that Sir W.
Hamilton (Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 31-2) brings a charge of
self-contradiction against Archbishop Whately, because, having in the
commencement and throughout his treatise on Logic, represented Reasoning
as the object-matter of that science, he, in certain passages, says that
Logic is entirely conversant with the use of language. [Cf. Richard
Whately, Elements of Logic (London: Mawman, 1828), pp. 1 and 56n.] This
is a contradiction only from Sir W. Hamilton’s point of view. If
Archbishop Whately’s had been the same—if he had thought as Sir W.
Hamilton did respecting Concepts, considered as the object-matter of
Reasoning—he would have been justly liable to the imputation cast upon
him. But the Archbishop’s two statements are perfectly consistent, if we
suppose his opinion to have been, that the formation of Concepts, and
the subsequent process of combining them in arguments, are themselves
processes of language. This doctrine (which is in fact Mr. Mansel’s [see
Prolegomena Logica, pp. 15-32, 56-69]) Sir W. Hamilton deems too absurd
to be imputed to the Archbishop (Discussions, p. 138). Yet he fancies
himself a Nominalist, and does understand and assent to all the
arguments of Nominalism. Unfortunately an intelligent assent to one of
two conflicting doctrines is in his case no guarantee against holding,
for all practical purposes eof thoughte, the other.

e-e
+67, 72

d
651, 652 [footnote appears at the end of this paragraph; moved in 67
presumably because another note was added at that place]

f-f
651, 652 consider it nothing less than a misfortune, that the words
Concept, General Notion, or any other phrase to express the supposed
mental modification corresponding to a class name, should ever have been
invented

*
[67] Dr. M‘Cosh says, “I think it desirable to have a phrase to denote,
not the ‘signification of a class name,’ but the thing signified by the
class name; and the fittest I can think of is Concept.” But the “thing
signified” by the class name is the class; the various objects called by
the name: and class is a sufficient name for these, nor has the word
Concept, to my knowledge, ever been predicated of them, but only of Sir
W. Hamilton’s “bundles of attributes.” ([Examination,] pp. 276-7.) gDr.
M‘Cosh’s use of the word Concept, for the thing conceived, not the
conception, is, I believe, peculiar to himself.g

I must add, that the chapter of Dr. M‘Cosh from which I am now quoting,
that headed “The Logical Notion,” contains much sound philosophy, and
little with which I disagree except the persistent impression which the
author keeps up throughout the chapter that I do disagree with him.
[Ibid., Chap. xix, pp. 267-84.]

g-g
+72

[*]
Prolegomena Logica, pp. 25-32.

*
Ibid., pp. 31-2.

*
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 171-2.

h-h
651, 652, 67 easy

*
Ibid., p. 181. [From Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz, Meditationes de
Cognitione, Veritate et Ideis, in Opera Philosophica, ed. Johann Eduard
Erdmann (Berlin: Eichler, 1840), pp. 79-80.] It will be remarked that
Leibnitz here employs the word Intuitive in a sense entirely different
from that which British metaphysicians, and Sir W. Hamilton himself,
attach to the word. In Leibnitz’s sense, we cognise a thing intuitively
in as far as we are conscious of the attributes of the thing itself;
symbolically in as far as we merely think of its name, as standing for
an aggregate of attributes, without having all, or perhaps any, of those
attributes present to our mind. I cannot help being surprised that Sir
W. Hamilton should have regarded this distinction of Leibnitz as
coinciding with that of Kant and the modern German thinkers between
Begriff and Anschauung, in other words, Concept and Presentation. Sir W.
Hamilton considers Begriff to be a name for “the symbolical notions of
the understanding,” in contrast with Anschauung, which means “the
intuitive presentations of Sense and representations of Imagination.”
(Ibid., p. 183.) He is right as to Anschauung, but as for “symbolical
notions of the understanding,” our thinking is called by Leibnitz
symbolical exactly in so far as it takes place without any “notions,”
any concept or Begriff at all, by virtue of the mere knowledge that
there is a Begriff which the word represents, and which we could recal
if we wanted it. When thinking is completely symbolical, the meaning of
the word is eliminated from thought, and only the word remains: as in
Leibnitz’s own illustration from algebra.

[*]
Prolegomena Logica, pp. 44-8.

*
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 119, 121, 126, 127, 128, 130, cum multis aliis.

†
Ibid., p. 122.

‡
Discussions, p. 283n.

§
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 121.

¶
Ibid., p. 126.

∥
Ibid., p. 78.

**
Ibid., p. 146.

*
Ibid., p. 148.

†
Ibid., p. 152.

‡
Foot-note to Reid, p. 360n.

§
Prolegomena Logica, p. 63.

¶
Ibid., p. 62.

*
Essays on the Intellectual Powers, Works, p. 404. By ideas Reid here
means (as he fully explains) attributes.

†
Ibid., p. 412.

‡
Accordingly, when Sir W. Hamilton contends, in opposition to Reid, that
there are definitions which are not nominal but notional, since they
have for their object “the more accurate determination of the contents
of a notion,” (foot-note to Reid, p. 691n,) there is no real difference
of meaning between them: the contents of a notion being simply the
connotation of a name.

Sir W. Hamilton enters, at some length, into the explanation of what is
meant by the clearness, and the distinctness, of Concepts. A concept,
according to him, is clear, if we can distinguish it as a whole from
other concepts; distinct, if we can discriminate the characters or
attributes of which it is the sum (Lectures, Vol. III, p. 158). The last
statement is intelligible, but what does the first mean? If we do not
know of what characters the concept is composed, seeing that it has no
existence but in those characters, how can we know it so as to
distinguish it from other concepts? Our author certainly had not a clear
conception of what makes a conception clear; and the proof is, that he
adopts as part of his text a quotation from Esser’s Logic, in which
Esser makes the clearness of a concept to depend on our being able to
distinguish, not the concept itself, but the objects included under it;
on our being able, in short, to apply the class-name correctly.
According to Esser, “a concept is said to be clear, when the degree of
consciousness by which it is accompanied is sufficient to discriminate”
not itself from other concepts, but “what we think in and through it,
from what we think in and through other notions:” and “notions
absolutely clear” are “notions whose objects” (not as Sir W. Hamilton
says, themselves) cannot “possibly be confounded with aught else,
whether known or unknown.” (Ibid., pp. 160-1. [Cf. Wilhelm Esser, System
der Logik, 2nd ed. (Munster: Theissing, 1830), pp. 91-2.]) So that,
according to Esser, the clearness of a concept has reference to its
Extension, the distinctness to its Comprehension. This is not the only
instance in which our author helps out his own expositions by passages
from other authors, written from a point of view more or less different
from his own.

[*]
Cf. Mill’s System of Logic, Bk. I, Chap. vi, §3, in Collected Works,
Vol. VII, p. 115.

*
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 225-6.

*
Ibid., pp. 213-14.

a-a
651, 652 do

†
Ibid., p. 214. [Cf. Krug, Logik, pp. 118-20.]

*
Ibid., pp. 226-7.

†
Ibid., p. 194.

‡
Ibid., p. 227.

§
Ibid., p. 229.

[*]
Cf. ibid., p. 227.

b-b
651, 652 , doubtless,

*
Essays on the Intellectual Powers, Works, p. 415.

[*]
Cf. Lectures, Vol. III, p. 131.

c-c
651, 652 evades

d-d
651, 652, 67 to

[*]
Ibid., p. 226.

[†]
Ibid., p. 229.

*
Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 204-5. [The words in square brackets are Mill’s.]

*
Ibid., Vol. II, pp. 277-8.

†
Ibid., Vol. III, p. 117.

*
This mode of escape from contradiction is the one which has, in
substance, been resorted to by Mr. Mansel. He distinguishes what he
terms Psychological from what he denominates Logical judgments.
Psychological judgments merely assert that some object of consciousness,
either external or internal, is present: they “may be generally stated
in the proposition, This is here.” These are the only judgments which
are implied in, and necessary to, the formation of Concepts: and these
judgments, as they assert a matter of present consciousness, are
necessarily true. “But the psychological judgment must not be confounded
with the logical. The former is the judgment of a relation betweenthe
conscious subject and the immediate object of consciousness: the latter
is the judgment of a relation which two objects of thought bear to each
other. . . . The logical judgment necessarily contains two concepts, and
hence must be regarded as logically and chronologically posterior to the
conception, which requires one only.” (Prolegomena Logica, pp. 53-5.)

But the operation by which a concept is built up, supposes much more
than a cognition of the present existence of a fact or facts of
consciousness, and a judgment in the form, “This is here.” It supposes
the whole process of comparing facts of consciousness, and recognising,
or in other words, judging, in what points they resemble. It implies
that the mind, in its “psychological” judgments, does to the Intuitions
or Presentations everything which it is supposed to do to the Concepts
in the “logical” ones. Consequently the distinction between Mr. Mansel’s
two kinds of judgments is in their matter only, not in the mental
operation, and is therefore, as he would say, extra-logical; to which I
will add, insignificant. It will be shown in the text that there is no
psychological difference between the two, and that the discrimination of
one class of judgments as conversant with Presentations and another with
Concepts, and the attribution to the latter class of the name of
logical, are founded on a false theory.

[*]
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 227.

*
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note A,] pp. 787n-8n.

e-e
651, 652 proposes new names for it (Explicative and Ampliative)

f-f
651, 652 in his own phrase

g
651, 652 And this, I presume, was what he had in his mind when he
suggested, as proper for synthetical judgments, the name of ampliative.

h-h
+67, 72

*
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 143.

†
Ibid., p. 151.

‡
Ibid., pp. 143-4.

§
In his non-recognition of the difference between Analytical and
Synthetical judgments, it is already implied that he never recognises
the Connotation of Names; which in itself is enough to vitiate his whole
logical system, and is a great point of inferiority in him to the best
Conceptualist thinkers, who do recognise it, though in a misleading
phraseology. To the same cause may be ascribed the extremely vulgar
character of the explanation of some of the leading metaphysical terms,
in his eighth Lecture. For example, the distinction between essential
and accidental qualities he defines thus—that the essential qualities of
a thing are those “which it cannot lose without ceasing to be.” [Ibid.,
Vol. I, p. 150.] This, which is a retrogression from Conceptualism to
Realism, does but prove that he simply transcribed his definition from
the Realistic Schoolmen. In a later part of his Lectures (Vol. IV, p.
11) he, more suo, forgets this definition, and replaces it by ione of
his owni; but in this second definition he betrays that he never saw the
genuine meaning which lay under the distinction, so badly expressed by
the schoolmen in the language of a false system. Sir W. Hamilton, in
distinguishing Essential from Unessential properties, means only the
difference between attributes of the whole genus, and those confined to
some of its species. Sir W. Hamilton’s knowledge of the scholastic
writings was extraordinary; but many students of them who had not a
tithe of that knowledge, have brought back and appropriated much more of
the important materials for thought which those writings abundantly
contain.

i-i
651, 652 another, drawn from his own thoughts

*
This is perfectly understood by Mr. Mansel, who says, “When I assert
that A is B, I do not mean that the attributes constituting the concept
A are identical with those constituting the concept B, for this is only
true in identical judgments; but that the object in which the one set of
attributes is found, is the same as that in which the other is found. To
assert that all philosophers are liable to error is not to assert that
the signification of the term philosopher is identical with that of
liable to error; but that the attributes comprehended in these two
distinct terms are in some manner united in the same subject.”
(Prolegomena Logica, pp. 58-9.) What Mr. Mansel here enunciates
distinctly, was contained, though less distinctly, in Sir W. Hamilton’s
first theory of judgment, especially as he illustrated it from Krug.
[See Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 225-48; see Krug, Logik, §57.] In adhering
to that first theory, as well as in limiting the concept to the
attributes connoted by the name—for that limitation clearly results from
his definition of a Concept (p. 60), in combination with other
passages—Mr. Mansel, as it appears to me, is much nearer the truth than
Sir W. Hamilton; and would perhaps be nearer still, if he were not
entangled in the meshes of the Hamiltonian phraseology.

An example how that phraseology controls him, is his strange assertion
that every concept “must contain a plurality of attributes” as a
condition of its conceivability; “for a simple idea, like a summum
genus, is by itself inconceivable.” Inconceivable it truly is, but not
in any sense in which conceivability is required of a concept: only in
the sense of not being conceivable separately. “Simple ideas are never
conceived as such, but only as forming parts of a complex object;” in
other words, they are inconceivable in the sense in which, according to
Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrine and Mr. Mansel’s own, all concepts are
inconceivable. (Prolegomena Logica, pp. 184-5.)

From a similar entanglement, although his account of Definition and
Division is decidedly better than Sir W. Hamilton’s, he follows that
philosopher in treating the latter logical operation as a division of
the Concept: as if the concept were divided by dividing the things which
it is predicable of (ibid., pp. 191-4).

jDr. M‘Cosh thinks that there are judgments (other than those in which
the predicates are proper names) which do not affirm or deny attributes,
viz. those in which we compare what he terms “mere Abstracts.” “We
cannot call such attributive; thus, there would be no propriety in
saying that 4 is an attribute of 2 + 2.” ([Examination,] p. 294.) But is
not making 4, an attribute of 2 + 2? Further on he says, that the
predicate in this class of propositions “has no quantity or extension,
for it is not a class notion. When we say that 3 × 3 = 9, neither
subject nor predicate has an indefinite number of objects embraced in
it.” (Ibid., p. 333.) The objects embraced in 9 are nine apples, nine
marbles, nine hours, nine miles, and all the other aggregations of which
nine can be predicated. Every numeral is the name of a class, and a most
comprehensive class, consisting of things of all imaginable qualities.
And the same observation applies to 3 × 3.j

j-j
+67, 72

*
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 229.

†
Ibid., pp. 231-3.

k
651 Man

[*]
See pp. 386ff. below.

*
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 274.

†
Ibid., p. 271.

‡
Ibid., p. 277.

a-a
651 one

[*]
This idea derives from Aristotle: see The Categories, in The Categories,
On Interpretation, Prior Analytics (Greek and English), trans. Harold P.
Cooke and Hugh Tredennick (London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1938), p. 16 (1b 9-12).

[*]
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 277.

b-b
+67, 72

*
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 4.

[*]
Elements of Logic, p. 1.

†
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 11; see also Discussions, pp. 133-4.

[*]
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 11-12.

*
Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 115-19.

[†]
Ibid., p. 116.

[‡]
Ibid., pp. 118-19.

†
I give the Aristotelian distinction in Sir W. Hamilton’s words. “In the
Aristotelic philosophy the terms πρᾶξις and πρακτικός, that is, practice
and practical,—were employed both in a generic or looser, and in a
special or stricter signification. In its generic meaning, πρᾶξις,
practice, was opposed to theory or speculation, and it comprehended
under it, practice in its special meaning, and another co-ordinate term
to which practice, in this its stricter signification, was opposed. This
term was ποίησις, which we may inadequately translate by production. The
distinction of πρακτικός and ποιητικός consisted in this: the former
denoted that action which terminated in action,—the latter, that action
which resulted in some permanent product. For example, dancing and music
are practical, as leaving no work after their performance: whereas
painting and statuary are productive, as leaving some product over and
above their energy. Now Aristotle, in formally defining art, defines it
as a habit productive, and not as a habit practical, ἕξις ποιητικὴ μετὰ
λογου [see Nichomachean Ethics, pp. 334-5 (VI, iv, 1140a21-2)]; and
though he has not always himself adhered strictly to this limitation,
his definition was adopted by his followers, and the term in its
application to the practical sciences (the term practical being here
used in its genuine meaning), came to be exclusively confined to those
whose end did not result in mere action or energy. Accordingly as
Ethics, Politics, &c., proposed happiness as their end, and as happiness
was an energy, or at least the concomitant of energy, these sciences
terminated in action, and were consequently practical, not productive.
On the other hand, Logic, Rhetoric, &c., did not terminate in a mere—an
evanescent action, but in a permanent—an enduring product. For the end
of Logic was the production of a reasoning, the end of Rhetoric the
production of an oration, and so forth.” (Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 117-18.)
The English language expresses the same distinction by the two verbs, to
do and to make.

*
Discussions, p. 134.

†
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 116.

a-a
651 here be

b-b
+67, 72

c-c
651 point

d-d
651 wind

[*]
See Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 11-12; Discussions, pp. 130-4.

[†]
See Lectures, Vol. III, p. 4.

*
Ibid., p. 12.

†
Ibid., pp. 13-14.

*
Ibid., p. 15.

†
Ibid., p. 21.

‡
Ibid., p. 40.

§
Ibid., p. 43.

*
Ibid., p. 15.

e-e
651, 652 is it

[*]
See, e.g., Elements of Logic, pp. 13-14.

[†]
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 15; cf. Esser, Logik, p. 4.

*
Prolegomena Logica, pp. 226-7. [The words in square brackets are
Mill’s.]

[*]
Ibid., p. 233.

f-f
651 form [printer’s error?]

[*]
See Aristotle, On the Soul, pp. 66-70 (II, i, 412a-b).

g-g
+67, 72

*
See Reid, [Inquiry,] p. 202, and Sir W. Hamilton’s foot-note [pp.
202n-3n]. A still odder example is given by Reid in his Essays on the
Active Powers. “In the scholastic ages, an action good in itself was
said to be materially good, and an action done with a right intention
was called formally good. This last way of expressing the distinction is
still familiar among theologians.” (Works, [ed. Hamilton,] pp. 649-50.)

[†]
See Kant, Logik, in Prolegomena zu einer jeden Künftigen Metaphysik, die
als Wissenschaft wird Auftreten Können und Logik, in Werke, Vol. III, p.
306.

†
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 287-8. [See Krug, Logik, §85.] So also Mr.
Mansel, Prolegomena Logica, p. 235.

*
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 24.

h-h
651, 652, 67 properties

*
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 78-9. It might have been supposed that the
double meaning of the word law, though in the last century it could
blind even a Montesquieu, had been sufficiently written about since that
time, to be understood by minds of far less calibre than Sir W.
Hamilton’s: yet in this passage he does not recognise it, but seems
rather to think that the difference between a law in the scientific, and
a law in the legislative or ethical sense, does not turn on an ambiguity
of the word, but on the difference between “the world of mind” and “the
world of matter:” a “free intelligence” knowing only precepts, which it
has power to disobey, and not being ruled, like the physical world, by
laws from which it cannot escape. Yet Sir W. Hamilton is the same
philosopher who is for ever telling us of necessities of thought which
are absolutely irresistible to us—from which we can by no mental effort
emancipate ourselves; and upon this alleged fact the larger half of his
philosophy is grounded. When we find all this forgotten, we almost fancy
that we have opened a volume of some other writer by mistake. Treating
of the same question in another place, our author remembers his own
philosophy much better. In the Lecture in which he divides mental
science into the “Phænomenology of Mind” and its “Nomology,” the former
a classification and analysis of our mental faculties, the latter an
investigation of their “laws,” the word Laws always stands for
“necessary and universal facts,” “the Laws by which our faculties are
governed,” not precepts by which they ought to be governed: and of these
necessary and universal facts it is expressly said that the Laws of
Thought, with which Logic is concerned, are a part. They are classed
with “the Laws of Memory,” “the Laws of Association,” “the laws which
govern our capacities of enjoyment,” all of which are correctly
described as necessary facts, and not as precepts. (Ibid., Vol. I, pp.
121ff.) The whole of this is thrown to the winds when the time comes for
taking up Logic as a separate science.

[*]
See Prolegomena Logica, pp. 9-10.

i-i
+72

[†]
Kritik der Reinen Vernunft, pp. 745-7.

[‡]
Ibid.

*
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 73.

†
Ibid., pp. 73-4.

*
Sir W. Hamilton holds a corresponding theory in regard to the identity
of an imagination with the imagining act. “A representation considered
as an object is logically, not really, different from a representation
considered as an act. Here object and act are merely the same
indivisible mode of mind viewed in two different relations. Considered
by reference to a mediate object represented, it is a representative
object: considered by reference to the mind representing and
contemplating the representation, it is a representative act. A
representative object being viewed as posterior in the order of nature,
but not of time, to the representative act, is viewed as a product; and
the representative act being viewed as prior in the order of nature,
though not of time, to the representative object, is viewed as a
producing process.” (“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note B,] p. 809.) Sir W.
Hamilton has not explained how, in the order of nature, or in any other
order, a thing can be prior, or posterior, or prior and posterior, to
itself.

j-j
651, 652 when

[*]
See Observations on Man, Vol. I, p. 104.

k
651, 652, 67 It has been said, not without reason, of Condillac and
others, that their psychological explanations treat our mental nature as
entirely passive, ignoring its active side. The contrary error may with
equal reason be imputed to Sir W. Hamilton, that of ignoring the passive
side.

[*]
See, e.g., Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 64, 79.

[†]
See Prolegomena Logica, pp. 227-9, 237-40.

[*]
See, e.g., ibid., pp. 240-5.

l-l
651, 652 conceptions

[*]
See ibid., pp. 237-40, 265-8.

*
Ibid., p. 265.

[*]
Ibid.

*
Lectures, Vol. IV, App. i, p. 232.

†
Ibid., p. 138. [See Bacon, Novum Organum, in Works, Vol. I, pp. 189 and
205 (Bk. I, Aphs. 82 and 105). Cf. De Augmentis Scientiarum, in ibid.,
p. 620 (Bk. V, Chap. ii).]

m-m
651 requirements [printer’s error?]

*
Accordingly all that Sir W. Hamilton has to say concerning the
requisites of a legitimate Induction, is that there must be no instances
to the contrary, and that the number of observed instances must be
“competent.” (Lectures, Vol. IV, pp. 168-9.) If this were all that “a
Material or Objective Logic” could “tell us,” Sir W. Hamilton’s
treatment of it would be quite justified. The point of view of a
complete Induction, namely one in which the nature of the instances is
such, that no other result than the one arrived at is consistent with
the universal Law of Causation, had never risen above Sir W. Hamilton’s
horizon. The same low reach of thought, not for want of power, but of
the necessary knowledge, shows itself in every part of the little he
says concerning the investigation of Nature. For example, he implicitly
follows the mistake of Kant in affirming an intrinsic difference between
the inferences of Induction and those of Analogy. [Cf. Kant, Logik, in
Werke, Vol. III, pp. 320-1.] Induction, he says, infers that “if a
number of objects of the same class possess in common a certain
attribute, . . . this attribute is possessed by all the objects of that
class;” while Analogy infers that “if . . . two or more things agree in
several internal and essential characters . . . they agree, likewise, in
all other essential characters, that is, they are constituents of the
same class.” (Lectures, Vol. IV, pp. 165-6.) A little more familiarity
with the subject would have shown him that the two kinds of argument are
homogeneous, and differ only in degree of evidence. The type of them
both is, the inference that things which agree with one another in
certain respects, agree in certain other respects. Any argument from
knownpoints of agreement to unknown, is an inference of analogy: and
induction is no more. Induction concludes that if a number of As have
the attribute B, all things which agree with them in being As agree with
them also in having the attribute B. The only peculiarity of Induction,
as compared with other cases of analogy, is, that the known points of
agreement from which further agreement is inferred, have been summed up
in a single word and made the foundation of a class. For further
explanations, see my System of Logic, Bk. III, Chap. xx. [In Collected
Works, Vol. VII, pp. 554ff.]

[*]
See, e.g., Leibniz, Essais de théodicée sur la bonté de Dieu, la liberté
de l’homme, et l’origine du mal (Amsterdam: Troyel, 1710), pp. 114-15,
156-7 (I, §§7, 44).

*
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 79. In the Appendix to the Lectures he calls them
the Laws of the Thinkable; and the laws of Conception, Judgment, and
Reasoning he distinguishes from them under the name of “the laws of
Thinking in a strict sense.” (Ibid., Vol. IV, App. iv, pp. 244-5.)

*
Foot-note to Reid, p. 713n, and in many other places.

a
651, 652 mere

[*]
See Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Works, Vol. III, pp. 23-5 (Bk.
IV, Chap. vii, §4).

†
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 79-80.

‡
We here see our author by implication admitting that a Concept has no
parts except its parts in Comprehension; what he elsewhere calls its
parts in Extension being in no sense parts of the Concept, but parts of
something else, namely, of the aggregate of concrete objects to which
the Concept corresponds. Had Sir W. Hamilton adhered to this rational
doctrine, he must have given up his Judgments in Extension: instead of
which he not only retains them, but considers them as also founded on
the Principle of Identity: though he has expressly limited that
principle in a manner inconsistent with founding any judgments on it
save Judgments in Comprehension. This contradiction was worth pointing
out, but is not worth insisting on, since it may be rectified by
extending the scope of the First Law to the identity of any whole with
its parts, instead of limiting it to the identity of a Concept with its
parts in Comprehension only.

[*]
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 79-80.

[†]
See ibid., p. 114.

*
[67] This principle provides for the whole of what Kant terms
Conclusions of Understanding [Kritik der Reinen Vernunft, pp. 245-7],
and Dr. M‘Cosh Implied or Transposed Judgments. ([Examination,] p. 296.)
They are not conclusions, nor fresh acts of judgment, but the original
judgment, expressed in other words.

*
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 114.

b-b
651 assert

*
Prolegomena Logica, pp. 196-7.

†
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 82.

‡
Ibid., p. 81.

§
Ibid., p. 82.

*
Ibid.

c-c
651, 652, 67 is

d-d
+72

*
Ibid., p. 83.

e-e
651, 652 evades

*
Ibid., p. 84.

†
Ibid., p. 239. [Cf. Krug, Logic, §57.]

*
Ibid., p. 98.

†
Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 65.

[*]
Ibid., p. 79.

*
[67] “When remembering a certain thing as in a certain place, the place
and the thing are mentally represented together; while to think of the
non-existence of the thing in that place, implies a consciousness in
which the place is represented but not the thing. Similarly, if instead
of thinking of an object as colourless, we think of it as having colour,
the change consists in the addition to the concept of an element that
was before absent from it—the object cannot be thought of first as red
and then as not red, without one component of the thought being totally
expelled from the mind by another. The law of the Excluded Middle, then,
is simply a generalization of the universal experience that some mental
states are directly destructive of other states. It formulates a certain
absolutely constant law, that the appearance of any positive mode of
consciousness cannot occur without excluding a correlative negative
mode: and that the negative mode cannot occur without excluding the
correlative positive mode: the antithesis of positive and negative
being, indeed, merely an expression of this experience. Hence it follows
that if consciousness is not in one of the two modes, it must be in the
other.” (Mr. Herbert Spencer, [“Mill versus Hamilton,”] in Fortnightly
Review for July 15, 1865 [p. 533].)

f-f
Source, 651 this

*
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 99-100.

*
The principal extant interpreter of the ancient Scepticism, Sextus
Empiricus, expressly defines as its essence and scope, τὸ παντὶ λόγῳ
λόγον ἴσον ἀντικεῖσθαι. (Pyrrh. Hypot.) [Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of
Pyrrhonism, in Sextus Empiricus, Vol. I, p. 8 (Chap. vi).] It is,
indeed, impossible to conceive Scepticism otherwise. Anything more would
not be Scepticism, but Negative Dogmatism.

†
“If I,” says our author, “have done anything meritorious in philosophy,
it is in the attempt to explain the phænomena of these contradictions,
in showing that they arise only when intelligence transcends the limits
to which its legitimate exercise is restricted.” (Lectures, Vol. I, App.
i, p. 402.) “In generating its antinomies, Kant’s Reason transcended its
limits, violated its laws. . . . Reason is only self-contradictory when
driven beyond its legitimate bounds.” (Ibid., Vol. II, App. iv, p. 543.)
“It is only when transcending that sphere, when founding on its
illegitimate as on its legitimate exercise, that it affords a
contradictory result. . . . The dogmatic assertion of necessity—of
Fatalism, and the dogmatic assertion of Liberty, are the counter and
equally inconceivable conclusions from reliance on the illegitimate and
one-sided.” (Ibid., Vol. I, App. i, p. 403.) To the same effect Mr.
Mansel, throughout his Limits of Religious Thought.

In one of the Appendices to the Lectures on Metaphysics (Vol. II, App.
iii, pp. 527-9), Sir W. Hamilton makes out a long list of contradictions
or antinomies (of which we shall have something to say hereafter)
involved, as he thinks, in the attempt to conceive the Infinite, and
which he considers as evidence that the notion is beyond the reach of
the human faculties. Yet he will not allow that the fact of leading to
contradictions, which he habitually urges as an argument against the
validity of some thought, would be admissible as an argument against
Thought in general, if it could be brought home to it. At least he will
not allow it in this place: for in his theory of the veracity of
Consciousness he does (ibid., Vol. I, p. 277).

*
Ibid., Vol. III, p. 100.

†
Ibid., p. 107 [cf. Esser, Logik, pp. 65-6]; see also Vol. IV, p. 61.

*
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 297, 304, 378; Vol. IV, App. v, p. 250.

†
An Essay on the New Analytic of Logical Forms, being that which gained
the prize proposed by Sir William Hamilton in the year 1846 for the best
exposition of the new Doctrine propounded in his Lectures. With an
Historical Appendix. By Thomas Spencer Baynes, Translator of the Port
Royal Logic (p. 80). [See also Antoine Arnauld and Pierre Nicole, The
Port-Royal Logic, trans. Baynes, 3rd ed. (Edinburgh: Sutherland, Knox,
1854).]

[*]
See pp. 339-41 above.

a-a
651, 652 dolphin

b-b
651, 652 dolphin

c-c
651, 652 dolphins

d-d
+652, 67, 72

[*]
See Collected Works, Vol. VII, pp. 196-9 (Bk. II, Chap. iii, §5).

*
[67] Dr. M‘Cosh has some partially just observations on this subject. He
admits that “in by far the greater number of propositions, the primary
and uppermost sense is in Comprehension.” ([Examination,] p. 292.) He
says, however, that in some, “the uppermost thought is in Extension.
Thus, when the young student of Natural History is told that the
crocodile is a reptile, his idea is of a class, of which he may
afterwards learn the marks.” (Ibid., p. 293.) And it is true that when
the known purpose of the statement is to declare what place the object
occupies in a classification, a fact of classification is the real
meaning of the proposition. This is emphatically the exception which
proves the rule. Dr. M‘Cosh adds, “the mind in its discursive operations
tends to go on from Comprehension to Extension.” [Ibid.] This I admit;
but the thought in Comprehension comes first: the thought in Extension
rests on the thought in Comprehension, and follows it; but is so closely
linked with it that it can hardly help following. The circumstance,
however, that the proposition is familiarly expressed in concrete
language, does not prove it to be thought in Extension. The practice of
so expressing it must, no doubt, as Dr. M‘Cosh says, “proceed from some
law of thought as applied to things;” but the law of thought it proceeds
from is merely the obvious one, that concrete language, requiring for
its formation a lower degree of abstraction, was earliest formed, took
possession of the field, and is still the most familiar. [Ibid.] When
Dr. M‘Cosh goes on to say that although “so far as propositions are
concerned, spontaneous thought is chiefly in Comprehension,” the case is
“different in regard to reasoning, the uppermost thought in which is
always in Extension,” (ibid., p. 303,) I cannot agree with him. If the
meaning, in consciousness, of the premises when separate, is in
Comprehension, it is not natural that the derivative and subordinate
meaning in Extension should leap to the front as soon as the premises
are brought together. But if, instead of “in reasoning,” Dr. M‘Cosh had
said “in the artificial formula of Reasoning called Syllogism,” I think
he would have been right.

*
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 286-7.

†
Ibid., p. 270.

‡
Ibid., p. 273.

§
Ibid., p. 399.

¶
Ibid., pp. 397-8.

∥
It is curious to observe with what facility Sir W. Hamilton drives two
conflicting opinions together in a team. The passages quoted in the text
are destructive of any notion of a different order of the premises in a
Syllogism of Extension and in one of Comprehension. Yet this notion
maintains full possession of our author’s mind. We have found him
accusing all logical writers of overlooking Reasoning in Comprehension;
but he thinks that they exceptionally recognised it in the case of the
Sorites, and that in that case, by a contrary error, they “altogether
overlooked the possibility of a Reasoning in Extension,” solely because,
in the Sorites, they inverted the usual order of the premises. (Ibid.,
pp. 379 and ff.) On a similar foundation stands his charge against the
Fourth Figure, of being “a monster undeserving of toleration,” [ibid.,
p. 424,] because instead of keeping to one of the two quantities,
Extension and Comprehension, it reasons (he says) across from one of
them to the other. This is merely because the Fourth Figure, while it
draws the same conclusion which might have been drawn in the First,
reverses the order of the premises. (Ibid., pp. 425-8.)

*
Ibid., p. 274.

*
Discussions, App. II [A], pp. 650-1.

†
Ibid., App. II [B], p. 691n. But the whole meaning of this assertion, as
available for our author’s purpose, is destroyed by the statement which
he is presently obliged to make, that “the Indesignate is thought,
either precisely, as whole or as part, or vaguely, as the one or the
other, unknown which, but the worse always presumed.” [Ibid.] The
concession, though fatal to himself, is short of the truth; for the
Indesignate is not necessarily thought either as a whole, or as part, or
as “unknown which:” it is often not thought in any relation of quantity
at all.

e
651 other

*
Not only we do not (unless exceptionally for some special purpose)
quantify the predicate in thought, but we do not even quantify the
subject, in the sense which Sir W. Hamilton’s theory requires. Even in
an universal proposition, we do not think of the fsubjectf as an
aggregate whole, but as its several parts: we do not judge that all A is
B, but that all As are Bs, which is a different thing. That what is true
of the whole must be true of any part, only holds good when the whole
means the parts themselves, and not when it means the aggregate of them.
All A, is a very different notion from Each A. What is true of A only as
a whole, forms no element of a judgment concerning its parts—even
concerning all its parts. Sir W. Hamilton thinks that the relation of
quantity in extension which the class A bears to the class B, is always
present in my thoughts when I predicate B of A. This relation of
quantity, however, does not belong to individual As, but specifically
and solely to A as a whole, and as a whole I am not thinking of it. When
I am predicating B of all As severally, I am not adverting to any
property or relation which belongs to A as their aggregate. Accordingly
we do not say, all ox ruminates, but all oxen ruminate. The distinction
is of little importance when A is only coextensive with part of B; for
if A altogether is but a part, still more must this be true of any
particular A, and it is indifferent whether we say all A is some B, or
each of the As is some B. But it is quite another matter when the
assertion is that all A is all B. This, if true at all, is true only of
A considered as a whole; and expresses a relation between the two
classes as totals, not between either of them and its parts. Now, to
affirm that when we judge every A to be a B, we always, and necessarily,
recognise in thought a fact which is not true of every, or even of any
A, but only of the aggregate composed of all As, seems to me as baseless
a fancy as ever implanted itself in the intellect of an eminent thinker.
gIt is, in short (as observed by one of my correspondents), a conclusive
reason against the assimilation of a judgment to an equation, that in
equations the terms are used collectively, and in judgments mostly
distributively.g

f-f
652 object [printer’s error?]

g-g
+72

h-h
651 part

*
The only answer I can imagine to this is, that having the two concepts
Man and Rational, and being engaged in actually comparing them with each
other, we must perceive and judge whether the one is merely a part of
the other, or a whole coinciding with it. But this answer it is not
competent to Sir W. Hamilton, or any other Conceptualist, to make. An
adversary of Sir W. Hamilton might make it. I have myself said, and have
offered as a reductio ad absurdum of his analysis of Reasoning, that if
we have two concepts and compare them, we cannot but perceive any
relation of whole and part which exists between them. [See pp. 342ff.
above.] Sir W. Hamilton however is precluded from making this reply; for
all Reasoning, even to the longest process in Mathematics, consists,
according to him, in discovering this relation of whole and part by
circuitous means, when direct comparison does not disclose it. From his
point of view, therefore, the argument is not tenable; and from mine it
has no pertinence, since I do not admit that Reasoning is a comparison
of Concepts at all.

†
Sir W. Hamilton goes the length of asserting that to a person who knows
all trilateral figures to be triangular, the proposition “all triangles
are trilateral” must, if expressed as understood, be written “All
triangles are all trilateral:” as if every proposition which I affirm
respecting a subject, must include all I know about it. (Appendix [v(f)]
to Lectures, Vol. IV, pp. 292 and ff.)

That the proposition All A is all B is not a single judgment, but
compounded of two, has already been urged against Sir W. Hamilton by Mr.
De Morgan, and we are in possession of Sir W. Hamilton’s answer
(Discussions, Appendix II, pp. 687-8). Unhappily Mr. De Morgan (by an
oversight not usual with that able thinker) gave Sir W. Hamilton an
apparent triumph, by mistaking the two judgments which the pretended
single proposition is composed of. He appears to have said, that the
proposition “All Xs are all Ys,” is compounded of the propositions “All
Xs are some Ys,” and “Some Xs are all Ys.” [See Augustus De Morgan, “On
the Symbols of Logic,” Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical
Society, I (25 Feb., 1850), 92.] Sir W. Hamilton replies, that these two
propositions are (in his own peculiar language) incompossible, inasmuch
as we cannot think X both as some Y, that is, a part of Y, and as the
whole. The argument is little better than a quibble, because other
people do not (though Sir W. Hamilton does) mean by some, some only;
they mean some at least; and if the first of Mr. De Morgan’s two
propositions identifies X with only some of Y, the second superadds the
remainder. But in reality the two judgments which go to the composition
of “All A is all B,” are not judgments with quantified predicates at
all. They are, All A is B, and All B is A. The one ascribes the
attributes of B to every A, the other the attributes of A to every B.
Judgments more distinct and independent of one another do not exist.

According to Sir W. Hamilton “ordinary language quantifies the Predicate
as often as this determination becomes of the smallest import.” And he
cites such instances as “Virtue is the only nobility;” “Of animals man
alone is rational,” and the like. (Lectures, Vol. IV, App. [v], pp.
259-61.) The truth is, that ordinary language quantifies the predicate
in the rare cases in which it is quantified in thought, and in no
others. And even then the quantified proposition is an abbreviated
expression of two judgments. The German logician Scheibler, to whom our
author refers in a foot-note (ibid., p. 261), could have set him right
here. [Christoph Scheibler, Opera philosophica, 2 vols. (Frankfurt:
Wustii, 1665).]

i“Sir W. Hamilton,” says Mr. Grote, “insists on stating explicitly, not
merely all that is thought implicitly, but a great deal more; adding to
it something else, which may, indeed, be thought conjointly, but which
more frequently is not thought at all. He requires us to pack two
distinct judgments into one and the same proposition: he interpolates
the meaning of the Propositio Conversa simpliciter into the form of the
Propositio Convertenda (when an universal affirmative) and then claims
it as a great advantage, that the proposition thus interpolated admits
of being converted simpliciter, and not merely per accidens. . . . If a
man is prepared to give us information on one Quæsitum, why should he be
constrained to use a mode of speech which forces on his attention at the
same time a second and distinct Quæsitum, so that he must either give us
information about the two at once, or confess himself ignorant
respecting the second?” ([“John Stuart Mill on the Philosophy of Sir
William Hamilton,”] pp. 31-2.) Mr. Grote goes on to cite from Sir W.
Hamilton’s own collection of authorities, an excellent passage from a
Jewish philosopher of the fourteenth century, Levi Ben Gerson, which
exactly confutes Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrine. “The cause why the
quantitative note is not usually joined with thepredicate, is that there
would thus be two quæsita at once; to wit, whether the predicate were
affirmed of the subject, and whether it were denied of everything
beside. For when we say, All Man is all Rational, we judge that all man
is rational, and judge likewise that rational is denied of everything
but man. But these are, in reality, two different quæsita; and therefore
it has become usual to state them, not in one, but in two several
propositions. And this is self-evident, seeing that a quæsitum in
itself, asks only—Does or does not this inhere in that? and not, Does or
does not this inhere in that, and at the same time inhere in nothing
else.”i [Quoted by Grote, p. 32n, from Hamilton, Lectures, Vol. IV, App.
v(g), pp. 310-11.]

Propositions in Extension have absolutely no meaning but what they
derive from Comprehension. The Logic of the quantified predicate takes
the Comprehension out of them, and leaves them a caput mortuum.

i-i
+67, 72

*
See, among many other places, Discussions, Appendix II[B], pp. 690n-1n,
where he says, “Every quantity is necessarily either all, or none, or
some; of these, the third is formally exclusive of the other two.”

j-j
+67, 72

*
Lectures, Vol. IV, App. [vi], p. 355. [See De Morgan, Formal Logic
(London: Taylor and Walton, 1847), p. 142.]

*
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 450-1.

*
Ibid., Vol. IV, pp. 64-8.

[*]
Ibid., p. 66.

[†]
Ibid., p. 65.

†
Ibid., Vol. II, p. 343.

*
Ibid., Vol. III, pp. 106-7. [Cf. Esser, Logik, pp. 65-6.]

†
Ibid., p. 106.

[*]
Ibid., p. 107.

[†]
I.e., in the passage quoted above.

[*]
See William Shakespeare, Macbeth, IV, iii, 211-19.

*
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 326ff.

†
Mr. Mansel does not fall into this mistake (Prolegomena Logica, p. 221).

a-a
+67, 72

[*]
See Whately, Elements of Logic, pp. 107-9, 112-13.

*
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 342. [See Krug, Logik, p. 258.]

†
Ibid., Vol. IV, App. ix, p. 395.

*
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 213-14. [See Aristotle, On Interpretation, in
The Categories, On Interpretation, Prior Analytics, pp. 124-8 (17b), and
Metaphysics, pp. 24-8 (1055a-1056b).]

†
Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 214-15. [See Krug, Logik, pp. 118-20.]

b-b
651, 652 a great deal more

*
Categoriæ, Cap. vi [6a17-18; in The Categories, On Interpretation, Prior
Analytics, p. 44].

†
Περὶ Ἑρμηνείας, Cap. xiv [23b23-4; On Interpretation, p. 174].

[*]
Metaphysics, Vol. II, p. 20 (X, iii, 1055a4-6).

‡
[Ammonius Hermiæ,] Ammonii Hermiæ in Aristotelis de Interpretatione
Librum Commentarius, ed. Aldi [i.e., Venice: Aldus, 1546], pp. 175-6.

§
[Franco Burgersdijck, Institutionum logicarum libri duo (Cambridge:
Field, 1660), pp. 94-5,] Lib. I, Cap. 22; Theorema i.

¶
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 224.

*
[(London: printed McMillan, 1826), Tractatus Primus,] Pars Tertia, Cap.
iii, Art. 1 [p. 74].

†
[Robert Sanderson, Logicæ Artis Compendium, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Lichfield
and Short, 1618), p. 52,] Pars Prima, Cap. xv [§4].

‡
[Richard Crakanthorp,] Logicæ [(London: Teage, 1622), Lib. II,] Cap. xx
[p. 206].

§
[Edward Brerewood,] Tractatus Quidam Logici de Prædicabilibus et
Prædicamentis. [Oxford: Turner, 1628.] Tractatus Decimus, “de
Post-Prædicamentis,” §§8 and 9. [Pp. 404-5. (The concluding sentence,
which appears in modified form in all the other Latin texts quoted, is a
translation of the passage of Aristotle’s Categories cited above [VI,
6a17-18]).]

¶
Aditus ad Logicam [7th ed.] (Oxford [: Hall], 1656), Lib. I, Cap. xiv
[p. 56].

*
[John Wallis,] Institutio Logicæ [3rd ed. (Oxford: West, Crosley,
Clements, and Peisley, 1702), p. 63], Lib. I, Cap. xvi.

†
[Henry Aldrich,] Artis Logicæ Compendium [Oxford: Sheldonian Theatre,
1704], “Quæstionum Logicarum Determinatio,” quæst. 19 [p. 118].

‡
[Bartholomæus Keckermannus,] Systema Logicæ [(Geneva: de la Rouière,
1611); see pp. 278ff. (Lib. I, Sectio Posterior, Cap. vi).]

§
Enchiridion Logicum [ex Aristotele, 3rd ed.], (Leipzig [: Cober], 1618),
Lib. I, Cap. xxiii [p. 186].

¶
[Jean Baptiste Du Hamel,] Philosophia vetus et nova ad usum scholæ
accommodata, 5th ed. (Amsterdam [: Gallet], 1700), [Vol. I,] pp. 197-8.

∥
[John Fell, Grammatica Rationis,] (Oxford [: Sheldonian Theatre], 1673)
[p. 111].

c-c
651, 652 who

*
Lectures, Vol. IV, App. x, p. 401, and Appendix [II(A)] to Discussions,
p. 652n.

[*]
See System of Logic, Bk. II, Chap. iii. §4, in Collected Works, Vol.
VII, p. 193.

[*]
See Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 376ff.

[†]
This formulation is mistakenly attributed to William of Ockham; it
appears to have originated with John Ponce, in an annotation to Duns
Scotus, Opera omnia, ed. Luke Wadding, John Ponce, et al., 12 vols.
(Lyons: Durand, 1639), Vol. VII, p. 723.

*
Appendix [I(A)] to Discussions, p. 622.

†
Ibid., p. 629. [For the Greek passages, cf. Aristotle, On the Heavens
(Greek and English), trans. W. K. C. Guthrie (London: Heinemann;
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1939), p. 30 (I, iv,
271a34-5); Parts of Animals, in Parts of Animals, Movement of Animals,
Progression of Animals (Greek and English), trans. A. L. Peck (London:
Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1937), p. 396
(IV, xi, 691b4); On the Heavens, pp. 206-8 (II, xii, 292a22-b25).]

[*]
See Timæus, in Timæus, Critias, Cleitophon, Menexenus, Epistles (Greek
and English), trans. R. G. Bury (London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s
Sons, 1929), pp. 108ff. (47eff.).

[†]
See Théodicée, pp. 115ff. (§§8ff.).

a-a
651, 652 a

*
Appendix [I(A)] to Discussions, p. 628n.

*
This is what Newton meant by a vera causa, in his celebrated maxim,
“Causas rerum naturalium non plures admitti debere quam quæ et veræ
sint, et earum phænomenis explicandis sufficiant.” [Isaac Newton,
Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica, in Opera, ed. Samuel
Horsley, 5 vols. (London: Nichols, 1779-85), Vol. III, p. 2.] It is
singular that Sir W. Hamilton does not seem to have understood, that by
veræ causæ Newton meant agencies the existence of which was otherwise
authenticated: for he says, “In their plain meaning, the words et veræ
sint are redundant; or what follows is redundant, and the whole rule a
barren truism.” (Foot-note to Reid, p. 236n.) bBut in the Appendix
[I(A)] to the Discussions (p. 631) Sir W. Hamilton puts the right
interpretation on Newton’s maxim.b

b-b
+72

†
Lectures, Vol. II, App. i, p. 522.

‡
Ibid.

[*]
See Reid, Inquiry, pp. 182-6.

*
Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 127-8.

c-c
651, 652 I shall not here enquire how much is positively proved by this
experiment, or with what hypotheses it is inconsistent: my object is

†
In the Lectures, I mean: for, in the “Dissertations on Reid” the
doctrine, that we feel in the toe, and not in a sensorium commune, is at
least so far retracted, that the possibility of the opposite theory is
explicitly acknowledged. ([Note D,] p. 861n.)

d-d
+67, 72

[*]
See pp. 198, 375 above.

[*]
Thomas Carlyle, Sartor Resartus, 2nd ed. (Boston: Munroe, 1837), p. 59
(I, viii).

[†]
See Bacon, Novum Organum, in Works, Vol. I, pp. 163 and 169 (Bk. I,
Aphs. 41 and 52).

*
In the course of his speculations our author comes across a fact which
is positively irreconcileable with his axiom; the fact of repulsion.
This brings him to a dead stand. He knows not whether to advance or
recede. Repulsion, he says, “remains, as apparently an actio in distans,
even when forced upon us as a fact, still inconceivable as a
possibility.” He is soon afterwards obliged to confess that the same is
true of attraction: “As attraction and repulsion seem equally actiones
in distans, it is not more difficult to realize to ourselves the action
of the one, than the action of the other.” (“Dissertations on Reid,”
[Note D,] p. 852.) Action from eae distance being “a fact,” though
inconceivable, this fact would seem to require of him the retractation
of his axiom: yet he does not retract it. I need hardly remark that
attraction and repulsion are not inconceivable; except indeed in another
of the numerous senses of that equivocal word; that in which it is used
when our author tells us that all ultimate facts are inconceivable,
meaning only that they are inexplicable.

e-e
+67, 72

f-f
651, 652 believed

[*]
See Brown, Lectures, Vol. II, p. 19.

*
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 373. To the same effect, Vol. IV, p. 71.

[†]
See ibid., Vol. III, p. 81.

†
Foot-note to Reid, p. 102n.

*
Appendix [I(A)] to Discussions, p. 606.

[*]
See Aristotle, The Physics (Greek and English), trans. Philip H.
Wickstead and Francis M. Cornford, 2 vols. (London: Heinemann;
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1963), Vol. II, pp. 176-90
(VI, Chap. ix, 239b-240b).

[†]
See Pierre Bayle, Dictionnaire historique et critique, 2 vols.
(Rotterdam: Reinier Leers, 1697), s.v. Zenon d’Elée, Vol. II, pp.
1267-9.

g-g
651, 652 a fallacy. For it

[*]
See Elements of Logic, p. 187.

h-h
651, 652 similarity

i-i
651, 652 An object

j-j
651, 652 an object

*
“Contradictions proving the Psychological Theory of the Conditioned.

1. Finite cannot comprehend, contain, the Infinite.—Yet an inch or
minute, say, are finites, and are divisible ad infinitum, that is, their
terminated division incogitable.

2. Infinite cannot be terminated or begun.—Yet eternity ab ante ends
now; and eternity a post begins now. So apply to Space.

3. There cannot be two infinite maxima.—Yet eternity ab ante and a post
are twoinfinite maxima of time.

4. Infinite maximum if cut in two, the halves cannot be each infinite,
for nothing can be greater than infinite, and thus they could not be
parts; nor finite, for thus two finite halves would make an infinite
whole.

5. What contains infinite quantities (extensions, protensions,
intensions) cannot be passed through,—come to an end. An inch, a minute,
a degree contains these; ergo, &c. Take a minute. This contains an
infinitude of protended quantities, which must follow one after another;
but an infinite series of successive protensions can, ex termino, never
be ended; ergo, &c.

6. An infinite maximum cannot but be all-inclusive. Time ab ante and a
post infinite and exclusive of each other; ergo, &c.

7. An infinite number of quantities must make up either an infinite or a
finite whole. I. The former.—But an inch, a minute, a degree, contain
each an infinite number of quantities; therefore an inch, a minute, a
degree, are each infinite wholes; which is absurd. II. The latter.—An
infinite number of quantities would thus make up a finite quantity,
which is equally absurd.

8. If we take a finite quantity (as an inch, a minute, a degree), it
would appear equally that there are, and that there are not, an equal
number of quantities between these and a greatest, and between these and
a least.

9. An absolutely quickest motion is that which passes from one point to
another in space in a minimum of time. But a quickest motion from one
point to another, say a mile distance, and from one to another, say a
million million of miles, is thought the same; which is absurd.

10. A wheel turned with quickest motion; if a spoke be prolonged, it
will, therefore, be moved by a motion quicker than the quickest. The
same may be shown using the rim and the nave.

11. Contradictory are Boscovich Points, which occupy space, and are
unextended. Dynamism, therefore, inconceivable. E contra,

12. Atomism also inconceivable; for this supposes atoms,—minima extended
but indivisible.

13. A quantity, say a foot, has an infinity of parts. Any part of this
quantity, say an inch, has also an infinity. But one infinity is not
larger than another. Therefore an inch is equal to a foot.

14. If two divaricating lines are produced ad infinitum from a point
where they form an acute angle, like a pyramid, the base will be
infinite, and, at the same time, not infinite; 1°. Because terminated by
two points; and, 2°. Because shorter than the sides; 3°. Base could not
be drawn, because sides infinitely long.

15. An atom, as existent, must be able to be turned round. But if turned
round, it must have a right and left hand, &c., and these its signs
[sides?] must change their place: therefore, be extended.” (Lectures,
Vol. II, App. iii, pp. 527-9.) [Mill’s square brackets.]

k-k
651, 652, 67 results

[*]
In Works, Vol. II, pp. 401-5, and Vol. III, pp. 1-62, respectively.

*
Appendix [II(B)] to Discussions, p. 707.

l-l
+67, 72

[*]
Augustus De Morgan, The Elements of Algebra (London: Taylor, 1835).

*
Lectures, Vol. II, p. 434.

*
Ibid., p. 440.

†
Ibid., p. 436.

‡
Ibid., pp. 435n, and 466.

§
Ibid., p. 435. [The words in square brackets are Mill’s.]

*
Ibid., p. 477.

*
Ibid., p. 441.

a-a
+72

b-b
651, 652, 67 does not fit the passive organic feelings

*
Ibid., pp. 494-5.

*
Ibid., p. 452. [See Aristotle, Nichomachean Ethics, p. 594 (X, iv,
1174b27-33).]

c-c
651, 652 Remains

[*]
I.e., the last lecture on Metaphysics; see Lectures, Vol. II, pp.
517-20.

*
Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 25-6.

†
Ibid., pp. 32-3. See also a passage in the essay on the Study of
Mathematics, Discussions, pp. 307-8.

[*]
Cf. Psalms, 94:9.

*
Both Sir W. Hamilton and Mr. Mansel sometimes call it by the fairer name
of Determinism. But both of them, when they come to close quarters with
the doctrine, in general call it either Necessity, or, less excusably,
Fatalism. The truth is, that the assailants of the doctrine cannot do
without the associations engendered by the double meaning of the word
Necessity, which, in this application, signifies only invariability, but
in its common employment, compulsion. Vide System of Logic, Bk. VI,
Chap. ii [Collected Works, Vol. VIII, pp. 836ff.].

*
“The atheist who holds matter or necessity to be the original principle
of all that is.” (Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 26-7.) “Those who do not allow
that mind is matter—who hold that there is in man a principle of action
superior to the determinations of a physical necessity, a brute or blind
fate.” (Ibid., p. 133.) And the entire argument in page 31 of the same
volume.

†
Reid’s [Essays on the Active Powers,] Works, Hamilton’s edition, p. 635.

‡
That Condillac was a Spiritualist, is shown by the chapter on the Soul,
which stands as the first chapter of his Art de Penser. [See Étienne
Bonnot de Condillac, La Logique, ou les premiers développemens de l’art
de penser, in Œuvres complètes, 31 vols. (Paris: Dufart, 1803), Vol.
XXX, pp. 5-15 (Part I, Chap. i).]

[*]
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 31.

*
[67] Sir W. Hamilton thinks it a fair statement of the Free-will
doctrine, that it supposes our volitions to be uncaused. But the
“Inquirer” considers this a misstatement, and thinks the real free-will
doctrine to be that “I” am the cause. (P. 45.) I prefer the other
language, as being more consistent with the use of the word cause in
other cases. If we take the word, we must take the acknowledged Law of
Causation along with it, viz., that a cause which is the same in every
respect, is always followed by the same effects. But on the free-will
theory, the a“I”a is the same, and all the other conditions the same,
and yet the effect may not only be different, but contrary. For instead
of saying that “I” am the cause, the “Inquirer” should at least say,
some state or mode of me, which is different when the effect is
different: though what state or mode this could be, unless it were a
will to will (the notion so justly ridiculed by Hobbes [see “Of Liberty
and Necessity,” Discourse III of Tripos, in English Works, ed.
Molesworth, Vol. IV, pp. 239-41]), it is difficult to imagine. I
persist, therefore, in saying, with Sir W. Hamilton, that, on the
free-will doctrine, volitions are emancipated from causation altogether.

a-a
67 “I”

*
Foot-notes to Reid, pp. 599n, 602n, 624n.

†
Lectures, Vol. II, pp. 412-13.

‡
To the same effect in another passage: “That, though inconceivable, a
motiveless volition would, if conceived, be conceived as morally
worthless, only shows our impotence more clearly.” (Appendix [I(A)] to
Discussions, pp. 614-15.) And in a foot-note to Reid, “Is the person an
original undetermined cause of the determination of his will? If he be
not, then he is not a free agent, and the scheme of Necessity is
admitted. If he be, in the first place, it is impossible to conceive the
possibility of this; and, in the second, if the fact, though
inconceivable, be allowed, it is impossible to see how a cause,
undetermined by any motive, can be a rational, moral, and accountable
cause.” (P. 602n.)

*
Appendix [I(A)] to Discussions, pp. 624-5.

b-b
651, 652 a distinction of which Sir W. Hamilton, of all men, ought to
recognise the importance

†
Foot-note to Reid, p. 602n.

[*]
Chap. xxiv, pp. 424ff.

*
Foot-note to Reid, p. 608n. To the same effect see Discussions, Appendix
[I(A)] on Causality, p. 614.

†
Foot-note to Reid, p. 609n.

[*]
Essays on the Active Powers, Works, p. 610.

‡
Foot-note to Reid, p. 610n.

§
Ibid., p. 611n.

*
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 34.

†
So difficult is it to escape from this fact, that Sir W. Hamilton
himself says, “Voluntary conation is a faculty which can only be
determined to energy through a pain or pleasure—through an estimate of
the relative worth of objects.” (Ibid., p. 188.) If I am determined to
prefer innocence to the satisfaction of a particular desire, through an
estimate of the relative worth of innocence and of the gratification,
can this estimate, while unchanged, leave me at liberty to choose the
gratification in preference to innocence?

c-c
+67, 72

d-d
651, 652 make a plain avowal of our ignorance

*
[67] The “Inquirer” accuses this argument of “gratuitously assuming that
free-will is inconsistent with foreknowledge.” (P. 45.) This is a
misapprehension. That vexed question is not even approached in the text.
All that is maintained is that the possibility eto human intelligence,e
of predicting human actions, implies a constancy of observed sequence
between the same antecedents and the same consequents, which, in the
case of all events except volitions, is deemed to justify the assertion
of a law of nature (called in the language of the free-will philosophers
Necessity). This constancy of sequence between motives, mental
dispositions, and actions, is a strong reason against admitting
free-will as a fact; but I have not meddled, and do not intend to
meddle, with the metaphysical question whether a contingent event can be
foreknown.

e-e
+72

f-f
651, 652 one thing, and

g-g
651, 652 another

†
“Dissertations on Reid,” [Note A,] p. 749.

*
“Does it not require,” says Locke, “some pains and skill to form the
general idea of a triangle (which yet is none of the most abstract,
comprehensive and difficult?) for it must be neither oblique nor
rectangle, neither equilateral, equicrural, nor scalene; but all and
none of these at once. In effect, it is something imperfect, that cannot
exist; an idea wherein some parts of several different and inconsistent
ideas are put together.” (Essay Concerning Human Understanding [Works,
Vol. III, pp. 27-8], Bk. IV, Chap. vii, §9.) Yet this union of
contradictory elements such a philosopher as Locke was able to fancy
that he conceived. I scarcely know a more striking example of the
tendency of the human mind to believe that things can exist separately
because they can be separately named; a tendency strong enough, in this
case, to make a mind like Locke’s believe itself to be conscious of that
which by the laws of mind cannot be a subject of consciousness to any
one.

[*]
See Lectures, Vol. I, App. i(b), p. 395.

[†]
See, e.g., Foot-notes to Reid, pp. 599n, and 602n.

†
Mr. Mansel, among others, makes the assertion in the broadest form it is
capable of, saying, “In every act of volition, I am fully conscious that
I can at this moment act in either of two ways, and that, all the
antecedent phænomena being precisely the same, I may determine one way
to-day and another way to-morrow.” (Prolegomena Logica, p. 152.) Yes,
though the antecedent phænomena remain the same: but not if my judgment
of the antecedent phænomena remains the same. If my conduct changes,
either the external inducements or my estimate of them must have
changed.

Mr. Mansel (as I have already observed) goes so far as to maintain that
our immediate intuition of Power is given us by the ego producing its
own volitions, not by its volitions producing bodily movements (pp.
139-40, and 151).

*
[67] In answer to the statement that what I am able to do is not a
subject of consciousness, Mr. Alexander says, “Perhaps it is not; but
what I feel I am able to do is surely a subject of consciousness. . . .
As to ‘consciousness is not prophetic, we are conscious of what is, not
of what will or can be,’ it seems enough to say that if we are conscious
of a free force of volition continuously inherent in us, we are
conscious of what is.” (Alexander, Mill and Carlyle, pp. 22-3 [quoting
Mill, p. 449 above].) If we can be conscious of a force, and can feel an
ability, independently of any present or past exercise thereof, the fact
has nothing similar or analogous in all the rest of our nature. We are
not conscious of a muscular force continuously inherent in us. If we
were born with a cataract, we are not conscious, previous to being
couched, of our ability to see. We should not feel able to walk if we
had never walked, nor to think, if we had never thought. Ability and
force are not real entities, which can be felt as present when no effect
follows; they are abstract names for the happening of the effect on the
occurrence of the needful conditions, or for our expectation of its
happening. It is of course possible that this may be all wrong, and that
there may be a concrete real thing called ability, of which
consciousness discloses to us the positive existence in this one case,
though there is no evidence of it in any other. But it is surely, to say
the least, much more probable that we mistake for consciousness our
habitual affirmation to ourselves of an acquired knowledge or belief.
This very common mistake may have escaped the notice of Mr. Alexander,
who (p. 23) considers knowledge to be the same thing as direct
consciousness! but it is a possibility which it will not do to overlook,
when one takes for one’s standard the “general consciousness of the
race;” especially if, with Mr. Alexander, one restricts “the race” to
those who are not philosophers, on the ground that no philosopher
“unless he be one of a thousand,” can see or feel anything that is
inconsistent with his preconceived opinion. (P. 25.) If this be the
normal effect of philosophy on the human mind; if, nine hundred and
ninety-nine times against one, the effect of cultivating our power of
mental discrimination is to pervert it; let us close our books, and
accept Hodge as a better authority in metaphysics than Locke or Kant,
and, I suppose, in astronomy than Newton. An appeal to consciousness,
however, to be of any value, must be to those who have formed a habit of
sifting their consciousness, and distinguishing what they perceive or
feel from what they infer; to those who can be made to understand that
they do not see the sun move: and, to have attained this power of
criticising their own consciousness on metaphysical subjects, they must
have reflected on those subjects, in a manner and degree which quite
entitle any one to the name of a philosopher.

Mr. Alexander denies that the belief that I was free to act can possibly
be tested by experience à posteriori, since experience only tells me the
way in which I did act, and says nothing about my having been able to
act otherwise. [Pp. 23-4.] Mr. Alexander’s idea of the conditions of
proof by experience is not a very enlarged one. Suppose that my
experience of myself afforded two undeniable cases, alike in all the
mental and physical antecedents, in one of which cases I acted in one
way, and in the other in the direct opposite: there would then be proof
by experience that I had been able to act either in the one way or in
the other. It is by experience of this sort I learn that I can act at
all, viz., by finding that an event takes place or not, according as
(other circumstances being the same) a volition of mine does or does not
take place. But when this power of my volitions over my actions has
become a familiar fact, the knowledge of it is so constantly present to
my mind as to be popularly called, and habitually confounded with,
consciousness. And the supposed power of myself over my volitions, which
is termed Free-will, though it cannot be a fact of consciousness, yet if
true, or even if believed, would similarly work itself into our inmost
knowledge of ourselves, in such a manner as to be mistaken for
consciousness.

It would hardly be worth while to notice a pretended inconsistency
discovered by Mr. Alexander between what is here said, and my
recognition in a former work of a “practical feeling of Free Will”—“a
feeling of Moral Freedom which we are conscious of,” if Mr. Alexander
had not inferred from it that I “was at one time conscious” of what I
now, for the convenience of my argument, deny to be a subject of
consciousness. [Alexander, p. 22-3, quoting Mill, A System of Logic, Bk.
VI, Chap. ii, §§1, 3, in Collected Works, Vol. VIII, pp. 836, 841.] Mr.
Alexander himself quotes the words in which I spoke of this practical
feeling of free-will as not one of free-will at all, in a sense implying
the theory; and took pains to describe what it really is, expressly
declaring our feeling of moral freedom to be a feeling of our being able
to modify our own character if we wish. When I applied the words feeling
and consciousness to this acquired knowledge, I did not use those terms
in their strict psychological meaning, there being no necessity for
doing so in that place; but, agreeably to popular usage, extended them
to (what there is no appropriate scientific name for) the whole of our
familiar and intimate knowledge concerning ourselves.

h-h
+67, 72

i-i
651, 652 if I had preferred it

j-j
651, 652 motives

k-k
651, 652 motives

*
[67] Preferring, as he says, a homely instance, Mr. Alexander supposes
that a man puts his finger to his nose, and asks, “Is not he conscious
of being able to touch at will either the right side of his nose or the
left? Having touched, let us say, the left side, is he not conscious he
could have touched the right side had he so willed it, and conscious
that he could have so willed, chosen, or preferred?” (P. 29.) Mr.
Alexander’s naïf expectation that his opponent’s answer will be
different because of the futility of the example, reminds one of the
asinus Buridani. I should, on the supposition which he makes, be aware
(I will not say conscious) that I could have touched the right side had
I so willed it; and aware that I could, and even should, have so willed,
chosen, and preferred, if there had existed a sufficient inducement to
make me do so, and not otherwise. If any one’s consciousness tells him
that he could have done so without an inducement, or in opposition to a
stronger inducement, I venture to express my opinion, in words borrowed
from Mr. Alexander, that it is not his “veritable consciousness.” I will
not imitate Mr. Alexander in calling it “a fraudulent substitute palmed
upon him” by his philosophical system. [Ibid.]

l-l
452+67, 72

*
[67] [Phillipps,] The Battle of the Two Philosophies, pp. 43-4.

†
[67] The writer I quote says, “Balancing one motive against another is
not willing but judging.” [P. 43.] The state of mind I am speaking of is
by no means a state of judging. It is an emotional, not an intellectual
state, and the judging may be finished before it commences. If there
were any indispensable act of judging in this stage, it could only be
judging which of the two pains or pleasures was the greatest: and to
regard this as the operative force would be conceding the point in
favour of Necessitarianism.

[*]
Ibid., pp. 43-4.

m-m
651, 652 being conscious

n
651, 652 the main

n
651, 652 the main

p-p
452+67, 72

*
[67] Mr. Alexander draws a woful picture of the pass which mankind would
come to, if belief in so-called Necessity became general. All “our
current moralities” would come to be regarded “as a form of
superstition,” all “moral ideas as illusions,” by which “it is plain we
get rid of them as motives:” consequently the internal sanction of
conscience would no longer exist. “The external sanctions remain, but
not quite as they were. That important section of them which rests on
the moral approval or disapproval of our fellow-men has, of course,
evaporated:” and “in virtue of a deadly moral indifference,” the
remaining external sanctions “might come to be much more languidly
enforced than as now they are,” and the progressive degradation would in
a sufficient time “succeed in reproducing the real original gorilla.”
(Pp. 118-21.) A formidable prospect: but Mr. Alexander must not suppose
that other people’s feelings, about the matters of highest importance to
them, are bound up with a certain speculative dogma, and even a certain
form of words, because, it seems, his are. As long as guilt is
thoroughly regarded as an evil, it would be quite safe even to hold with
Plato, that it is the mental equivalent of bodily disease [see, e.g.,
Republic, p. 418 (IV, 444d10-e4)]: people would be none the less anxious
to avoid it for themselves, and to cure it in others. Whatever else may
be an illusion, it is no illusion that some types of conduct and
character are salutary, and others pernicious, to the race and to each
of its members; and there is no fear that mankind will not retain the
property of their nature by which they prefer what is salutary to what
is pernicious, and proclaim and act upon the preference. It is no
illusion that human beings are objects of sympathy or of antipathy as
they belong to the one type or to the other, and that the sympathies and
antipathies excited in us by others react on ourselves. The qualities
which each man feels to be odious in others, are odious, without
illusion, in himself. The basis of Mr. Alexander’s gloomy prophecy thus
fails him. I might add, that even if his groundless anticipations came
to pass in some other manner, and disinterested love of virtue and
hatred of guilt faded away from the earth; though the human race, thus
degenerated, would be little worth preserving, it would probably find
the means of preserving itself notwithstanding. The external sanctions,
instead of being more languidly, would probably be far more rigidly
enforced than at present; for more rigorous penalties would be necessary
when there was less inward sentiment to aid them: and however destitute
of pure virtuous feeling mankind might be, each one of them would be far
too well aware of the importance of other people’s conduct to his own
interest, not to exact those penalties without stint, and without any of
the scruples which at present make conscientious men afraid of carrying
repression too far.

q-q
651, 652 though

r-r
+67, 72

s-s
651, 652 the best

*
“La liberté, complète, réelle, de l’homme, est la perfection humaine, le
but à atteindre.” From a paper by M. Albert Réville, [“De la liberté et
du progrès à propos des anciens et des modernes,”] in the Revue
Germanique [et Française, XXVII, 21,] for September, 1863, in which the
question of free-will is discussed (though only parenthetically) with a
good sense and philosophy seldom found in recent writings on that
subject.

tThe “Inquirer” accuses me (pp. 49-51) of throwing aside “a well
considered and deliberate opinion, because it refuses to fit in with a
foregone conclusion on another subject,” when I affirm that the good of
the person punished can ever be one of the ends of punishment; and he
quotes, on that subject, my essay on Liberty. I am responsible for the
Essay, but not for this absurd perversion of its doctrines. Does it
anywhere assert that children ought not to be punished for their own
good? that parents, and even the magistrate, when dealing with that
class of delinquents, are not entitled to constitute themselves judges
of the delinquent’s good, and even bound to make it the principal
consideration? Did I not expressly leave open, as similar to the case of
children, that of adult communities which are still in the infantine
stage of development? [See On Liberty, in Collected Works, Vol. XVIII
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1977), p. 224.] And did I say, or
did any one ever say, that when, for the protection of society, we
punish those who have done injury to society, the reformation of the
offenders is not one of the ends to be aimed at, in the kind and mode,
at least, of the punishment?

The “Inquirer” adds, “If I deserve punishment, only because my love of
right is too weak, and my desire for wrong pleasures is too strong, and
therefore punishment will help me to dislike the latter the most, then I
equally deserve rewards; ‘by counterbalancing the influence of present
temptation or bad habits,’ rewards ‘restore the mind to the normal
preponderance of the love of right.’ . . . And the more wicked I am, the
greater reward I deserve. . . . For children, and for all so far as
their own improvement is concerned, rewards for evil-doers must be more
moral than punishments, as tending directly to diminish misery, and
increase the sum of human happiness.” (P. 49.)

Supposing even that the matter of reward were sufficiently plentiful to
allow of compensating everybody for every temptation he foregoes, I
submit that this plan would scarcely fulfil the other, and still more
important end of punishment, the discouragement of future offenders. And
even in the case of children, whose own improvement, as long as their
education lasts, is the main end to be considered, every one knows,
though he may forget it in confuting an adversary, that pain is a
stronger thing than pleasure, and punishment vastly more efficacious
than reward. Punishment, too, can alone produce the associations which
make the conduct that incurs it, ultimately hateful in itself, and which
by rendering that which is injurious to society, sincerely distasteful
to its individual members, produces the fellowship of feeling which
gives them a sense of common interest, and enables them to sympathize
and cooperate as creatures of one kin. Thus much to show (if it needs
showing) that the preference of punishment to reward as a protection
against violations of right, is no inconsistency in the conception of
social justice laid down in the text. If the objector now asks—But,
supposing this were not so, and that rewarding an offender were as
effectual a means of improving his own character and protecting society
as punishing him, would it equally commend itself to our feeling of
desert? I answer, no. It would conflict with that natural, and even
animal, desire of retaliation—of hurting those who have hurt us, either
in ourselves or in anything we care for—which, as I have elsewhere
maintained, is the root of all that distinguishes our feeling of justice
from our ordinary sense of expediency. This natural feeling, whether
instinctive or acquired, though in itself it has nothing moral in it,
yet when moralized by being allied with, and limited by, regard for the
general welfare, becomes, in my view of the matter, our moral sentiment
of justice. And this sentiment is necessarily offended by rewarding
delinquents, and gratified by their punishment. The sentiment is
entitled to consideration in a world like ours, in which punishment is
really necessary: but granting the absurd supposition of a state of
human affairs in which rewarding offenders would really be more
expedient than punishing them, there would be no need of this particular
moral sentiment, and, like other sentiments the use of which is
superseded by changes in the circumstances of mankind, it might, and
probably would, die away.

The chapter in which I have discussed this question (Utilitarianism,
Chap. v [in Collected Works, Vol. X, pp. 240ff.]) is quite familiar to
Mr. Alexander; who shows himself extremely well acquainted with all
parts of it, except those which tell against his own side. Even when he
accomplishes (pp. 52 and 59) the great feat of finding in it the two
statements, that justice, in the general mind, has a great deal to do
with the notion of desert, and that justice is not synonymous with
expediency, no one who reads him would suspect that I had explained in
the same chapter what, in my view, the notion of desert is, and what
there is in our idea of justice besides expediency. Mr. Alexander’s
perpetual insinuations, and more than insinuations, of bad faith, since
he makes a kind of retractation of their grossest meaning in one line of
his essay [see p. 72], I pardon, as one of the incidents of his
rollicking style; but it is well that he should be aware how easy, if
any one were disposed, it would be to retaliate them.

How far Mr. Alexander understands the first elements of the ethical
system which he denounces, is shown by one of his arguments, which he is
so fond of that he repeats it several times; that if the protection of
society is a sufficient reason for hanging any one, it holds good for
hanging an innocent person, or a madman (pp. 36, 37, 65, 89). He
repeatedly says, that this has just as deterring an effect as hanging a
real criminal; being of opinion, apparently, that hanging a person who
is not guilty gives people a motive to abstain from being guilty. As to
the madman, he asks, “How should the state of mind of the maniac, as
unamenable to motive, any way affect the efficacy of our hanging him for
murder, as a means to deter others from murder?” (P. 65.) Mr. Alexander
really has no claim to be answered, until he has got a step or two
beyond this. Perhaps, however, he may be able to see, that all the
deterring effect which hanging can produce on men who are amenable to
motive, is produced by hanging men who are amenable to motive. Hanging,
in addition, those who are not amenable to motive, adds nothing to the
deterring effect, and is therefore a gratuitous brutality.t

t-t
+67, 72

u-u
+67, 72

v
651, 652 exactly

w-w
651, 652 just

x-x
+67, 72

*
[67] The force of this argument is attested by the straits to which my
most persevering assailant, Mr. Alexander, is reduced by it (pp. 63-4).
He finds himself obliged to say that, “could we have positive
assurance,” in the case of such people, “that their outrage of the
obligation to respect life was solely an act of self-sacrifice to what
they considered a higher and more sacred one, we should be obliged to
admit that their doom was not just in the particular instance.” This is
very well, but we want practice as well as theory. Would you hang them?
Mr. Alexander makes a halting half-admission that he would. “A dubious
point of justice—dubious, because the true motive of the act must always
remain obscure—may here be allowed to be overridden by a plain and
potent mandate of expediency.” Mr. Alexander therefore would hang men
when it is doubtful whether they deserve it; would hang them for what
“may really have been an act of sublime virtue.” But what is the amount
of real dubiousness in cases like these? Of all acts that a man can do,
those by which he knowingly sacrifices his life, sometimes with the
addition of horrible torments, are the clearest from suspicion of any
motives but honest ones. Mr. Alexander talks of Brutus and Charlotte
Corday, but I am content with Ravaillac. Is there the smallest reason to
doubt that Ravaillac’s “outrage of the obligation to respect life” was
“an act of self-sacrifice” to what, in his opinion, was “a higher and
more sacred one?” What motive had Ravaillac for his abominable action
except a supposed duty to God, and did he not deem this his highest and
most sacred duty? As for Mr. Alexander’s hint [p. 63] that such a man,
if not culpable in the act, was “culpable in the perversion of his
conscience which led to it,” it is the old odious assumption of
persecutors, that acts which they cannot show to have been wicked in
intention, must have originated in previous wickedness. The act of
Ravaillac simply originated in false teaching, coming to him from the
same quarter from which had come most of the good teaching which he had
received during life. It came from the fountain of goodness, not of
wickedness.

y-y
651, 652 for no reason

*
Several of Sir W. Hamilton’s admissions are strong arguments against the
alleged self-evident connexion between free-will and accountability. We
have found him affirming that a volition not determined by motives
“would, if conceived, be conceived as morally worthless;” that “the free
acts of an indifferent, are, morally and rationally, as worthless as the
preordained passions of a determined will;” and that “it is impossible
to see how a cause, undetermined by any motive, can be a rational,
moral, and accountable cause.” [Appendix I(A) to Discussions, pp.
614-15, 624-5, and Foot-note to Reid, p. 602n; cf. pp. 442-3 and 442n
above.] If all this be so, there can be no intuitive perception of a
necessary connexion between free-will and morality; it would appear, on
the contrary, that we are naturally unable to recognise an act as moral,
if it is, in the sense of the theory, free.

zMr. Alexander actually thinks that in these passages, Sir W. Hamilton
is “asserting the determination of the will by motives;” and cannot
believe that he intended “to assert an absolute commencement as the mode
under which Freedom, though inconceivable, has yet to be believed:”
since this “would have been to rush with his eyes open on the staring
contradictory, of a thing at once caused and uncaused.” (P. 80.) Yet,
presently after, he himself charges Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrine with
requiring belief in two contrary inconceivables. [Pp. 81n-2n.] In the
present case it only requires a belief in one of them, an absolute, or
uncaused, commencement. Mr. Alexander does not lay claim to much
knowledge of Sir W. Hamilton; and certainly no one who understood what
that philosopher, and most others who discuss this question, mean by “to
determine,” could fail to see that with him the determination of the
will by motives means Determinism, or as it is commonly called,
Necessity.z

z-z
+67, 72

a-a
651, 652 ideas of doing wrong and

*
Lectures, Vol. III, p. 47.

[*]
For the image, see William Shakespeare, Twelfth Night, II, iii, 115-16.

b-b
651, 652 his will could not have helped it

c-c
+67, 72

d-d
651, 652 right

e-e
651, 652 wrong

*
Prolegomena Logica, Note C at the end [pp. 298-305].

f
651, 652 as

†
System of Logic, Bk. VI, Chap. ii. [Collected Works, Vol. VIII, pp.
836ff.]

[*]
Quoted by Mansel, Prolegomena Logica, pp. 298-9, from Logic, Bk. III,
Chap. v, §8 (§7 in the 2nd ed., from which Mansel quotes), Collected
Works, Vol. VII, p. 347n.

[†]
Prolegomena Logica, p. 299.

[‡]
See Sophocles, Œdipus the King, Œdipus at Colonus.

g-g
651, 652 necessity: in

*
[67] This vital truth in moral psychology, that we can improve our
character if we will, is a great stumbling block both to the “Inquirer”
and to Mr. Alexander. They maintain that this fact makes no difference
at all, and that the Causation of human actions is exactly the same
thing with Modified Fatalism. That the “Inquirer” cannot see any
difference, excites no surprise, since he professes himself unable to
understand “how our conduct is amenable to our will if it is wholly
caused by our character and circumstances.” (P. 46n.) Is not the very
doctrine he is contending against, that our character and circumstances
cause it through our will? Both he and Mr. Alexander protest vehemently,
and Mr. Alexander at much length, that the Causation doctrine is as
incompatible with Free will as Fatalism is. [See Phillipps, pp. 46-7,
and Alexander, pp. 100-18.] As if anybody had denied that. In the very
next paragraph, when arguing against Kant, I expressly affirmed it. But,
if it is not too much to ask, let them try to put their own opinion in
abeyance, and condescend for a few moments to look at the question from
mine. Suppose (I have as much right to make the supposition as they
have) that a person dislikes some part of his own character, and would
be glad to change it. He cannot, as he well knows, change it by a mere
act of volition. He must use the means which nature gives to ourselves,
as she gave to our parents and teachers, of influencing our character by
appropriate circumstances. If he is a Modified Fatalist, he will not use
those means, for he will not believe in their efficacy; but will remain
passively discontented with himself, or what is worse, will learn to be
contented, thinking that his character has been made for him, and that
he cannot make it over again, however willing. If, on the contrary, he
is a Moral Causationist, he will know that the work is not finally and
irrevocably done; that the improvement of his character is still
possible by the proper means, the only needful condition being that he
should desire, what by the supposition he does desire: consequently if
the desire is stronger than the means are disagreeable, he will set
about doing that which, if done, will improve his character. I cannot
suppose my critics capable of maintaining that such a difference as
this, between the two theories, is of no practical importance; and I
must, with all courtesy, decline to recognise as entitled to any voice
in the question, whoever is not able to seize a distinction so broad and
obvious.

Mr. Alexander’s curious dictum that a motive is itself an act, can only
have a true meaning, or any meaning at all, if understood of this
indirect influence of our voluntary acts over our mental dispositions.
(Pp. 18-20.) That a person can, by an act of will, either give to
himself, or take away from himself, a desire or an aversion, I suppose
even Mr. Alexander will hardly affirm: but we can, by a course of
self-culture, finally modify, to a greater or less extent, our desires
and aversions; which is the doctrine of Moral Causation, as
distinguished from Modified Fatalism.

[*]
Prolegomena Logica, p. 303.

[†]
See Metaphysik der Sitten, in Werke, Vol. IX, pp. 21-30.

h-h
+67, 72

[‡]
Prolegomena Logica, pp. 299-300.

[*]
See Reid, Essays on the Active Powers, Works, p. 609; Mansel,
Prolegomena Logica, p. 301.

*
Pp. 609n-11n.

[†]
See Essays on the Active Powers, Works, pp. 599-636.

[‡]
Prolegomena Logica, p. 302.

[*]
Ibid., pp. 302-3.

[*]
“Study of Mathematics—University of Cambridge,” Edinburgh Review, LXII
(Jan., 1836), 409-55; reprinted in Discussions, pp. 263-325.

[*]
See Hebrews, 12:1.

[*]
See Auguste Comte, Cours de philosophie positive, Vol. I, pp. 57-9.

*
I do not know that the logical value of mathematics has ever been more
finely and discriminatingly appreciated than by M. Comte in his latest
work, Synthèse subjective ([Paris: Comte et Dalmont, 1856,] p. 98).
“Bornée à son vrai domaine, la raison mathématique y peut admirablement
remplir l’office universel de la saine logique: induire pour déduire,
afin de construire. Renonçant à de vaines prétentions, elle sent que ses
meilleurs succès restent toujours incapables de nous faire, partout
ailleurs, induire, ou même déduire, et surtout construire. Elle se
contente de fournir, dans le domaine le plus favorable, un type de
clarté, de précision, et de consistance, dont la contemplation familière
peut seule disposer l’esprit à rendre les autres conceptions aussi
parfaites que le comporte leur nature. Sa réaction générale, plus
négative que positive, doit surtout consister à nous inspirer partout
une invincible répugnance pour le vague, l’incohérence, et l’obscurité,
que nous pouvons réellement éviter envers des pensées quelconques, si
nous y faisons assez d’efforts.”

*
See, among other passages, Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 146-7.

†
Ibid., Vol. I, p. 246.

*
Ibid., Vol. II, p. 98.

†
Ibid., p. 439.

‡
Discussions, p. 282.

*
Ibid., pp. 313-14.

†
Ibid., p. 322.

‡
Ibid., p. 290.

§
Ibid., p. 291.

[*]
See, e.g., Cambridge Problems, Being a collection of the printed
questions proposed to the candidates for the degree of Bachelor of Arts,
1801-1820 (London: Black and Armstrong, 1836).

[†]
Miles Bland, Algebraical Problems (Cambridge: Nicholson, 1812), and
Geometrical Problems (Cambridge: Nicholson, 1819).

*
Discussions, p. 268n. [The references are to Francisco Sanchez, Minerva,
sive De Causis Latinæ Linguæ Commentarius, by Caspar Schoppe and Jacobus
Perizonius (Franeker: Strickius, 1687), and to Isaac Newton, Philosophiæ
Naturalis Principia Mathematica, in Opera, ed. Samuel Horsley, 5 vols.
(London: Nichols, 1779-85), Vols. II-III.]

[*]
Hamilton’s “On the Study of Mathematics” (a review in the Edinburgh
Review of William Whewell’s Thoughts on the Study of Mathematics as a
Part of a Liberal Education [Cambridge: Deighton, 1835]) was reprinted
in his Discussions (pp. 263-325) with Whewell’s reply, “To the Editor of
the Edinburgh Review,” LXIII [April, 1836], 270-2, and the editorial
note from the Edinburgh (Discussions, pp. 326-8), and Hamilton’s “Notes
to the Above Letter” (again from the Edinburgh, ibid., 272-5; in
Discussions, pp. 329-40).

*
Discussions, pp. 334-5.

a-a
+67, 72

b-b
651, 652 , straight lines

c-c
651, 652 (or three) rectangular axes

[*]
Discussions, p. 335; cf. p. 477 above.

[†]
Ibid., p. 314; cf. p. 475 above.

d-d
651, 652 If Sir W. Hamilton could think so, his ignorance of the subject
must have been

*
Ignorance of this important principle of the logic of induction, or want
of familiarity with it, continually leads to gross misapplications, even
by able writers, of the logic of ratiocination. For instance, we are
constantly told that the uniformity of the course of nature cannot be
itself an induction, since every inductive reasoning assumes it, and the
premise must have been known before the conclusion. Those who argue in
this manner can never have directed their attention to the continual
process of giving and taking, in respect of certainty, which
reciprocally goes on between this great premise and all the narrower
truths of experience; the effect of which is, that, though originally a
generalization from the more obvious of the narrower truths, it ends by
having a fulness of certainty which overflows upon these, and raises the
proof of them to a higher level; so that its relation to them is
reversed, and instead of an inference from them, it becomes a principle
from which any one of them may be ededucede.

e-e
651, 652 inferred

[*]
See “Study of Mathematics,” passim.

[*]
Hamilton’s translation of Adrien Baillet, La Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes,
2 vols. (Paris: Horthemels, 1691), Vol. I, pp. 111-13.

[†]
René Descartes, Regulæad directionem ingenii (Amsterdam: Blaev, 1710),
p. 12.

[‡]
Hamilton’s translation of Baillet, Vol. I, p. 225, Hamilton mistakenly
attributes the matter to a letter of Descartes to Marin Mersenne of
1630; Baillet is in fact conflating comments from several letters to
Mersenne in the 1630s.

[§]
Hamilton’s mistranslation of ibid., p. 235; Hamilton’s parenthesis.

*
Discussions, pp. 277-8. [The two parentheses are Hamilton’s; the closing
passage is Hamilton’s translation of Baillet, Vol. II, p. 481.]

*
Ibid., p. 323. [The words in square brackets are Mill’s. For the opinion
of Socrates, see Xenophon, Memorabilia, in Memorabilia and Œconomicus
(Greek and English), trans. E. C. Marchant (London: Heinemann; New York:
Putnam’s Sons, 1923), pp. 346-8 (IV, vii, 3-5).]

†
Ibid., p. 266.

f-f
+67, 72 [not in Source]

*
It is but just to add, that the English mode of thought has suffered in
a different, but almost equally injurious manner, by its exclusive
following of what it imagined to be the teaching of Bacon, being in
reality a slovenly misconception of him, leaving on one side the whole
spirit and scope of his speculations. The philosopher who laboured to
construct a canon of scientific Induction, by which the observations of
mankind, instead of remaining empirical, might be so combined and
marshalled as to be made the foundation of safe general theories, little
expected that his name would become the stock authority for disclaiming
generalization, and enthroning empiricism, under the name of experience,
as the only solid foundation of practice.

*
The character here drawn of German thought is, I hardly need say, not
intended to apply to such a man as Goethe, or to those who received
their intellectual impulse from him. In him, indeed, not to speak of his
almost universal culture, the intellectual operations were always guided
by an intense spirit of observation and experiment, and a constant
reference to the exigencies, outward and inward, of practical human
life. Such criticism as can justly be made on Goethe as a thinker, rests
on entirely different grounds.

†
Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 35-42.

[*]
See Metaphysics, Vol. I, p. 12 (I, ii, 982b12ff.).

*
F. H. Jacobi. [See David Hume über den Glauben, oder Idealismus und
Realismus, in Werke, 6 vols. (Leipzig: Fleischer, 1812-25), Vol. II, pp.
54-5.] The entire passage is in Discussions, p. 312.

†
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 37.

[*]
Ibid., pp. 39-40; quoting Kant, Kritik der Praktischen Vernunft, in
Werke, Vol. VIII, p. 312.

[†]
Milton, Paradise Lost, in Works, p. 202 (VIII, 84).

*
Wordsworth, in the Biography by his nephew [Christopher Wordsworth,
Memoirs of William Wordsworth, 2 vols. (London: Moxon, 1851)], Vol. II,
p. 159.

*
[Michael Faraday,] Lectures on the [Various] Forces of Matter [and on
the Chemical History of a Candle (London: Griffin, Bohn, 1863)], pp.
2-3. The philosophy of this is well given by Mr. Lewes in his valuable
work on Aristotle. “Surprise starts from a background of knowledge, or
fixed belief. Nothing is surprising to ignorance, because the mind in
that state has no preconceptions to be contradicted.” ([George Henry
Lewes, Aristotle: A Chapter in the History of Science (London: Smith,
Elder, 1864),] p. 212.)

[*]
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.

a
651, 652 : but the subject, though a highly important, is a
comparatively simple one

*
Even on this subject he has not been able to avoid some fallacies in
reasoning. Thus, in maintaining against Stewart and Brown that we can
attend to more than one object at once, he defends this true doctrine by
some very bad arguments. He says, that if the mind could “attend to, or
be conscious of, only a single object at a time,” the conclusion would
be involved, “that all comparison and discrimination are impossible.”
(Lectures, Vol. I, p. 252.) This assumes that we cannot compare and
discriminate any impressions but those which are exactly simultaneous.
May not the condition of discrimination be consciousness not at the
same, but at immediately successive instants? May not discrimination
depend on change of consciousness; the transition from one state to
another? This is a tenable opinion; it was actually maintained by the
philosophers against whom our author was arguing; and if he thought it
erroneous, he should have disproved it. Unless he did, he was not
entitled to treat a doctrine shown to involve this consequence, as
reduced to absurdity. Another of his proofs of our ability to attend to
a plurality of things at once, is our perception of harmony between
sounds. He argues that to perceive a relation between two sounds implies
a comparison, and that if this comparison is not between the sounds
themselves, simultaneously attended to, it must be a comparison of “past
sound as retained in memory, with the present as actually perceived;”
which still implies attending to two objects at once (ibid., p. 244).
His opponents however might say, that if there be a comparison, it is
not between two simultaneous impressions, either sensations or memories,
but between two successive sounds in the instant of transition. They
might add, that the perception of harmony does not necessarily involve
comparison. When a number of sounds in perfect harmony strike the ear
simultaneously, we have but a single impression; we perceive but one
mass of sound. Analysing this into its component parts is an act of
intelligence, not of direct perception, and is performed by fixing our
attention first on the whole, and then on the separate elements, not all
at once, but one after another.b These objections to his doctrine our
author seems not to have thought of, because those of Stewart, whom as
an opponent he principally had in view, were different (ibid., Vol. II,
p. 145). But they ought to have occurred to him without prompting, being
in complete unison with his doctrine that consciousness of wholes
usually precedes that of their parts; that “instead of commencing with
minima, perception commences with masses.” (Ibid., p. 327, and many
similar passages.)

Sir W. Hamilton is also inconsistent in affirming that attention is “an
act of will or desire,” (ibid., Vol. I, p. 237,) and afterwards that it
is in some cases automatic, “a mere vital and irresistible act.” (Ibid.,
p. 248.) This, however, is only a verbal inaccuracy. He doubtless meant
that attention is generally voluntary, but occasionally automatic.

b
651, 652 The perception of the parts is so far from being distinctly
present in our feeling of the harmony, that in proportion as we
consciously realize it we injure the general effect.

b
651, 652 The perception of the parts is so far from being distinctly
present in our feeling of the harmony, that in proportion as we
consciously realize it we injure the general effect.

[*]
Ibid., pp. 310-37.

*
[67] [See ibid., pp. 324-34, where Hamilton quotes from Théodore
Jouffroy, “Du sommeil,” Mélanges philosophiques, 2nd ed. (Paris:
Ladrange, 1838), pp. 290-302.] I see with regret that what I have said
above, or rather perhaps what I have omitted to say, has given an
impression even to friendly critics that I think considerably less
highly of Sir W. Hamilton’s intellectual calibre, and of his general
services to mankind, than I do. My business in this work was to estimate
not the man, but the permanent additions made by him to the sum of
speculative philosophy. These I cannot rate very high, but I join
sincerely and heartily in the tribute to his merits, so justly paid by
Mr. Grote in the Westminster Review (pp. 2-3).

“He kept up the idea of philosophy as a subject to be studied from its
own points of view: a dignity which in earlier times it enjoyed, perhaps
to mischievous excess, but from which in recent times it has far too
much receded, especially in England. He performed the great service of
labouring strenuously to piece together the past traditions of
philosophy, to rediscover those which had been allowed to drop into
oblivion, and to make out the genealogy of opinions as far as negligent
predecessors had still left the possibility of doing so. We recognise
also in Sir W. Hamilton an amount of intellectual independence which
seldom accompanies such vast erudition. He recites many different
opinions, but he judges them all for himself; and, what is of still
greater moment, he constantly gives the reasons for his judgments. To us
these reasons are always of more or less value, whether we admit them to
be valid or not. . . . To those who dissent from him, as well as to
those who agree with him, his reasonings are highly instructive: while
the full citations from so many other writers contribute materially not
only to elucidate the points directly approached, but also to enlarge
our knowledge of philosophy generally.”

And in the emphatic words of Professor Masson: “Try him even in respect
of the importance of his effects on the national thought. Whether from
his learning or by reason of his independent thinkings, was it not he
that hurled into the midst of us the very questions of metaphysics, and
the very forms of those questions, that have become the academic theses
everywhere in this British age for real metaphysical discussion? . . .
Let it be said of Sir W. Hamilton that, simply and by whatever means, he
did more than any other man to reinstate the worship of Difficulty in
the higher mind of Great Britain.” ([Recent British Philosophy,] pp.
308-9.)

Moreover, as Mr. Grote [p. 2] further observes, “in a subject so
abstract, obscure, and generally unpalatable, as Logic and Metaphysics,
the difficulty which the teacher finds in inspiring interest is extreme.
That Sir W. Hamilton overcame such difficulty with remarkable success is
the affirmation of his two editors,” and is proved by the profound
impression left by the teacher and his teaching on the intellects and
feelings of his pupils. The “Inquirer” charges me with ignoring “that
which formed the greater part of his work—the living teaching he gave to
living men—whereby he has raised up for our age and nation that which we
most needed, a school of men who can and do think.” (P. 6.) It would be
very unworthy to ignore so important an item in his services to mankind.
I acknowledge it with a feeling, in which I am surpassed by none, of the
inestimable worth of all such services. But if I had been attempting a
summary of the benefits which the world owes to Sir W. Hamilton, neither
could I have ignored his articles on Education, and especially those on
the English Universities, to which it is impossible not to attribute a
great influence in shaming those bodies out of their long-continued
selfish betrayal of their national trust, and putting the new life into
them which they have since manifested and are manifesting, with so much
advantage to the spirit of the time and to the national culture.

Even in the character of a speculative thinker, my estimate of Sir W.
Hamilton is prodigiously misjudged by those who have made themselves, as
they had good right to do, the champions of his philosophic reputation.
I cannot sufficiently protest against such assertions as that of Mr.
Mansel, to which there are several equivalent dbyd the “Inquirer,” [pp.
5-8,] that, if all is true which I have alleged, “Sir W. Hamilton,
instead of being a great philosopher, is the veriest blunderer that ever
put pen to paper.” ([Mansel, Philosophy of the Conditioned,] p. 181.)
Such exaggerations are intelligible in those by whose own estimate he
stands almost at the summit of existing philosophy, and who having
climbed, as they think, by his assistance, to the same pinnacle, think
an inferior eminence unworthy to be counted for anything at all. But
some of the most conspicuous figures in the history of philosophy,
distinguished no less by the power of their eintellecte than by the
greatness of their influence on subsequent thought, have not, at least
in my judgment, left behind them even so much of positive addition to
philosophic truth as Sir W. Hamilton. Kant, for example, of whose mental
powers no one who is not a disciple probably forms a higher estimate
than I do, and who holds so essential a place in the development of
philosophic thought, that until somebody had done what Kant did,
metaphysics according to our present conception of it could not have
been constituted—Kant, probably, will be finally judged to have left no
noticeable contribution to philosophy which was both new and true,
except some of his refutations of predecessors. Kant, it is true, was a
more consecutive, and therefore a more consistent thinker than Sir W.
Hamilton, and it is chiefly by that quality that he has become one of
the turning points in the history of philosophy, which Sir W. Hamilton
has no claim to be: but in ability to discern psychological truths
uncoloured by a theory, he seems to me inferior to Sir W. Hamilton.
Perhaps, though of a very different character of mind, the nearest
parallel in philosophic merit to Sir W. Hamilton (apart from erudition,
in which he has probably no parallel among philosophers), was Professor
Dugald Stewart. Neither of them can be numbered among the great original
thinkers who have carried philosophy into one of its indispensable
phases, as did Locke, Descartes, Hume, Kant, and with all his
shortcomings, even Reid. Neither of them saw into the heart of great
psychological questions which had never been fathomed before, like
Berkeley, Hartley, Brown, or James Mill. Both of them have thrown
considerable light on minor questions: both have gathered, and more or
less perfectly assimilated, truths from very opposite quarters: both
have committed great oversights, though Sir W. Hamilton, coming last,
and having the benefit of the Kantian movement, stood on a considerably
higher platform of metaphysical thought. Both had some, though but
moderate, powers of analysis; their philosophic style, though extremely
unlike, was, in both, excellent: both gave an important stimulus to the
national intellect by their extraordinary power as public teachers; and
both will be remembered as meritoriously handing on the torch of
philosophy, but neither of them, I venture to say, as among those who
have much brightened or fed its flame.

d-d
67 in

e-e
67 intellects

*
Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 123-5. This third part is “Ontology, or
Metaphysics Proper;” “the science conversant about inferences of unknown
being from its known manifestations;” [ibid., p. 125,] things not
manifested in consciousness, but legitimately inferrible from those
which are.

†
This is strikingly the case, among many others, with the Lectures on
Definition and Division. [Lectures, Vol. IV, pp. 1-36 (Lectures xxiv and
xxv.)] On those subjects our author lets Krug and Esser think for him.
Those authors stand to him instead, not merely of finding a fit
expression for his thoughts, but apparently of having any thoughts at
all.

‡
fI have already given an example of this from the Lectures, Vol. III,
pp. 159-62. Hisf own idea of Clearness as a property of concepts, is
that “a concept is said to be clear when the degree of consciousness is
such as to enable us to distinguish it” (the concept) “as a whole from
others” [ibid., p. 158]: but this idea is expounded by a passage from
Esser [ibid., pp. 160-2], in which it is not the concept, but the
objects thought through the concept, which, if sufficiently
distinguished from all others, constitute the gconceptg a clear one. I
confess that Esser has here greatly the advantage over Sir W. Hamilton,
who might have usefully corrected his own theory from the borrowed
commentary on it.

f-f
651, 652 For example, (Lectures, Vol. III, pp. 159-62) his

g-g
651, 652, 67 conception

[*]
Edward Gibbon, “Memoirs of My Life and Writings,” in Miscellaneous
Works, ed. John Baker Holroyd, Lord Sheffield, 2 vols. (London: Strahan,
Cadell and Davies, 1796), Vol. I, p. 66.

*
The signs of Sir W. Hamilton’s want of familiarity with the physical
sciences meet us in every corner of his works. One, which I have not
hitherto found a convenient place for noticing, is the singular view he
takes of analysis and synthesis. He imagines that synthesis always
presupposes analysis, and that unless grounded on a previous analysis,
synthesis can afford no knowledge. “Synthesis without a previous
analysis is baseless; for synthesis receives from analysis the elements
which it recomposes” (Lectures, Vol. I, p. 98). “Synthesis without
analysis is a false knowledge, that is, no knowledge at all. . . . A
synthesis without a previous analysis is radically and ab initio null.”
(Ibid., 99.) This affirmation is the more surprising, as the example he
himself selects to illustrate analysis and synthesis is a case of
chemical composition; a neutral salt, compounded of an acid and an
alkali. Did he suppose that when a chemist succeeds in forming a salt by
synthesis merely, putting together two substances never actually found
in combination, he does not make exactly the same addition to chemical
science as if he had met with the compound first, and analysed it into
its elements afterwards? Did Sir W. Hamilton ever read a memoir by a
chemist on a newly-discovered elementary substance? If so, did he not
find that the discoverer invariably proceeds to ascertain by synthesis
what combinations the new element will form with all other elements for
which it has any affinity? Sir W. Hamilton, though he drew his example
from physics, forgot all that related to the example, and thought only
of psychological investigation, in which it does commonly happen that
the compound fact is presented to us first, and we have to begin by
analysing it; our synthesis, if practicable at all, taking place
afterwards, and serving only to verify the analysis. Therefore, in spite
of his own example, Sir W. Hamilton defines synthesis as being always a
recomposition and “reconstruction” (ibid., p. 98). Could any one who had
the smallest familiarity with physical science have committed this
strange oversight?

Another example, to which I shall content myself with referring, is the
incapacity of understanding an argument respecting a principle of
Mechanics, shown in his controversy with Dr. Whewell respecting the law
that the pressure of a lever on the fulcrum, when the weights balance
one another, is equal to the sum of the two weights (Discussions, pp.
338-9). [See also William Whewell, An Elementary Treatise on Mechanics,
Vol. I (Cambridge: Deighton; London: Whittaker, 1819), p. 19.]

*
[67]“We set particular value upon this preservation of the traditions of
philosophy, and upon this maintenance of a known perpetual succession
among the speculative minds of humanity, with proper comparisons and
contrasts. We have found among the names quoted by Sir W. Hamilton, and
thanks to his care, several authors hardly at all known to us, and
opinions cited from them not less instructive than curious. He deserves
the more gratitude, because he departs herein from received usage since
Bacon and Descartes. The example set by these great men was admirable,
so far as it went to throw off the authority of predecessors; but
pernicious so far as it banished those predecessors out of knowledge,
like mere magazines of immaturity and error. Throughout the eighteenth
century, all study of the earlier modes of philosophizing was, for the
most part, neglected. Of such neglect, remarkable instances are pointed
out by Sir W. Hamilton.” (Mr. Grote, in Westminster Review, pp. 3-4.)

h
651, 652 far

*
[67] Mr. Grote, agreeing with me as to Brown, demurs to this judgment as
regards Archbishop Whately; of which latter comparison Professor Masson,
still more naturally, complains. [See Grote, pp. 37-8; Masson, Recent
British Philosophy, p. 303.] Our difference, I suspect, is not that I
value Sir W. Hamilton less, but Archbishop Whately more. The result of
my reading of many of his multifarious writings is a much higher
estimation than Mr. Grote’s seems to be, both of his originality and of
his services to thought. As a metaphysician proper, no one would compare
him with Sir W. Hamilton: but I am speaking of him in the more general
character of a thinker, and in respect of the number of true and
valuable thoughts on many various subjects, metaphysics being one, which
he brought into the general stock, and threw into circulation.

Let me add that in speaking of Brown and Whately as active and fertile
thinkers, I had no idea that I should be considered as refusing those
attributes to Sir W. Hamilton.

[*]
See Aristotle, Metaphysics, Vol. I, p. 6 (I, i, 981a29); see also
Hamilton, Lectures, Vol. I, Lecture iii, p. 58.

*
This solitary exception relates to Hume. Respecting the general scope
and purpose, the pervading spirit, of Hume’s speculations, Sir W.
Hamilton does give an opinion, and, I venture to think, a wrong one. He
regards Hume’s philosophy as scepticism in its legitimate sense. Hume’s
object, he thinks, was to prove the uncertainty of all knowledge. With
this intent he represents him as reasoning from premises “not
established by himself,” but “accepted only as principles universally
conceded in the previous schools of philosophy.” These premises Hume
showed (according to Sir W. Hamilton) to lead to conclusions which
contradicted the evidence of consciousness; thus proving, not that
consciousness deceives, but that the premises generally accepted on the
authority of philosophers, and leading to these conclusions, must be
false. (Discussions, pp. 87-8, and elsewhere.)

This is certainly the use which has been made of Hume’s arguments, by
Reid and many other of his opponents. Admitting their validity as
arguments, Reid considered them, not as proving Hume’s conclusions, but
as a reductio ad absurdum of his premises. [See On the Intellectured
Powers, pp. 484-9.] That Hume however had any foresight of their being
put to this use, either for a dogmatical or a purely sceptical purpose,
appears to me supremely improbable. If we form our opinion by reading
the series of Hume’s metaphysical essays straight through, instead of
judging from a few detached expressions in a single essay (that “on the
Academical or Sceptical Philosophy,”) I think our judgment will be that
Hume sincerely accepted both the premises and the conclusions. It would
be difficult, no doubt, to prove this by conclusive evidence, nor would
I venture absolutely to affirm it. In the case of the freethinking
philosophers of the last century, it is often impossible to be quite
certain what their opinions really were; how far the reservations they
made, expressed real convictions, or were concessions to supposed
necessities of position. Hume, it is certain, made such concessions
largely: insincere they can hardly be called, being so evidently
intended to be φωνήεντα, at least συνετοῖσι. [Pindar, Olympian Odes, in
The Odes of Pindar Including Principal Fragments (Greek and English),
trans. John Sandys (London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1937), p. 26 (II, 85).] I have a strong impression
that Hume’s scepticism, or rather his professed admiration of
scepticism, was a disguise of this description, intended rather to avoid
offence than to conceal his opinion; that he preferred to be called a
sceptic, rather than by a more odious name; and having to promulgate
conclusions which he knew would be regarded as contradicting, on one
hand the evidence of common sense, on the other the doctrines of
religion, did not like to declare them as positive convictions, but
thought it more judicious to exhibit them as the results we might come
to, if we put complete confidence in the trustworthiness of our rational
faculty. I have little doubt that he himself did feel this confidence,
and wished it to be felt by his readers. There is certainly no trace of
a different feeling in his speculations on any of the other important
subjects treated in his works: and even on this subject, the general
tenor of what he wrote pointing one way, and only single passages the
other, it is most reasonable to interpret the latter in the mode which
will least contradict the expression of his habitual state of mind in
the former.

I cannot but believe, therefore, that Sir W. Hamilton has misunderstood
the essential character of Hume’s mind: but his hearty admiration and
honest vindication of him as a thinker are highly honourable to Sir W.
Hamilton, both as a philosopher and as a man.

i-i
651, 652, 67 never

*
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 304. [See Théodicée, pp. 174-6 (§§61, 62).]

†
Foot-note to Reid, p. 309n.

[*]
See Leibniz, Monadologie, in Opera Philosophica, pp. 705-12.

[†]
See p. 372 above.

[‡]
See Théodicée, pp. 382-3 (II, §§207-8), and pp. 428-30 (III, §§248-9).

[§]
Ibid., pp. 347-8 (II, §181).

*
Quoted from Leibnitz by Sir W. Hamilton, Lectures, Vol. I, p. 303. [See
Leibniz, Troisième Éclaircissement, in Opera, p. 135.]

[*]
See Dissertatio de Methodo, pp. 23ff. (V).

*
Lectures, Vol. I, pp. 11-12.

j-j
+72

*
[72] “Speculative truth is only pursued and held of value for the sake
of intellectual activity” (ibid., p. 10), and again (at p. 13)
“speculative truth” is said to be “only valuable as a mean of
intellectual activity.”

†
The very passage quoted from Aristotle kby the editorsk in support of
this representation of him, shows that he was using the word in his own
and not in Sir W. Hamilton’s sense. Τέλος δ’ ἡ ἐνέργεια, καὶ τούτου
χάριν ἡ δύναμις λαμβάνεται . . . καὶ τὴν θεωρητικὴν (ἔχουσιν) ἵνα
θεωρῶσιν· αλλ’ οὐ θεωρῶσιν ἵνα θεωρητικὴν ἔχωσιν. [Ibid., p. 12n.] [See
Metaphysics, Vol. I, p. 458 (IX, viii, 1050a9-14).]

k-k
+72

[*]
Nichomachean Ethics, p. 8 (I, iii, 1095a6-7).

‡
[72] [Ibid., p. 12 and n.] Professor Veitch, in the third Appendix to
his Memoir of Sir W. Hamilton [p. 447], points out that in this last
sentence I have done Sir W. Hamilton an injustice. The passage, Τέλος οὐ
γνῶσις ἀλλὰ πρᾶξις, was not quoted by himself, but by his editors [see
Lectures, Vol. I, p. 12n], as the nearest they had found to a
justification of the statement that Aristotle held the opinion
attributed to him in the text. They would have done more wisely by
making no reference, than one which so totally fails to support the
inference drawn from it.

l-l
651, 652 Yet, such [a manuscript fragment of the 67 version exists; see
Appendix A below]

m
652 ADDENDUM. / Note to p. 150. [here appears a version of the note that
is given above at p. 143 (the equivalent of p. 150 in 652)]

a-a
[this fragmentary sentence, which may be cancelled by a vertical line,
does not correspond to anything in the final text]

b-b
67 There is, however,

c-c
67 Sir W. Hamilton ascribed to

d-d
67 He

e-e
67 The passages already quoted apply as much to attributes as to
substances. “In saying that we know only the relative, I virtually
assert that we know nothing absolute—nothing existing absolutely, that
is, in and for itself, and without relation to us and our faculties.”†

f-f
67 In the following passages he is speaking solely of attributes. “By

g-g
67 relative.”* “We

h-h
67 therefore, which Sir W. Hamilton recognises

i-i
67 He affirms without reservation, that [presumably there was a further
difference in this sentence between the draft and the final version]

a-a
67 same regarded as

b-b
67 Conformity to the standard of right has

c-c
67 only be

d-d
67 persons, though all

e-e
67 may

f-f
67 : influences (temptations for example)

g-g
67 upon another

h-h
67 complete

i-i
67 person. But

j-j
67 there is an extreme limit to these gradations—the idea

k-k
67 or

l-l
67 deflect in the minutest degree

m-m
67 to be

n-n
67 infinite, still appears

o-o
67 the illustration nearest

p-p
67 the discussion

[*]
Headed in Mill’s hand “p. 50”, i.e., of the 2nd ed.

a-a
67 would be

b-b
67 were

c-c
67 incapable of ever passing into relation. But

d-d
67 it

e-e
67 in

f-f
67 relation whatever, except that of dependence,

a-a
67 we

b-b
67 we are capable of thinking something

c-c
67 Mr. Mansel may make his choice between the two opinions. I

d-d
67 Space and in all Time

e-e
67 must of course

a-a
67 We

b-b
67 anything which, while it has never been presented in our experience,
also contradictsour habitual associations:

c-c
67 some possible

d-d
67 existence

e-e
67 incredibility, and

f-f
67 explains, though it does not justify,

g-g
67 endeavours to reduce

h-h
67 [this sentence does not correspond to anything in the final text]

[*]
Headed in Mill’s hand “Note (a) continued.” In the printed version, Mill
quotes part of the passage with which the fragment begins, but then
departs totally from the wording of this draft.

a-a
67 just what might have been expected, for I am far from agreeing with
Platner that the notions of figure and distance come originally from
sight.

b-b
67 is not

c-c
67 ; but, giving a prodigious number of simultaneous sensations in one
glance, it greatly quickens all processes dependent on observation of
the fact of simultaneousness. A

d-d
67 by a more gradual

[*]
Headed in Mill’s hand “p. 560”, i.e., of the 2nd ed.

a-a
67 been an invaluable protection against the mistakes of subsequent
historians, and would have prodigiously abridged their labours


