

ONLINE LIBRARY OF LIBERTY


A collection of scholarly works about individual liberty and free
markets. A project of Liberty Fund, Inc.



JOHN STUART MILL, _THE COLLECTED WORKS OF JOHN STUART MILL, VOLUME XII – THE EARLIER LETTERS OF JOHN STUART MILL 1812-1848 PART I_ [1812]


Edition used:

John Stuart Mill, _The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume XII –
The Earlier Letters of John Stuart Mill 1812-1848 Part I,_ ed. Francis
E. Mineka, Introduction by F.A. Hayek (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1963).
http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/249

About this Title:

Vol. 12 of the 33 vol. Collected Works contains Mill’s letters written
between 1812-1837.

Copyright information:

The online edition of the _Collected Works_ is published under licence
from the copyright holder, The University of Toronto Press. ©2006 The
University of Toronto Press. All rights reserved. No part of this
material may be reproduced in any form or medium without the permission
of The University of Toronto Press.

Fair use statement:

This material is put online to further the educational goals of Liberty
Fund, Inc. Unless otherwise stated in the Copyright Information section
above, this material may be used freely for educational and academic
purposes. It may not be used in any way for profit.

Table of Contents:

-   Preface
-   Contents
-   Introduction
-   Abbreviations and Short Titles
-   THE EARLIER LETTERS OF JOHN STUART MILL 1812–1837
-   1812–1830
-   TO JEREMY BENTHAM1
-   TO AN UNIDENTIFIED FRIEND OF THE FAMILY1
-   TO MRS. HARRIET BURROW1
-   TO SIR SAMUEL BENTHAM1
-   TO SARAH AUSTIN1
-   TO JAMES MILL1
-   TO JAMES MILL1
-   TO MR. AND MRS. GEORGE GROTE1
-   TO EDWIN CHADWICK1
-   TO EDWIN CHADWICK1
-   TO EDWIN CHADWICK1
-   TO EDWIN CHADWICK1
-   TO JEREMY BENTHAM1
-   TO EDWIN CHADWICK1
-   TO EDWIN CHADWICK1
-   TO ARTHUR AYLMER1
-   TO EDWIN CHADWICK1
-   TO W. H. FERRELL1
-   TO CHARLES COMTE1
-   TO JOHN BOWRING1
-   TO BENJAMIN KEEN1
-   TO CHARLES COMTE1
-   TO ARCHIBALD THOMSON1
-   TO THOMAS COATES (see page 742)
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO JOHN STERLING1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO HENRY COLE1
-   TO SARAH AUSTIN1
-   TO JAMES MILL1
-   TO JAMES MILL1
-   TO JAMES MILL1
-   TO JAMES MILL1
-   TO WILLIAM JACKSON HOOKER1
-   1831
-   TO WILLIAM JACKSON HOOKER1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO SARAH AUSTIN1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO JOHN STERLING1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   1832
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO JOHN STERLING1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL AND CHARLES DUVEYRIER1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO HARRIET TAYLOR1
-   TO JOHN TAYLOR1
-   TO SARAH AUSTIN1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO [WILLIAM BRIDGES ADAMS]1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO WILLIAM TAIT1
-   TO WILLIAM TAIT1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   1833
-   TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1
-   TO WILLIAM TAIT1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO WILLIAM TAIT1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO WILLIAM TAIT1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1
-   TO JOHN STERLING1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO WILLIAM TAIT1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO WILLIAM TAIT1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO VICTOR COUSIN1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   1834
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1
-   TO WILLIAM TAIT1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO HARRIET TAYLOR1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO [ADOLPHE NARCISSE THIBAUDEAU]1
-   TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1
-   TO VICTOR COUSIN1
-   TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1
-   TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1
-   TO ADOLPHE NARCISSE THIBAUDEAU1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO EDWIN CHADWICK1
-   TO FRANCIS PLACE1
-   TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1
-   TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1
-   1835
-   TO JAMES MARTINEAU1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1
-   TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1
-   TO RICHARD BENTLEY1
-   TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1
-   TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1
-   TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1
-   TO JAMES MARTINEAU1
-   TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1
-   TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1
-   TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1
-   TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1
-   TO THOMAS FALCONER1
-   TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1
-   TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1
-   TO JOHN MURRAY1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1
-   TO HENRY S. CHAPMAN1
-   TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   1836
-   TO [ADOLPHE NARCISSE?] THIBAUDEAU1
-   TO SARAH AUSTIN1
-   TO THOMAS FALCONER1
-   TO HENRY S. CHAPMAN1
-   TO HENRY S. CHAPMAN1
-   TO SARAH AUSTIN1
-   TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1
-   TO LORD WELLESLEY1
-   TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1
-   TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1
-   TO HENRY MILL1
-   TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1
-   TO HENRY MILL1
-   TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1
-   TO SARAH AUSTIN1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO CLARA MILL1
-   TO MRS. JAMES MILL1
-   TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   TO EDWARD LYTTON BULWER1
-   TO EDWARD LYTTON BULWER1
-   TO SIR WILLIAM MOLESWORTH1
-   TO DAVID BARCLAY1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE (see page 743)
-   1837
-   TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1
-   TO EDWARD LYTTON BULWER1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO SARAH AUSTIN1
-   TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1
-   TO FRANCIS PLACE1
-   TO FRANCIS PLACE1
-   TO FRANCIS PLACE1
-   TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1
-   TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO LEIGH HUNT1
-   TO LEIGH HUNT1
-   TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1
-   TO JOHN MACRONE1
-   TO LEIGH HUNT1
-   TO SARAH AUSTIN1
-   TO SARAH AUSTIN1
-   TO HARRIET GROTE1
-   TO EDWARD LYTTON BULWER1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   TO JOHN ROBERTSON1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO HENRY MILL (see page 743)
-   TO LEIGH HUNT1
-   TO JOHN ROBERTSON1
-   TO JOHN ROBERTSON1
-   TO JOHN ROBERTSON1
-   TO THOMAS CARLYLE1
-   TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1
-   TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1
-   TO JOHN ROBERTSON1
-   TO JOHN ROBERTSON1
-   TO JOHN ROBERTSON1
-   TO JOHN ROBERTSON1
-   TO JOHN ROBERTSON1
-   TO WILLIAM TAIT1
-   TO WILLIAM TAIT1
-   TO LEIGH HUNT1
-   TO GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS1
-   TO JOHN HILL BURTON1
-   TO JOHN ROBERTSON1
-   TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1

Edition: current; Page: [i]
COLLECTED WORKS OF JOHN STUART MILL

volume xii

Edition: current; Page: [ii]
The Collected Edition of the works of John Stuart Mill has been planned
and is being directed by an editorial committee appointed from the
Faculty of Arts and Science of the University of Toronto, and from the
University of Toronto Press. The primary aim of the edition is to
present fully collated texts of those works which exist in a number of
versions, both printed and manuscript, and to provide accurate texts of
works previously unpublished or which have become relatively
inaccessible.

Editorial Committee

f. e. l. priestley, General Editor

j. m. robson, Associate Editor

v. w. bladen, alexander brady, j. b. conacher

w. line, r. f. mcrae, a. s. p. woodhouse

marsh jeanneret, francess halpenny

Edition: current; Page: [iii]
The Earlier Letters of John Stuart Mill 1812-1848

Edited by FRANCIS E. MINEKA The Class of 1916 Professor of English
Cornell University

With an Introduction by F. A. Hayek, f.b.a. University of Freiburg i.B.

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS

ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL

Edition: current; Page: [iv]
Copyright, Canada, 1963, by

University of Toronto Press

Printed in Canada

London: Routledge & Kegan Paul

Edition: current; Page: [v]
to the members of

THE CORNELL UNIVERSITY CLASS OF 1916

Edition: current; Page: [vi] Edition: current; Page: [vii]


Preface

credit for the conception of this edition belongs to Professor F. A.
Hayek, who while a member of the faculty of the London School of
Economics nearly twenty years ago began an organized effort to assemble
the widely scattered early letters of John Stuart Mill. At that time the
only collected edition of Mill’s correspondence was the one edited by
Hugh S. R. Elliot which was published in 1910. It contained 268 letters,
largely from the last twenty-five years of Mill’s life; only fifty-two
of the letters were from the period covered by the present edition. A
considerable number of the early letters had been published elsewhere,
but in no one place could one find the correspondence for the period of
Mill’s life to which approximately three-fourths of his Autobiography is
devoted.

Professor Hayek’s decision to assemble as complete a collection as
possible through the year 1848 was wholly sound. In that year, with the
publication of Principles of Political Economy, Mill became a widely
recognized public figure, and his correspondence thereafter often took
on much more of a public character as his advice and his opinions were
sought by correspondents from all over the civilized world. By 1848,
also, were virtually completed most of the correspondences with the
friends and intimates of his youth and early manhood, with Thomas
Carlyle, John Sterling, J. P. Nichol, Robert Barclay Fox, W. J. Fox,
Gustave d’Eichthal, Auguste Comte, Alexis de Tocqueville, and John and
Sarah Austin. These series of letters constitute the best supplement to
the most interesting and moving sections of Mill’s Autobiography, for
they reveal many sides of Mill’s intellectual and emotional development
during the formative and most productive years of his life.

These were the years of which he later said, in commenting on his early
reaction against orthodox Benthamism, “I found the fabric of my old and
taught opinions giving way in many fresh places, and I never allowed it
to fall to pieces, but was incessantly occupied in weaving it anew.” The
new strands in the fabric were by no means wholly of British origin,
though Mill acknowledged the importance of Wordsworth, Coleridge, and
Carlyle in the reshaping of many of his views. The imported strands came
in part from Germany (usually somewhat transmuted in the writings of
Carlyle, Coleridge, and Coleridge’s disciple, John Sterling), but more
significantly from France. Most important were the strands emanating
from the Saint-Simonians Edition: current; Page: [viii] (as seen in the
correspondence with D’Eichthal) and from the positivism of Comte and the
critical views of democracy held by Tocqueville.

Mill was not engaged solely in reweaving the fabric of his opinions
during these years, however; he was also busily engaged in trying to
influence the opinions of others. For five years he edited a radical
quarterly, the London and Westminster Review, and during that same time
he worked behind the scenes to force the Radicals in Parliament into
concerted action. The letters between 1835 and 1840 present the best
picture available of his activities as an editor and of his hopes and
frustrations as a thwarted politician.

Little will be found in the present edition, however, to throw more
light upon one of the major influences in Mill’s life between 1831 and
1848—that of Mrs. Taylor. I have included the two letters of this period
by Mill to Mrs. Taylor which Professor Hayek first published in his John
Stuart Mill and Harriet Taylor: Their Friendship and Subsequent Marriage
(1951), but no additional letters to Mrs. Taylor before 1849 have been
found.

The 534 letters and excerpts of letters published herein comprise all
the personal letters that I have been able to find, except that I have
excluded a small number of undated and undatable short notes of little
significance. No effort has been made to include the letters written for
publication in newspapers, which are listed in the Bibliography of the
Published Writings of John Stuart Mill edited by Ney MacMinn, J. R.
Hainds, and James McNab McCrimmon (1945), nor to include official
letters written by Mill in carrying out his duties at the East India
Company.

All fifty-two of the letters before 1849 published by Elliot, including
eighteen to Carlyle, eighteen to John Sterling, and six to Edward Lytton
Bulwer, have been re-collated wherever possible and for the first time
annotated. Included also are some other series of Mill’s early letters
that had been published before the appearance of Elliot’s edition:
twenty to Gustave d’Eichthal, edited by Eugène d’Eichthal; twelve to
John Pringle Nichol, edited by William Knight; twenty-one to John
Robertson, edited by Mrs. G. D. M. Towers; forty-four to Auguste Comte,
edited by Lucien Lévy-Bruhl; fifteen to Robert Barclay Fox, edited by H.
N. Pym; nine to Macvey Napier edited by the latter’s son; and eighteen
letters and excerpts from letters, largely to Mill’s family, included by
Alexander Bain in his life of Mill.

Several other series were published after Elliot’s edition appeared:
thirteen letters to W. J. Fox in Richard Garnett’s life of Fox; nine to
George Henry Lewes in Anna T. Kitchel’s George Lewes and George Eliot;
and fourteen to Alexis de Tocqueville edited by J.-P. Mayer in his
Edition: current; Page: [ix] collected edition of Tocqueville’s work.
All have been re-collated wherever the originals have been available.

Mill’s letters to John Pringle Nichol have not been found, and the text
of these is that published by William Knight. The text of the letters to
Tocqueville is reproduced from J.-P. Mayer’s edition of the works of
Tocqueville and has not been re-collated, though additional annotation
has been provided. Even very brief published excerpts from otherwise
unlocated letters have been included, in the hope that they may provide
clues to the eventual finding of the originals.

It has been possible to add a good many as yet unpublished letters to
the various series published by Elliot and others—notably letters to
Carlyle, D’Eichthal, R. B. Fox, W. J. Fox, and Napier. A number of
additional series, of which hitherto either none or only a scattered few
had been published, appear in print for the first time: letters to Edwin
Chadwick, Albany Fonblanque, John and Sarah Austin, Joseph Blanco White,
William Tait, Aristide Guilbert, Henry S. Chapman, John Mitchel Kemble,
Henry Cole, and Sir John F. W. Herschel. In all, this edition contains
238 hitherto unpublished letters and 72 letters which have previously
unpublished passages.

While Professor Hayek was chiefly responsible for the assembling of the
letters, the work of editing and annotating has been mine. The method I
have followed in preparing the text has been to reproduce the original
as closely as possible, and I have rarely yielded to the temptation to
insert a bracketed sic. I have silently transferred in a relatively
small number of letters dates and addresses from the end to the heading
of the letter. In rare instances only has punctuation been inserted and
then the insertion has been noted. Mill’s letters in French are
presented as they were written; errors have not been corrected and
obsolete spellings have not been modernized. The text of his letters to
Comte has been collated with the originals in the Library of the Johns
Hopkins University; the text of Lévy-Bruhl’s edition differs in
paragraphing, punctuation, and spelling from that of the original
letters, though in other respects it is very accurate.

The first note to each letter provides the following information: the
location of the manuscript when it is known (some transcribed by
Professor Hayek as early as 1943 cannot now be located); addresses and
postmarks where they have been available; the place of publication of
previously published letters. If no printed source is indicated, the
letter, to the best of my knowledge, has hitherto been unpublished.
Except for several letters published in full by Michael Packe in his
biography of Mill, no mention has been made of excerpts published by
him, since he had full access to Professor Hayek’s collection. The
editor has located over sixty additional letters since the publication
of Mr. Packe’s biography.

Edition: current; Page: [x]
A good deal of effort has been expended upon dating as accurately as
possible letters not dated by Mill. Sometimes it has been possible to do
such dating by means of external evidence that is corroborative of
details in the letter (e.g., Letters 11 and 382); at other times I have
had to depend solely on internal evidence. In some instances previously
published letters (e.g., Letters 47 and 96) were incorrectly dated, and
corrections have had to be made.

Recipients of letters and names of persons mentioned have normally been
identified only on the occasion of their first appearance in the
letters. To avoid the necessity of an over-abundance of
cross-references, an extensive name and subject index is provided. The
page reference set in bold type after an indexed name indicates the
location of the identifying note. Authors of books mentioned in the
letters usually have not been otherwise identified.

While I have made some successful efforts to enlarge Professor Hayek’s
original collection, I am by no means assured that additional early
letters may not yet make their appearance. In fact, I hope that the
publication of this edition will bring to light many more. Efforts to
trace many once in the possession, for instance, of Alexander Bain, the
first biographer of Mill, have proved thus far unavailing. I should
appreciate receiving information of any uncollected Mill letters, since
I am planning, in collaboration with Professor Dwight N. Lindley of
Hamilton College, an edition of the later (1849-1873) letters. If
additional early letters come out of hiding, it may be possible to
include them in an appendix to the later letters.

There remains the pleasant task of acknowledging generous help from many
persons and institutions. Professor Hayek in his Introduction to this
edition has acknowledged some of his indebtednesses during the period
when he was collecting the letters. Since he has turned over to me all
his extensive correspondence relating to the collecting, it is incumbent
upon me to acknowledge on his behalf—and my own—major contributions
during that period by the following persons: W. H. Browning, W. C.
Dickinson, the late Mrs. Vera Eichelbaum, Miss Philippa G. Fawcett, J.
L. Harlan, the late Norman E. Himes, the late Lord Keynes, J. A. La
Nauze, Ney MacMinn, J. M. McCrimmon, Emery Neff, A. M. Carr Saunders,
Hill Shine, the Right Rev. Charles L. Street, Jacob Viner, and Gordon
Waterfield. In addition many individuals, too numerous to mention here,
generously answered queries and offered useful suggestions.

My own debts incurred since I took over in 1953 the task of editing the
letters have likewise been many. In efforts to enlarge Professor Hayek’s
collection I have been aided by H. L. Beales, Joseph Hamburger, Peter M.
Jackson, Cecil Lang, J.-P. Mayer, Anna J. Mill, James M. Osborn, John M.
Edition: current; Page: [xi] Robson, Henry Siegel, Jack Stillinger, and
William E. S. Thomas. Alice Kaminsky, Dwight N. Lindley, Emily Morrison,
and Robert Scholes have provided me at various times with valuable
research and editorial assistance. Among my colleagues at Cornell I have
received generous help in spotting allusions and tracing quotations from
M. H. Abrams, Robert M. Adams, Harry Caplan, David Davis, J.-J.
Demorest, Ephim G. Fogel, and Gordon Kirkwood, and from a former
colleague, Luitpold Wallach. Professor John M. Robson of the University
of Toronto by his critical reading of the manuscript at a late stage
gave me the benefit of his extensive knowledge of Mill, thereby
considerably improving the edition. A former graduate student of mine,
Dr. Eileen Curran, collated some letters for me and supplied useful
information from her detailed knowledge of the history of English
periodicals. George H. Healey and Felix Reichmann of the Cornell
University Library staff have been unfailingly helpful. Mertie Decker
and Eleanor Rosica have typed what must have seemed to them endless
numbers of pages of manuscript. Among British librarians I have been
chiefly indebted to Mr. G. Woledge and Mr. C. G. Allen of the British
Library of Political and Economic Science of the London School of
Economics, to Mr. A. N. L. Munby of the Library of King’s College,
Cambridge, and to J. S. Ritchie of the National Library of Scotland.
J.-P. Mayer and his publishers (the Librairie Gallimard) have granted me
permission to reprint the letters of Mill in the copyrighted edition of
the works of Alexis de Tocqueville. Indebtedness to the many libraries
which possess the originals of these letters is recorded in the notes to
the letters, but I should like to express here in particular my thanks
to the four libraries which have by far the largest holdings: those of
The Johns Hopkins University, the London School of Economics, the
National Library of Scotland, and Yale University. I acknowledge also
with gratitude a Faculty Research Grant from Cornell University and
funds for travel and research from the endowment provided by the Cornell
Class of 1916 for the Professorship which I have the honour to hold.

Professor Hayek at the close of his Introduction implies that in this
project the fun was all his, but the hard work, mine. I can only say
that I have deeply appreciated the opportunity he gave me to do the
work. I have had fun too.

Francis E. Mineka

Cornell University

September 1, 1962

The hope expressed in the foregoing Preface that more of Mill’s earlier
letters can still be located has been in small part fulfilled by the
addition of three letters that have come to light while this edition was
in process. Edition: current; Page: [xii] Since pagination was already
completed at this point, the three letters have been added at the end of
the second volume (Volume XIII of the Collected Works) and assigned
numbers appropriate to their place in the sequence. References to these
additional letters have been included in the Index.

F.E.M.

May 15, 1963

Edition: current; Page: [xiii]


Contents

-   

    preface vii
-   

    introduction, by F. A. Hayek xv
-   

    abbreviations and short titles xxv
-   

    the letters, 1812-1837 1812-1830, 3 1831, 69 1832, 94 1833, 136
    1834, 204 1835, 247 1836, 291 1837, 316
-   

    the letters, 1837-1848 1838, 367 1839, 395 1840, 417 1841, 461 1842,
    495 1843, 565 1844, 618 1845, 653 1846, 690 1847, 706 1848, 730
-   

    indexes
    -   

        General Index 745
    -   

        Index of Correspondents 780

-   

    Facsimile of Letter 1, to Jeremy Bentham, from MS in the British
    Museum facing page 3
-   

    Facsimile of Letter 405, to Macvey Napier, from MS in the British
    Museum facing page 367

Edition: current; Page: [xiv] Edition: current; Page: [xv]


Introduction

by f. a. hayek

john stuart mill has not been altogether fortunate in the manner in
which his memory was served by those most concerned and best authorized
to honour it. It is true that his stepdaughter, heir, and literary
executor, Helen Taylor, promptly published the Autobiography, which
chiefly determined the picture posterity formed of Mill, and that the
only other manuscript ready for publication was also rapidly printed.
But during the next forty years, while Mill’s fame persisted
undiminished, little was done either to make his literary work more
readily accessible or his other activities better known. There are few
figures of comparable standing whose works have had to wait nearly a
hundred years for a collected edition in English to be published. Nor,
while his reputation was at its height, did any significant information
become available that would have enabled another hand to round off the
somewhat angular and fragmentary picture Mill had given of himself. He
had been quite aware that his more public activities would be of
interest to later generations and had begun to mark some of the copies
of his letters which he had kept as suitable for publication. But Helen
Taylor appears increasingly to have been more concerned to prevent
others from encroaching upon her proprietary rights than to push on with
her own plans for publication. It was only when the material so
jealously guarded by her finally passed to one of Mrs. Mill’s
granddaughters, Mary Taylor, that an outsider was called in to publish
some of the more readily accessible correspondence. Again, however, Mary
Taylor reserved to herself part of the task which she was hardly
qualified to carry out and in fact did not bring to completion. When at
last after her death the papers in her possession became generally
accessible, interest in Mill seems to have been at a low point and those
papers were allowed to be widely dispersed. Nothing illustrates better
the temporary eclipse of his fame than that some of the institutions
which then acquired important parts of these papers did not trouble to
catalogue them for another fifteen years.

It would seem that at least in his native country, during the period
between the two great wars, Mill was regarded as one of those outmoded
figures of the recent past whose ideas have ceased to be interesting
because they have become commonplace. Most of the battles he fought had
been won and to many of those who knew his name he probably appeared as
a Edition: current; Page: [xvi] somewhat dim figure whose On Liberty
they had been made to read at school but whose “Victorian” outlook had
lost most of its appeal. There was, perhaps, also some suspicion that
his reputation had been somewhat exaggerated and that he had not been a
great original genius but rather an honest, hardworking, and lucid
expositor of ideas that other and greater minds had originated. He even
came to be regarded, very unjustly, as the last of the “orthodox”
tradition in economics and politics. In fact, however, few men have done
more to create the intellectual climate in which most of what he stood
for was finally taken for granted.

The gradual but steady revival of the interest in John Stuart Mill in
the course of the last twenty years is based on a truer understanding of
the significance of his work.1 Though nothing could be more misleading
than to represent him as a “typical” Victorian or a “typical” Englishman
(he certainly was neither), he was one of the most representative
figures of the changes of thought that were germinating during his
lifetime. During the forty years after his death he governed liberal
thought as did no other man, and as late as 1914 he was still the chief
source of inspiration of the progressive part of the intellectuals of
the West—of the men whose dream of an indefinitely peaceful progress and
expansion of Western civilization was shattered by the cataclysms of war
and revolution. But even to that development Mill had unquestionably
contributed by his sympathies for the rising aspirations of national
self-determination and of socialism. His reputation declined with the
confidence in the steady advance of civilization in which he had
believed, and for a time the kind of minds who had believed in him were
attracted by more revolutionary thinkers.

It must probably still be admitted that it is not so much for the
originality of his thinking as for its influence on a world now past
that Mill is chiefly of importance today. We may still discover that he
is a better guide to many of our present problems than is generally
appreciated. But there can be no question that his influence is such
that to the historian of thought all information we have about Mill’s
activities, his contacts, and about the channels through which ideas
reached him and through which he acted upon others is nearly as
important as his published work. This is particularly true of a man like
Mill who strove to keep his mind open to new ideas but upon whom
accident and personal idiosyncrasies nevertheless acted to decide in
some measure what would and what would not enter his system of thought.

The present volume contains some of the most important sources of
Edition: current; Page: [xvii] information we have on all the different
spheres of Mill’s activities. The work on the collection of these
letters started about the same time as the new interest in Mill began to
make itself felt but for reasons presently to be explained, publication
has been long delayed. Some of the early results of these efforts have
however already been used in various contributions to our knowledge of
Mill which have appeared during this period, particularly in Mr. Michael
Packe’s vivid Life of John Stuart Mill (1954). The following brief
account of the circumstances which led to the present edition may be
found useful.

Although more than fifty years ago there were published two volumes of
Letters of John Stuart Mill, edited by Hugh S. R. Elliot, these were in
the main confined to the last twenty-five years of Mill’s life. Of the
earlier and most productive period the edition contained only three
series of letters which happened to have been returned to Mill or his
heirs. Many more belonging to this period have been published in some
thirty different places, while an even larger number of unpublished
letters was found to be dispersed among many private and public
collections.

This unsatisfactory state of affairs, of which every student of
nineteenth-century ideas must soon become aware, induced me nearly
twenty years ago to attempt to bring together the main body of Mill’s
early correspondence as a supplement to the existing collection. This
soon proved a much bigger task than I had anticipated and a task,
moreover, which in one sense I had started too late and in another sense
too early. Eighteen or even thirteen years earlier I should still have
found together all or at least part of Mill’s own papers which in the
meantime had been dispersed; and as it soon appeared, much important
information had been destroyed by fire during the bombing of London only
a few months before I started my work. On the other hand, wartime
conditions in England made inaccessible for the next five years some of
the material that had to be examined. In the circumstances I carried the
task of collection as far as was then possible, but had in the late
forties to postpone its completion, first temporarily and then,
consequent upon my move from London to Chicago, indefinitely. By then I
had completed the editing of one rather special set of Mill’s letters
which, for reasons explained in the Introduction to the edition
published in 1951 (John Stuart Mill and Harriet Taylor: Their Friendship
and Subsequent Marriage [London and Chicago, 1951]) seemed to demand
separate treatment. That experience taught me that if I was not for
years to abandon all my other work I could not adequately perform the
same task for the complete collection. I was therefore only too grateful
when not long after, an expert in the field, Professor Francis E. Mineka
of Cornell University, agreed to assume responsibility for that arduous
task. Edition: current; Page: [xviii] The editing of the present volume
is entirely his and in the course of this work he has also been able to
add to the collection of transcripts I had assembled over sixty
additional hitherto unpublished letters by Mill.

It may be useful if, before commenting on the character of the present
volumes, I give a brief account of the fate of the books and papers
which were in Mill’s possession at the time of his death, so far as this
became known in the course of the search for his letters. Mill died on
May 7, 1873, at Avignon, where for the preceding fifteen years he had
spent much of his time in the house he had bought to be near his wife’s
grave.2 His stepdaughter and sole heir, Helen Taylor, continued to live
there most of the time for another thirty years, jealously guarding her
exclusive rights to all of Mill’s literary remains and steadfastly
refusing requests for permission to publish any of his letters. The
draft of a letter of hers written not long after Mill’s death (on the
back of a letter addressed to her, dated July 30, 1873) shows that she
was then contemplating publication of some of his letters:

I have all my dear stepfather’s letters, preserved, looked through from
time to time by himself, arranged in order by myself, and left by him in
my hands with directions, verbal and written, to deal with them
according to my judgement. When the more pressing task of the
publication of his MSS. is completed, I shall, if I live, occupy myself
with his correspondence, if I do not live it will be for my literary
Executors to decide what to do with it.3

It seems that by “all [her] dear stepfather’s letters” she meant no more
than the drafts he had begun to keep from about 1848 or 1849. But she
did make some efforts to recover from the heirs of his correspondents
sets of earlier letters in exchange for those written to him and it was
probably in this manner that the letters to Sterling and Bulwer included
in the Elliot edition came to be among the Mill papers.

Nothing came of Helen Taylor’s plans for publication and the Mill papers
rested at the Avignon cottage until 1904, when Helen Taylor’s niece Mary
Taylor (the younger daughter of Mrs. Mill’s son Algernon) succeeded in
persuading the old lady, who at seventy-three appears to have been
somewhat peculiar and senile, to return to England. Early in 1905 a
friend of Mary Taylor’s (Mary Ann Trimble, who earlier had spent some
time at Avignon with Mary Taylor) returned to Avignon and, with the
assistance of a married couple who had accompanied her from England
Edition: current; Page: [xix] (according to a diary Mary Taylor kept at
the time) did there “the work of three months in three weeks. Half a ton
of letters to be sorted, all manner of rubbish to be separated from
useful things, books to be dusted and selected from, arrangements to be
made for sale, and 18 boxes to be packed.”4

A considerable part of Mill’s library and at least some of his papers
were disposed of at a sale held at Avignon from May 21 to 28, 1905.5
Some of the manuscripts were acquired by a local bookseller, Romanille,
from whom at least one bound volume was bought by an American scholar,6
while a London clergyman bought a manuscript entitled “On Social
Freedom” which he published (reputedly with the consent of Helen Taylor,
who had died a few months before it appeared) as a posthumous work of
Mill in the Oxford and Cambridge Review of June, 1907, and which was
republished in book form under Mill’s name as late as 1941, though it
now appears that it was not a work by Mill but a manuscript sent to Mill
for his opinion by one of his admirers.7

On their return to England Helen Taylor had been taken by her niece to
Devon, where she died at Torquay on January 29, 1907. As she appears, in
the words of the younger woman, long before that time to have “lost her
memory to a great extent,” all business, even the signing of legal
documents, was conducted on her behalf by Mary Taylor. One of the first
steps taken by the latter soon after the return to England was, on the
advice of John Morley, to give that part of Mill’s and Helen Taylor’s
library which had been stored in London to Somerville College (one of
the women’s colleges at Oxford). Miss Taylor retained a few books and
Somerville College was to be entitled to dispose of what it did not want
and in the course of 1906 actually sold some of the books.8

Edition: current; Page: [xx]
It seems that shortly after Helen Taylor’s death Mary Taylor placed the
collection of Mill’s correspondence in the hand of Mr. Hugh S. R.
Elliot. Little is known about him or the authority he was given and the
fragments of information we have about the proceedings are somewhat
puzzling. There is extant an account by Mr. Elliot of his relations to
Mary Taylor9 from which the following passages may be quoted:

As to the private letters of Mill to his wife & daughter, we hesitated
for a very long time about them; but Miss Taylor, who is a lady of very
peculiar ideas and habits, did not wish them to be published. She has it
in her mind to bring out another volume in a few years’ time, consisting
exclusively of Mill’s letters to his wife, daughter, and sisters; but
wants to delay this until the last of Mill’s sisters10 is dead. Whether
it will ever be done I cannot say. She guards the letters very
jealously; and it was only after much pressure and persuasion that I was
allowed to see them at all.

As to her published introduction, following mine in the book, it was
entirely an afterthought. In the study of the private letters, I formed
a very unfavourable opinion both of Mrs. Mill and of Miss Helen Taylor.
It appeared to me that they were both selfish and somewhat conceited
women, and that Mill (who must have been a very poor judge of character)
was largely deceived with regard to them. Of course I could not state my
views openly in a book which is published by Miss Mary Taylor at her own
expense. But in my original introduction, I found it impossible to
allude to the women without unconsciously conveying into my language
some suggestion of what I thought. To this Miss Mary Taylor took the
strongest possible exception. I reconsidered the whole matter, but found
myself unable to speak any more favourably of them than I had done. For
some days Miss Taylor declined even to see me, and we were completely at
a deadlock; but at last it was agreed that I should omit all mention of
Mill’s private life and that Miss Taylor should herself write a second
introduction (for which I took no responsibility) and say what she
liked. I did not greatly care for her contribution, but it was a
necessary compromise. Myself, however, I entertain no sort of doubt that
Miss Taylor is right in her main belief that there was no “guilty”
intrigue. . . .

There is, on the other hand, an account which the late Sir Frederick R.
Chapman gave twenty-five years ago in a letter to an American scholar:

Miss Mary [Taylor] mentioned another fact that seemed very strange to
me. She had placed the whole of the copies of Mr. Mill’s correspondence
at the disposal of Mr. Elliot when assisting him in the preparation of
the published letters. When he had made his selection he induced her to
destroy the rest save only what she termed the “intimate letters” which
she intended to embody in another book. I understand that the book has
never appeared.

Edition: current; Page: [xxi]
Assuming that she has told me the actual facts I should say that her
weakness is as remarkable as Mr. Elliot’s meaningless advice or request
to destroy the balance of the letters which must have been very
numerous.11

Though Sir Frederick’s recollection was no doubt correct, there is every
reason to doubt Miss Taylor’s account of the events and it is by no
means certain that any destruction of letters did take place at that
time (whatever may have happened at Avignon in 1905). Not only most of
the letters which Mr. Elliot published but so many others are known to
have been preserved that I am on the whole inclined to think that
nothing was destroyed then.

Mary Taylor appears to have proceeded with her plan of preparing a
further volume of family letters and it seems that by the beginning of
1918 she had, with the assistance of Miss Elizabeth Lee (sister of Sir
Sidney Lee and author of the article on Helen Taylor in the Dictionary
of National Biography), completed a typescript and was negotiating
through a literary agent (Mr. A. P. Watts) with Messrs. Longmans, Green
& Co. concerning publication. Since the files of all parties involved
(the literary agent, the publishers, Miss Mary Taylor’s solicitors and,
at least in part, her literary executors) were destoyed by fire during
the London “Blitz” in December, 1940, it is now impossible to say with
certainty why it was not published. But some letters of Mary Taylor
together with the recollections of one of the partners of the literary
agents (Mr. C. A. Watts, who in his old age still distinctly remembered
the “irresponsible Miss Mary Taylor”) show that after a period of
irresolution Miss Taylor suffered a “nervous breakdown,” accompanied by
insomnia and illusions. After certification she was in March, 1918,
taken to an institution in London where she died on November 6, 1918.

In her will Mary Taylor had left all copyrights and letters and
correspondence referring to John Stuart Mill and Helen Taylor to the
National Provincial Bank Ltd. as residuary legatees and literary
executors who were to be free to use this material in any way they saw
fit. An inventory of her possessions mentions among the contents of “a
gunpowder proof safe,” a collection of “Public Letters to and from J. S.
Mill A to Z,” and a packet of private letters. The former together with
various other manuscript material the Bank decided, on the report of a
Mr. P. W. Sergeant who had been asked to value them, to sell by auction,
while it was thought that “the intimate letters relating to the family
quarrel . . . could not be offered for sale publicly.”

Edition: current; Page: [xxii]
A first sale was accordingly held at Sotheby’s of London on March 29,
1922, which produced a gross amount of £276.19.-. Of this, however, £200
were paid on behalf of the Trustees of the Carlyle House Memorial Trust
for a set of seventy-seven letters by Thomas Carlyle to Mill (which in
the following year were published by Mr. Alexander Carlyle in Letters of
Thomas Carlyle to John Stuart Mill, John Sterling and Robert Browning
[London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1923]). The twenty-one lots of Mill
manuscripts proper seem all to have been bought by various London
booksellers and altogether to have fetched no more than £76.19.-. They
appear to have contained numerous notebooks, mostly botanical, and
miscellaneous correspondence. Most of the Mill manuscripts now in
various American libraries derive from this sale.12 Quantitatively the
largest part (although much of it of a kind not readily salable
otherwise) was in 1926 sold by one of the booksellers to the Library of
the London School of Economics, where it constitutes the nucleus of the
Mill-Taylor Collection, since much enriched by many additions.

Because of the loss of part of the relevant files of the National
Provincial Bank, we do not know why the sale of a large part of the
papers was postponed for five years. But on June 27, 1927, Sotheby’s
sold another fourteen lots described as “The Property of Miss Mary
Taylor, dec.,” containing mostly letters to Mill, but also one lot
containing “upwards of 132 autograph letters to his wife on literary
work and travel.” It seems that both the material now at Yale University
Library and that acquired by Lord Keynes and now at King’s College,
Cambridge, derive from this sale. The National Provincial Bank
apparently retained only the small collection of correspondence
exchanged between Mill and his brothers and sisters and a few family
documents and portraits, all of which were in 1943 presented by the Bank
to the London School of Economics for inclusion in the Mill-Taylor
Collection.

Although it seemed appropriate to use this occasion to give an account
of what happened to Mill’s own books and papers, the material deriving
from them could in fact make little contribution to the present edition.
This is intended to cover the period up to 1849, which, because Mill did
not then keep copies of his letters, is so little represented in
Elliot’s edition of his letters, which was based on his papers. In so
far as the present collection was to go beyond bringing together the
considerable number of earlier letters that had been published in a
great variety of places and a few unpublished ones known to be preserved
in libraries, the main effort had to be directed towards tracing
descendants of Mill’s correspondents in the Edition: current; Page:
[xxiii] hope that some of their papers might be preserved. This indeed
absorbed the greater part of the time I was able to devote to the
project, yet the results were not great. Even in England, where in
general family papers are preserved perhaps longer than anywhere else,
two wars have led to the destruction of much of the extraordinary
quantity of manuscript material which had accumulated by 1914. It was
not so much destruction by enemy action as the appeal for old paper for
salvage and the insistence of air-raid wardens that lofts should be
cleared of all inflammable matter which caused most of the loss. In more
than one instance it seemed at least likely that what I was searching
for had only a short while before left the place where it had rested
undisturbed for two or three generations. I should add that wherever I
succeeded in tracing descendants of Mill’s correspondents, my inquiries
were invariably met with the greatest courtesy and helpfulness. I can of
course not claim that I have exhausted even all the likely leads and no
doubt in the course of time further letters by Mill will turn up by
accident. But while I do not feel that further systematic search in
England would be likely to produce much, there may well be such
opportunities on the Continent and particularly in France which, during
the greater part of the time I was engaged on this work, was
inaccessible to me. If, for instance, good fortune had somewhere
preserved the letters which for some years after his visit to France as
a boy Mill wrote to his “first friend” Antoine Jérôme Balard,13 later a
distinguished chemist, these would probably tell us more about his early
development than any document which might still be found in England.

There are various obligations I have incurred in the work on the
material now published in this volume and which I wish to acknowledge in
this place. All the work I did on the collection was done while I held a
professorship at the London School of Economics and Political Science
and I have received all sorts of assistance from the Economic Research
Division of that institution, including the provision of assistance and
of some funds for various incidental expenditures. Dr. Ruth Borchardt
and Miss Dorothy Salter (now Mrs. F. H. Hahn) in succession helped me
for long periods of the work. I must also especially mention the Library
of the London School of Economics, or the British Library of Political
and Economic Science as it is officially called, which as custodian of
the Mill-Taylor Collection not only has provided much of the material of
this book but also has often helped by buying at my suggestion documents
to which I otherwise might not have obtained access. It was in these
circumstances very generous of the authorities of the School to give
first to me and then Edition: current; Page: [xxiv] to Professor Mineka
permission to use the material collected in any way we thought best. Of
the many others who in various ways have helped I ought to single out
the National Provincial Bank Ltd. which, after so many years
conscientiously watching over the interests of Mill’s heirs, finally
decided to hand over to the uses of scholarship what the bombs had
spared of the papers of the late Mary Taylor.

The chief credit for the appearance of this edition, however, belongs of
course to the editor. Only those who have tried their hands at this kind
of task at least on a small scale will appreciate the amount of
painstaking care and ingenuity that has to be devoted to an edition of
the size of the present one before the reader can use it with the
implicit trust and ease which a good editor’s work assures. I am the
more indebted to Professor Mineka because he was prepared to take over
the more burdensome part of the task I had half-playfully commenced. The
tracing of unpublished manuscripts is the kind of detective work which
most people will enjoy doing as a recreation in their spare time. But
while the pleasure of the hunt was largely mine, the solid hard work to
which the reader owes this edition is entirely Professor Mineka’s.

F.A.H.

University of Chicago

January, 1962

Edition: current; Page: [xxv]


Abbreviations and Short Titles

A. Carlyle: Letters of Thomas Carlyle to John Stuart Mill, John Sterling
and Robert Browning, ed. Alexander Carlyle, New York, 1923

Arsenal: Bibliothèque de l’Arsenal, Paris

Autobiog.: Autobiography of John Stuart Mill, published for the first
time without alterations or omissions from the original manuscript in
the possession of Columbia University, with a Preface by John Jacob
Coss, New York, 1924

BFR: The British and Foreign Review, or European Quarterly Journal,
1835-44

Bain, JSM: Alexander Bain, John Stuart Mill: A Criticism: With Personal
Recollections, London, 1882

Bain, James Mill: Alexander Bain, James Mill: A Biography, London, 1882

Brit. Mus.: British Museum, London

Caroline Fox, Journals. See Pym

Cosmopolis: “Letters of John Stuart Mill to Gustave d’Eichthal,” ed.
Eugène d’Eichthal, in Cosmopolis, VI (April-May, 1897), 21-38, 348-66,
and IX (Feb.-March, 1898), 368-81, 780-90

D’Eichthal Corresp.: John Stuart Mill, Correspondance inédite avec
Gustave d’Eichthal, 1828-1842, 1864-1871, éd. Eugène d’Eichthal, Paris,
1898 (same as preceding, but translated into French)

Dissertations: John Stuart Mill, Dissertations and Discussions:
Political, Philosophical, and Historical, 4 vols., London, 1859-75

ER: The Edinburgh Review, 1802-1929

Early Draft: The Early Draft of John Stuart Mill’s Autobiography, ed.
Jack Stillinger, Urbana, 1961

Elliot: The Letters of John Stuart Mill, ed. Hugh S. R. Elliot, 2 vols.,
London, 1910

FQR: The Foreign Quarterly Review, 1827-46

Fawcett: Mrs. [Millicent] Fawcett, Life of the Right Hon. Sir William
Molesworth, London, 1901

Fraser’s: Fraser’s Magazine for Town and Country, 1830-82

Garnett: Richard Garnett, The Life of W. J. Fox . . . , concluded by
Edward Garnett, London, 1910

Hayek: F. A. Hayek, John Stuart Mill and Harriet Taylor: Their
Friendship and Subsequent Marriage, London and Chicago, 1951

JSM: John Stuart Mill

Edition: current; Page: [xxvi]
Johns Hopkins: The Johns Hopkins University Library

Kew: Archives of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew

King’s: Keynes Collection, King’s College Library, Cambridge University

Kitchel: Anna T. Kitchel, George Lewes and George Eliot: A Review of
Records, New York, 1933

Knight: “Unpublished Letters from John Stuart Mill to Professor Nichol,”
ed. William Knight, in Fortnightly Review, LXVII (May, 1897), 660-78

LSE: The British Library of Political and Economic Science, at the
London School of Economics and Political Science

LWR: London and Westminster Review, 1836-40

Leeds: Brotherton Library, University of Leeds

Lévy-Bruhl: Lettres inédites de John Stuart Mill à Auguste Comte,
publiées avec les réponses de Comte, éd. L. Lévy-Bruhl, Paris, 1899

Lindley: Dwight N. Lindley, “The Saint-Simonians, Carlyle, and Mill,”
unpublished Columbia University dissertation, 1958 (available from
University Microfilms, Ann Arbor, Mich.)

Logic: John Stuart Mill, A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive;
Being a Connected View of the Principles of Evidence and the Methods of
Scientific Investigation, 2 vols., London, 1843

MR: The Monthly Repository, 1806-38

MacMinn, Bibliog.: Bibliography of the Published Writings of John Stuart
Mill, ed. Ney MacMinn, J. R. Hainds, and James McNab McCrimmon,
Evanston, Ill., 1945

Mayer: Alexis de Tocqueville, Œuvres, papiers et correspondances,
édition définitive publiée sous la direction de J.-P. Mayer, Paris,
1951- , tome VI, Correspondance anglaise, éd. J.-P. Mayer et Gustave
Rudler, Paris, 1954

Mineka, The Dissidence of Dissent: Francis E. Mineka, The Dissidence of
Dissent: The Monthly Repository, 1806-38, Chapel Hill, N.C., 1944

Morrison: Catalogue of the Collection of Autograph Letters and
Historical Documents Formed between 1865 and 1882 by Alfred Morrison,
compiled and annotated under the direction of A. W. Thibaudeau, 6 vols.,
London, 1883-92, IV

NLS: The National Library of Scotland, Edinburgh

Napier Corresp.: Selections from the Correspondence of the late Macvey
Napier, Esq., ed. by his son, Macvey Napier, London, 1879

Packe: Michael St. John Packe, Life of John Stuart Mill, London, 1954

Pankhurst: Richard K. P. Pankhurst, The Saint Simonians, Mill and
Carlyle, London, [1957]

Pym: Memories of Old Friends, Being Extracts from the Journals and
Letters of Caroline Fox, from 1835 to 1871, ed. H. N. Pym, 2nd ed., 2
vols., London, 1882

QR: The Quarterly Review, 1809-

Edition: current; Page: [xxvii]
Tait’s: Tait’s Edinburgh Magazine, 1832-61

Thom: The Life of the Rev. Joseph Blanco White, Written by Himself; with
Portions of his Correspondence, ed. John Hamilton Thom, 3 vols., London,
1845

Towers: C. M. D. [Robertson] Towers, “John Stuart Mill and the London
and Westminster Review,” Atlantic Monthly, LXIX (Jan., 1892), 58-74

Tuell, John Sterling: Anne Kimball Tuell, John Sterling: A
Representative Victorian, New York, 1941

UCL: Library of University College, the University of London

WR: Westminster Review, 1824-1914

Yale: Yale University Library

Edition: current; Page: [1]


THE EARLIER LETTERS OF JOHN STUART MILL
 1812–1837

Edition: current; Page: [2]
[lf0223-12_figure_001.jpg]
Letter 1, to Jeremy Bentham, from MS in the British Museum

Edition: current; Page: [3]


1812–1830

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 28, 1812

Newington Green

Jeremy Bentham

Bentham, Jeremy

1.


TO JEREMY BENTHAM1

[
July 28, 1812

]2

My dear Sir,

Mr. Walker3 is a very intimate friend of mine, who lives at No. 31 in
Berkeley Square. I have engaged him, as he is soon coming here, first to
go to your house, and get for me the 3.d and 4.th volumes of Hooke’s
Roman history.4 But I am recapitulating5 the 1.st and 2.d volumes,
having finished them all except a few pages of the 2.d. I will be glad
if you will let him have the 3.d and 4.th volumes.

I am yours sincerely

John Stuart Mill.

Newington Green

,

Tuesday 1812

.

Edition: current; Page: [4]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

September 13, 1814

2.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED FRIEND OF THE FAMILY1

September 13, 1814

I have arrived at Ford Abbey without any accident, and am now safely
settled there. We are all in good health, except that I have been ill of
slight fever for several days, but am now perfectly recovered.

It is time to give you a description of the Abbey.2 There is a little
hall and a long cloister, which are reckoned very fine architecture,
from the door, and likewise two beautiful rooms, a dining-parlour and a
breakfast-parlour adorned with fine drawings within one door; on another
side is a large hall, adorned with a gilt ceiling; and beyond it two
other rooms, a dining and drawing-room, of which the former contains
various kinds of musical instruments, and the other is hung with
beautiful tapestry.

To this house there are many staircases. The first of them has little
remarkable up it, but that three rooms are hung with tapestry, of which
one contains a velvet bed, and is therefore called the velvet room. The
looking-glass belonging to this room is decorated with nun’s lace.

Up another staircase is a large saloon, hung with admirable tapestry, as
Edition: current; Page: [5] also a small library. From this saloon
issues a long range of rooms, of which one is fitted up in the Chinese
style, and another is hung with silk. There is a little further on a
room, which, it is said, was once a nursery; though the old farmer
Glyde, who lives hard by, called out his sons to hear the novelty of a
child crying in the Abbey! which had not happened for the whole time he
had lived here, being near thirty years. Down a staircase from here is a
long range of bedrooms, generally called the Monks’ Walk. From it is a
staircase leading into the cloisters. The rest of the house is not worth
mentioning. If I was to mention the whole it would tire you exceedingly,
as this house is in reality so large that the eight rooms on one floor
of the wing which we inhabit, which make not one-quarter of even that
floor of the whole house, are as many as all the rooms in your house,
and considerably larger.

I have been to the parish church which is at Thornecomb. Mr. Hume3 has
been here a great while. Mr. Koe4 came the other day, and Admiral
Chietekoff5 is expected. Willie6 and I have had rides in Mr. Hume’s
curricle.

[He goes on to say—] What has been omitted here will be found in a
journal which I am writing of this and last year’s journeys. [He then
incontinently plunges again into descriptive particulars about the
fish-ponds, the river Axe, the deer-parks, the walks, and Bentham’s
improvements.]

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 27th 1817

Ford Abbey

Mrs. Harriet Burrow

Burrow, Mrs. Harriet

3.


TO MRS. HARRIET BURROW1

Ford Abbey

,
Oct. 27th 1817

Dear Grandmother,

I write to you now, as both my Sisters are writing, and there is not
likely to be another parcel going to town for a great while.

I have very little news to tell you: Willie has informed you of the
accident which has happened to James’s2 eye. Willie, Harriet,3 and
Clara,4 have Edition: current; Page: [6] begun music: and you learn from
Willie’s and Clara’s letters, this also. Willie and Clara are ready to
begin the first lesson: Harriet has not finished the treble notes.

The rainy weather has at length set in here, after an exceedingly dry
autumn. I am however very glad to say, that no rain now can do any
injury to the crop, which is almost all in.

We are still learning to write. How much Willie and Clara have improved
you will know by reading their letters.

I hope that all my aunts and uncles are very well. I did not know that I
had a new little cousin, till Willie saw it in the paper. I believe my
Mother has written to you a very long letter: and I suppose that she has
told you all the little news that we have: so that I have very little to
tell you: moreover, I had only two days notice to write four letters: or
else I would probably have written more.

We are all in very good health, except little Jane,5 who has got a
little cough. I had lately the tooth-ache very bad. I hope that you are
also in very good health.

Since we were here, there has been a groping in the pond for eels. Mr.
Bragg’s two sons went into the mud, (after almost all the water had been
let out) and groped with their hands for eels. Those caught were, many
of them, very large ones. A number of trout, caught in the river, were
afterwards put in that pond.

All of us send our love to you and all our other relations, and our good
friends. I am,

Your affectionate Grandson

John Stuart Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 30, 1819

Acton Place, Hoxton

Sir Samuel Bentham

Bentham, Sir Samuel

4.


TO SIR SAMUEL BENTHAM1

Acton Place, Hoxton

,
July 30, 1819

My dear Sir,

It is so long since I last had the pleasure of seeing you that I have
almost forgotten when it was, but I believe it was in the year 1814, the
first year we were at Ford Abbey. I am very much obliged to you for your
inquiries with respect to my progress in my studies; and as nearly as I
can remember I will endeavour to give an account of them from that year.

Edition: current; Page: [7]
In the year 1814, I read Thucydides, and Anacreon, and I believe the
Electra of Sophocles, the Phœnissæ of Euripides, and the Plutus and the
Clouds of Aristophanes. I also read the Philippics of Demosthenes.

The Latin which I read was only the Oration of Cicero for the Poet
Archias, and the (first or last) part of his pleading against Verres.
And in Mathematics, I was then reading Euclid; I also began Euler’s
Algebra, Bonnycastle’s principally for the sake of the examples to
perform. I read likewise some of West’s Geometry.

Æt. 9.—The Greek which I read in the year 1815 was, I think, Homer’s
Odyssey. Theocritus, some of Pindar, and the two Orations of Æschines,
and Demosthenes on the Crown. In Latin I read the six first books, I
believe, of Ovid’s Metamorphoses, the five first books of Livy, the
Bucolics, and the six first books of the Æneid of Virgil, and part of
Cicero’s Orations. In Mathematics, after finishing the first six books,
with the eleventh and twelfth of Euclid, and the Geometry of West, I
studied Simpson’s Conic Sections and also West’s Conic Sections,
Mensuration and Spherics; and in Algebra, Kersey’s Algebra, and Newton’s
Universal Arithmetic, in which I performed all the problems without the
book, and most of them without any help from the book.

Æt. 10.—In the year 1816 I read the following Greek: Part of Polybius,
all Xenophon’s Hellenics, The Ajax and the Philoctetes of Sophocles, the
Medea of Euripides, and the Frogs of Aristophanes, and great part of the
Anthologia Græca. In Latin I read all Horace, except the Book of Epodes;
and in Mathematics I read Stewart’s Propositiones Geometricæ, Playfair’s
Edition: current; Page: [8] Trigonometry at the end of his Euclid, and
an article on geometry in the Edinburgh Encyclopædia. I also studied
Simpson’s Algebra.

Æt. 11.—In the year 1817 I read Thucydides a second time, and I likewise
read a great many Orations of Demosthenes and all Aristotle’s Rhetoric,
of which I made a synoptic table. In Latin I read all Lucretius, except
the last book, and Cicero’s Letters to Atticus, his Topica, and his
treatise, De Partitione Oratoria. I read in Conic Sections an article in
the Encyclopædia Britannica (in other branches of the mathematics I
studied Euler’s Analysis of Infinities and began Fluxions, on which I
read an article in the Encyclopædia Britannica), and Simpson’s Fluxions.
In the application of mathematics I read Keill’s Astronomy and
Robinson’s Mechanical Philosophy.

Æt. 12.—Last year I read some more of Demosthenes, and the four first
Books of Aristotle’s Organon, all which I tabulated in the same manner
as his Rhetoric.

In Latin, I read all the works of Tacitus, except the dialogue
concerning oratory, and great part of Juvenal, and began Quintilian. In
Mathematics and their application, I read Emerson’s Optics, and a
Treatise on Trigonometry by Professor Wallace, of the Military College,
near Bagshot, intended for the use of the cadets. I likewise re-solved
several problems in various branches of mathematics; and began an
article on Fluxions in the Edinburgh Encyclopædia.

Æt. 13.—This year I read Plato’s dialogues called Gorgias and
Protagoras, and his Republic, of which I made an abstract. I am still
reading Quintilian and the article on Fluxions, and am performing
without book the problems in Simpson’s Select Exercises.

Last year I began to learn logic. I have read several Latin books of
Logic: those of Smith, Brerewood, and Du Trieu,2 and part of
Burgersdicius, as far as I have gone in Aristotle. I have also read
Hobbes’ Logic.

I am now learning political economy. I have made a kind of treatise from
what my father has explained to me on that subject,3 and I am now
reading Mr. Ricardo’s work4 and writing an abstract of it. I have learnt
Edition: current; Page: [9] a little natural philosophy, and, having had
an opportunity of attending a course of lectures on chemistry, delivered
by Mr. Phillips, at the Royal Military College, Bagshot,5 I have applied
myself particularly to that science, and have read the last edition of
Dr. Thomson’s system of chemistry.

What English I have read since the year 1814 I cannot tell you, for I
cannot remember so long ago. But I recollect that since that time I have
read Ferguson’s Roman and Mitford’s Grecian History. I have also read a
great deal of Livy by myself. I have sometimes tried my hand at writing
history. I had carried a history of the United Provinces from their
revolt from Spain, in the reign of Phillip II., to the accession of the
Stadtholder, William III., to the throne of England.

I had likewise begun to write a history of the Roman Government, which I
had carried down to the Licinian Laws. I should have begun to learn
French before this time, but that my father has for a long time had it
in contemplation to go to the Continent, there to reside for some time.6
But as we are hindered from going by my father’s late appointment in the
East India House,7 I shall begin to learn French as soon as my sisters
have made progress enough in Latin to learn with me.

Edition: current; Page: [10]
I have now and then attempted to write Poetry. The last production of
that kind at which I tried my hand was a tragedy. I have now another in
view in which I hope to correct the fault of this.

I believe my sister Willie was reading Cornelius Nepos when you saw her.
She has since that time read some of Cæsar; almost all Phædrus, all the
Catiline and part of the Jugurtha of Sallust, and two plays of Terence;
she has read the first, and part of the second book of Lucretius, and is
now reading the Eclogues of Virgil.

Clara has begun Latin also. After going through the grammar, she read
some of Cornelius Nepos and Cæsar, almost as much as Willie of Sallust,
and is now reading Ovid. They are both now tolerably good
arithmeticians; they have gone as far as the extraction of the cube
root. They are reading the Roman Antiquities and the Greek Mythology,
and are translating English into Latin from Mair’s Introduction to Latin
Syntax.

This is to the best of my remembrance a true account of my own and my
sisters’ progress since the year 1814.

I hope Lady Bentham, and George,8 and the young ladies are in good
health.

Your obedient, humble servant,

John Stuart Mill.

To Sir Saml. Bentham.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

17 Janv. 1821

Montpellier

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

5.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

Montpellier

2
17 Janv. 1821

Madame

Je n’ai reçu que depuis deux jours la lettre dont vous avez bien voulu
m’honorer. Croyez, Madame, à ma réconnaissance de tout ce qu’elle
contient: réconnaissance qui aurait été grande, si vous aviez écrit sous
de Edition: current; Page: [11] meilleures auspices: jugez donc combien
elle doit l’être dans le cas actuel. J’avoue que je ne suis point digne
de cet effort que vous avez fait pour m’écrire: puisque deux ou trois
lignes à la fin d’une lettre à mon père sont tout ce que vous avez eu de
ma part, depuis que j’ai quitté l’Angleterre. Je vous prie de vouloir
bien pardonner ma negligence, et recevoir cette lettre en expiation de
ma faute. Puisque vous lisez toutes mes lettres à mon père, il est
inutile que je vous raconte la manière dont je m’occupe ici: la lettre
qui accompagne celle-ci vous donnera tous les renseignemens là dessus
que vous pouvez désirer. Il ne me reste donc plus qu’à vous remercier
des bons conseils que vous me donnez: ne doutez pas qu’ils ne produisent
tout l’effet que vous souhaitez.

Le cours publics que je suis dans ce moment ne termineront pas encore de
quelque temps. Le professeur de Logique3 ne fait guère que d’entrer dans
son sujet: le professeur de Zoologie4 n’a fait encore que douze leçons.
Il est cependant probable que si les cours durent encore longtems, je
n’en attende pas la fin: Je partirai d’ici au milieu du mois prochain,
pour retourner à Paris. J’aurai donc l’honneur de vous revoir avant
qu’il soit longtems: J’espère que nous aurons l’occasion de causer
ensemble sur toutes les choses dont vous parlez, et sur beaucoup
d’autres dont je n’ai pas la place ni le tems de vous entretenir
momentanément. Ce sera alors que j’aurai l’honneur de vous assurer moi
même de ma reconnaissance, non seulement de l’interêt que vous prenez à
tout ce qui m’arrive, mais de la bonté avec laquelle vous vous êtes
donner la peine de soigner l’éducation de mes sœurs: Je ne sais si elles
sentent toute l’étendue de cette bonté, mais je vous assure que je la
sens, et que je ne manquerai pas de vous en remercier, à mon retour, de
vive voix. — Je suis très fâché que vous ne jouissiez pas d’une santé
pareille à mes vœux: J’espère qu’elle vous sera Edition: current; Page:
[12] bientôt rendue. Veuillez bien, assurez Mr votre époux de mes
sentimens de réconnaissance pour lui; et croyez, Madame, que je serai
toujours,

Votre serviteur très obligé

J. S. Mill

Pardonnez mon embrouillomanie.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

25 Avril 1821

Paris

James Mill

Mill, James

6.


TO JAMES MILL1

[
Paris

]

25 Avril 1821

Mon cher père,

Je vous écris cette lettre de Paris, où je suis arrivé hier, après un
heureux voyage. Vous voyez que mon départ a été un peu retardé, presque
de jour en jour, mais je n’ai pas la place de vous donner des détails:
ce sera pour la prochaine lettre que je ne tarderai pas à vous envoyez.
Il y a long tems que je ne vous ai rien ecrit. Ce n’est pas qu’il me
manquait de la matière, mais il y a bien près d’un mois que je devais
partir incessamment de Montpellier, par consequent pour diminuer le
post, je n’ai pas voulu pas ecrire avant mon arrivée ici. J’aurai encore
de quoi remplir deux longues lettres pour ramener le journal à la date
de la présente. Je vous les enverrai de suite.

J’apprends par vos deux lettres à M. Say,2 qu’il a eu l’extreme
complaisance de me communiquer, qu’il est décidé que j’irai passer
quelque tems à Caen. Je suis bien convaincu que vous avez formé cette
determination après avoir bien pesé le pour et le contre: et c’est
certainement vous êtes le plus capable d’en juger. Cependant malgré le
respect que je dois à M. Lowe,3 et les bontés qu’il a pour moi, je ne
vous cache pas que je suis fâché d’aller chez lui en revenant de chez M.
Bentham, et cela principalement parceque je vois bien que cela fait de
la peine à toute la famille. Ne croyez pas qu’ils soient guidés par
l’amour propre, mais leur plus grand desir était toujours que je
revinsse chez vous aussitôt que je les eusse quittés pourque vous
puissiez juger des instructions qu’ils ont eu la bonté de me donner, et
savoir si leurs idées cadrent avec les vôtres. Ce n’est pas le sentiment
d’un seul d’entre eux mais de toute la famille; et je ne puis que me
féliciter qu’ils n’aient pas su d’abord que je devais aller Edition:
current; Page: [13] ailleurs que chez vous après les avoir quittés: car
s’ils l’avaient su je suis persuadé qu’ils ne se seraient jamais donnés
tant de peine pour mon instruction—Je ne puis plus ecrire; croyez que je
serai toujours

votre dévoué et obéissant fils

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1822

Autumn

James Mill

Mill, James

7.


TO JAMES MILL1

[
Norwich

]

[
Autumn

,
1822

]2

[The letter begins with a short account of his studies. He read
Blackstone (with Mr. Austin) three or four hours daily, and a portion of
Bentham’s “Introduction” (I suppose the “Morals and Legislation”) in the
evening.] I have found time to write the defence of Pericles3 in answer
to the accusation which you have with you. I have also found some time
to practise the delivery of the accusation, according to your
directions. [Then follows an account of a visit of ten days with the
Austins to the town of Yarmouth, with a description of the place itself.
The larger part of the letter is on the politics of Norwich, where “the
Cause” (Liberal) prospers ill, being still worse at Yarmouth. He has
seen of Radicals many; of clear-headed men not one. The best is Sir
Thomas Beever,4 whom he wishes to be induced to come to London and see
his father and Mr. Grote.5 At Yarmouth he has dined with Radical
Palmer,6 who had opened the borough to the Whigs; not much better than a
mere Radical.] I have been much entertained by a sermon of Mr. Madge,7
admirable as against Edition: current; Page: [14] Calvinists and
Catholics, but the weakness of which as against anybody else, I think he
himself must have felt. [The concluding part of the letter should have
been a postscript—]

I wish I had nothing else to tell you, but I must inform you that I have
lost my watch. It was lost while I was out of doors, but it is
impossible that it should have been stolen from my pocket. It must
therefore be my own fault. The loss itself (though I am conscious that I
must remain without a watch till I can buy one for myself) is to me not
great—much less so than my carelessness deserves. It must, however, vex
you—and deservedly, from the bad sign which it affords of me.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

14 Novr. 1822

Q[ueen] S[quare]

Mr. George Grote

Grote, Mr. George

Mrs. George Grote

Grote, Mrs. George

8.


TO MR. AND MRS. GEORGE GROTE1

Q[ueen] S[quare]

14 Novr. 1822

My dear Sir and Madam,

I crave pardon for addressing you jointly. It is a liberty for which,
like a true lawyer, I have two reasons, a technical and a rational one.
My technical reason (for confirmation of which vide Blackstone) is that
baron and feme are one person in law. My utilitarian reason is that to
do otherwise might imply that I failed of rendering to one of you, the
tribute of gratitude which your friendship so justly deserves at my
hands.

I have little news to tell you, save that which regards the Util. Soc.2
On this subject my father still preserves the most profound silence. (I
am sure that I shall often remind you of the pleasure with which I
anticipate its meetings, by the life-and-death style in which I speak
and write about it). The unsettled state of mind in which Alfred3 has
been, and is still kept, from the uncertainty of his destination, has
prevented him from giving any attention to the thing: and I have great
fears that in the event of his being able to enter into it at all he
will still have too little time to read and to study hard on Utilitarian
subjects. Still I have great hopes of him, but I Edition: current; Page:
[15] have greater hopes of R. Doane,4 who as I see, is very much in
earnest about the thing, who has read my father’s Pol. Ec.5 with great
attention as a preparative. He has also made considerable progress in
writing his introductory essay; and I will venture to prophecy, from
what I know of him by his conversation and by the application which he
shows, nothwithstanding his want of encouragement, that he will be an
active and useful member, and will profit by the Society, as well as
that he will be a source of profit to all the other members.—I have not
seen Mr. W. Prescott6 since I saw you last, but it is unnecessary that I
should see him till Alfred’s fate is decided. As for myself, I have not
only completed Jug True,7 but have commenced writing for the Util. Rev.8
and I hope that, on your return, the Defence of Pericles,9 which is now
undergoing a transmutation from a highly illegible to a tolerably
legible state, will undo all the impression which the accusation may
have made on your mind. (A propos, pardon this scrawl).

You who interest yourself so strongly in favour of M. Berchet,10 will be
delighted with Santa Rosa:11 who grows every day in the good opinion of
all the Utilitarians who see him. I hope to see him play a conspicuous
role in your society: both for his own sake, and for yours.

ERRATUM in your letter. For STERN MORALIST read DESPONDING
PHILANTHROPIST. It is the more appropriate appellation. The other I do
not think at all correct.

Yours ever

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [16]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday February 19, 1827

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

9.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Saturday
 afternoon
 [
February 19, 1827

]

Dear Chadwick

As Graham2 is unable to walk tomorrow we had better perhaps postpone our
walk to next Sunday.

Very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday March 26, 1827

E.I.H. [East India House]

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

10.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

E.I.H. [East India House]

Monday
 [
March 26, 1827

]

Dear Chadwick

If you have any influence with Thwaites,2 you will oblige me greatly by
exercising it in favour of a gentleman of the name of Taylor3 who is
about to appear for the first time as a public singer, at the Concert at
Covent Garden or Drury Lane (I forget which) on Wednesday. I could tell
you much about Mr Taylor which would interest you very strongly in his
behalf, but this I reserve till I see you. I believe his qualifications
to be of a very high order, but he does not ask to be praised, he is
only anxious that if he Edition: current; Page: [17] should sink, he may
sink quietly, without being treated with severity or with ridicule.

Very truly yours

J. S. Mill

I should say perhaps that I write to you not at his request but at that
of his relations who are my very particular f[riends].4

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday April 12, 1827

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

11.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Thursday
 ½ past four
 [
April 12, 1827

]

Dear Chadwick

Being engaged to breakfast with McCulloch2 tomorrow, I cannot walk
before breakfast—but if the weather should be sufficiently fine to tempt
you out I shall hope to meet with you chez Graham at eleven: Elliott3
has been informed.

I hope you are not the “young law student of Lyon’s Inn” whose chère
amie tried to throw herself into the Thames yesterday?

yours most truly

J. S. Mill

P.S. What is the reason that you lawyers always have pens with nibs an
inch wide?

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday 1827

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

12.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Saturday
 2 o’clock
 [
1827

?]

Dear Chadwick

Graham is absolutely engaged tomorrow, & I am conditionally so. I have
therefore agreed with Grant2 not to walk tomorrow unless Elliott comes,
Edition: current; Page: [18] which I understand is not probable—But if
you think he will come, pray come yourself and I shall be ready to join
you.

Very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 24, 1827

Jeremy Bentham

Bentham, Jeremy

13.


TO JEREMY BENTHAM1

[ca.
April 24, 1827

]

I certainly did not understand you to have expressed any desire that my
name should be in the title page. Nevertheless, if you positively
require it, I am willing that it should be so,2 rather than that you
should imagine I had taken less pains with the work under the idea of
its being (so far as I am concerned) anonymous. But I confess I should
greatly prefer that my name should be omitted. That the work should be
benefited by it is out of the question. I myself might be benefited
inasmuch as it would prove that you thought me worthy to be the editor
of a work of yours. But on Edition: current; Page: [19] the other hand
very little of the labour which I have bestowed upon the book appears on
the face of it, or can be known to any one who was not acquainted with
the MS.3 If my name were annexed to it people would think that I wished
to make a parade either of your good opinion [of]4 me, or of the few
notes which I have added.5 The notes are not of sufficient value to make
it of any consequence to the public to know who wrote them—I should be
very sorry to be suspected of wishing to obtain a reputation at a cheap
rate by appearing before the public under the shelter of your name.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1827

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

14.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

[
1827

?]

Dear Chadwick

Tooke2 cannot come this evening—therefore I must beg you to defer your
visit till further notice—Tuesday & Friday next he is disengaged,
therefore I hope you will also keep yourself at liberty for one of those
days—I cannot yet answer for myself.

Yours ever

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday 1827

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

15.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Tuesday
 [
1827

?]

Dear Chadwick

Tooke will be with me tonight.

Yours ever

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [20]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 27, 1827

Westminster

Arthur Aylmer

Aylmer, Arthur

16.


TO ARTHUR AYLMER1

[
Nov. 27, 1827

]

London Debating Society

Sir

The half yearly subscription2 for September last being now due, you are
requested to forward it, with all arrears of former subscriptions, to my
address.

I am, Sir
 Your most obt. Servt.

J. S. Mill, Treasurer

1 Queen Square

Westminster

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday Dec. 22, 1827

E.I.H.

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

17.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

E.I.H.

Friday
 [
Dec. 22, 182(7?)

]

Dear Chadwick

I am requested by Mr. & Mrs. George Grote to beg the favour of your
company at dinner this day se’nnight at six—62 Threadneedle Street. You
will meet Graham and Roebuck,2 & probably myself.

Very truly yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [21]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 14, 1828

Westminster

W. H. Ferrell

Ferrell, W. H.

18.


TO W. H. FERRELL1

[
Jan. 14, 1828

]

London Debating Society

Sir,

I have the honour to recal [sic] your attention to my last half yearly
circular, and to request that your arrears of Subscription, amounting to
£1 may be discharged at your earliest convenience.

I have the honour to be,

Your obedient Servant

J. S. Mill, Treasurer.

1 Queen Square

Westminster

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

25 janvier 1828

Londres

Charles Comte

Comte, Charles

19.


TO CHARLES COMTE1

Londres

,
25 janvier 1828

.

Mon cher Monsieur Comte

Je m’occupe depuis quelque temps d’une critique de la Vie de Bonaparte
par Sir Walter Scott,2 et surtout des deux premiers volumes, contenant
une esquisse historique de la révolution française. Je ne me dissimule
pas combien la tâche que je me suis imposée est au dessus de mes forces;
mais on est ici dans une si crasse ignorance sur la révolution, et tous,
jusqu’aux individus les plus instruits, ont des idées tellement
ridicules sur la nature de cette crise politique, qu’avec mon peu de
lumières et de connaissance des faits j’ai crû pouvoir faire quelque
chose pour dessiller les yeux de mes compatriotes. C’est pour avoir des
renseignemens un peux moins imparfaits sur quelques-uns des évènements
les plus remarquables de la révolution, Edition: current; Page: [22] que
j’ose vous prier de vouloir bien m’indiquer les preuves sur lesquelles
s’appuient trois faits, énoncés comme certains dans votre Histoire de la
Garde Nationale.3

1° L’intention qu’eut la cour, dans les jours antérieurs à l’époque de
14 juillet, de faire le procès des chefs du parti populaire.

2° L’intention qu’elle eut de faire la contre-révolution, en-fesant
partir le roi de Versailles pour aller à Metz, à l’époque du repas des
gardes du corps dans les premiers jours d’octobre 1789.

3° Les assurances solennelles faites par le roi à M. de Lafayette, avant
le voyage de Varennes, qu’aucun projet d’évasion n’était entré dans sa
tête.

Les preuves que j’ai pu recueillir sur ces trois faits ont bien assez de
poids pour que moi en me[. . . ?]4 particulier je n’en doute nullement.
Cependant elles ne montent pas audessus d’une grande probabilité, et il
faut quelque chose de plus que des probabilités, pour satisfaire à un
public aussi prévenu que le nôtre. Vous me ferez donc, Monsieur, le plus
grand plaisir, en m’indiquant les moyens de parvenir à une certitude
plus parfaite à l’égard de ces circonstances.

D’ailleurs, comme il est probable que vous ayez lû l’ouvrage de Sir
Walter Scott, je n’ai pas besoin de vous dire combien d’obligation je
vous aurais de toute indication que vous voulûssiez bien me donner
relativement aux erreurs de ce livre. Elles sont si nombreuses, qu’il
est impossible de les relever toutes; mais, d’autant qu’on connaît un
plus grand nombre, on est à portée de faire une meilleure choix, pour
démontrer l’infidélité de cet ouvrage prétendu historique, et le faire
tomber dans le decrédit absolu qu’il mérite.

Pour vous épargner pourtant une peine inutile, je dois vous dire que je
sais déjà à peu près tout ce qu’on peut apprendre en lisant la plupart
des Mémoires sur la Révolution, ainsi que les ouvrages historiques de
Mignet,5 Toulongeon,6 et autres. Dans le cas donc où vous eussiez la
bonté de me donner quelques renseignemens, il n’est pas besoin de vous
occuper de ces matières-la.

Mon père me charge de le rappeler à votre souvenir, et de vous prier de
servir d’interprète à ses sentimens auprès de Mme votre épouse, ainsi
que de M. et Mme Say, et de leur aimable famille. Veuillez bien agréer
le témoignage de mon respect et de mon amitié.

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [23]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

10th March 1828

John Bowring

Bowring, John

20.


TO JOHN BOWRING1

10th March 1828

.

My dear Sir

Your letter, which I received this morning, is a more good-natured one
than I fear mine was. I am much obliged to you for not being offended at
my taking huff as I did, and I will now tell you exactly what I think of
Mr George Bentham’s book2—and what I am ready to say of it, if you think
that it would be more satisfactory to Mr Bentham3 than an entire
omission.

I do not think that Mr. G. B’s book affords any proof of want of
talent—far from it—but many of haste, and want of due deliberation. This
mistake was, as it seems to me, that of supposing that he was qualified
to write on such a subject as Logic after two or three months’ study, or
that so young a logician was capable of maintaining so high a ground as
that of a critic upon Whately.4 The consequences of his mistake have
been twofold: first of all, he has produced nothing but minute
criticism, which even when most just, is particularly annoying to the
person criticized when so much stress appears to be laid upon it. This
minute criticism is often just, sometimes very acute, but frequently,
also, if I am not mistaken, altogether groundless. Instead of this, a
good critic on Whately should have laid down as a standard of
comparison, the best existing or the best conceivable exposition of the
science, & examined how far Whately’s book possesses the properties
which should belong to that. In the second place, Mr George Bentham
seems not to be aware, that Dr Whately is a far greater master of the
science than he is, & that the public will think the disproportion still
greater than it is. It would therefore have been wiser in him not to
have assumed the tone of undisputed & indisputable superiority over
Whately, which marks the greater part of his critique. To be entitled to
do this, a writer should not only be superior, but prove himself to be
superior, in knowledge of the subject, to the author whom he criticizes.
He should let people see that if he differs from Whately, it is not
because W. knows more than he but because he knows more than W.

Edition: current; Page: [24]
I have put this more strongly, and enlarged upon it more fully, to you,
than I should in the W. R.5 But I should think it wrong, in noticing the
book, not to say something of this sort.

Very truly yours,

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 23, 1828

Westminster

Benjamin Keen

Keen, Benjamin

21.


TO BENJAMIN KEEN1

[
April 23, 1828

]

London Debating Society

Sir

The half yearly subscription for March last being now due, you are
requested to forward it, with all arrears of former subscriptions, to my
address.

Arrears £2

Subscrn 10/

I am, Sir
 You most obt. Servt.

J. S. Mill, Treasurer

1 Queen Square

Westminster

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

27 juin 1828

Londres

Charles Comte

Comte, Charles

22.


TO CHARLES COMTE1

Londres

27 juin
1828

Mon cher M. Comte

Vous me ferez plaisir en voulant bien accepter quelques exemplaires de
ma critique de Walter Scott,2 dont M. Bodin3 a la bonté de se charger.
Je vous prie d’en garder autant que vous voudrez, et de placer les
autres Edition: current; Page: [25] comme vous le trouverez bon. Je vous
engage seulement à en faire part à M. Say, et de lui en donner un ou
deux, s’il veut bien me faire l’honneur de les accepter.—Comme il est
très probable que j’écrive encore quelques articles de revue, sur la
révolution française et sur l’ancien régime, je désirerais beaucoup que
ceux qui pourraient avoir les moyens et la bonne volonté de me faire
parvenir des renseignemens utiles là dessus, pûssent juger au moyen de
cette brochure, quelles sont ceux qui me manquent. Au reste, je ne vois
guère que [?] moi en angleterre qui rendent justice à la révolution.

Agréez, Monsieur, l’expression de mes sentimens respectueux.

J. S. Mill

J’ai lieu de vous remercier très sincerement, de m’avoir fait faire la
connaissance de M. Victor Jacquemont.4 Il me paraît très estimable à
tous les égards.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 26, 1828

Westminster

Archibald Thomson

Thomson, Archibald

23.


TO ARCHIBALD THOMSON1

[
Nov. 26, 1828

]

London Debating Society

Sir

The half-yearly subscription for September last being now due, you are
requested to forward it, with all arrears of former subscriptions, to my
address.

Arrears 10/

Subscrn 10/

I am, Sir,
 Your most obt. Servt.

J. S. Mill, Treasurer

The same to Mr Alfred Thomson (£1.)

1 Queen Square

Westminster

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thomas Coates

Coates, Thomas

23A.


TO THOMAS COATES (see page 742)

Edition: current; Page: [26]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

11th March, 1829

London

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

24.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

London

,
11th March, 1829

My dear friend,

I have been so much occupied of late that I have not had leisure even to
think of writing to you, and if your brother2 had not afforded me the
present opportunity, I should probably have deferred that pleasure some
time longer. I hope that you will receive the Statements and Reports of
the Council of the London University3 along with this letter, the
Warden4 having promised to send them to me in time to be given to your
brother before his departure. If he should omit to do so, which I trust
he will not, I will take the earliest subsequent opportunity of sending
them to you. I am glad to hear that you are busily engaged in writing on
the subject of England, and am not surprised to learn that you find a
great number of unexpected difficulties in giving an account of the
state of society here.5 As there is nobody even in England who is by any
means qualified to treat so immense a subject with any thing like
completeness, it would be very wrong in you to be discouraged by finding
that there is a great deal that you do not know—it is sufficient if you
know, as I am satisfied you do, very much on the subject of England
which is known to few, perhaps to none of your countrymen. It would have
been a good thing for the interest of your book, if you had been here at
this moment: you would have seen, what you did not see when you were
here, a state of great political excitement. The excitement does not
reach the labouring classes, but it pervades all the rest of the
community to such a degree that, as I am credibly informed, it has to a
great degree put a stop to buying and selling, at least Edition:
current; Page: [27] on a large scale, as no one can think of any thing
except the Catholic question. Since the debate in the House of Commons,
and the majority of 188 in favour of the question, nobody doubts the
success of the bill;6 and it is very gratifying, and most creditable to
our ministers, that they have not clogged the measure with any
objectionable or ungracious provisoes or restrictions. The most
disgraceful artifices have been employed by the Duke of Cumberland7 and
Lord Eldon8 in order to work upon the mind of the King; & it is a fact
which you may rely upon, that the Duke of Wellington, the Lord
Chancellor,9 and Mr Peel,10 left Windsor on Wednesday last out of
office, their resignations having been accepted, & the Anti-Catholics
had already begun to arrange a ministry when the King grew alarmed and
sent off an express to beg the Duke of Wellington still to consider
himself in office. It is of the greatest importance that the probable
effect of this measure should be known in France. Its effect in Ireland
will be a trifle compared to its effect in England. It forms an era in
civilization. It is one of those great events, which periodically occur,
by which the institutions of a country are brought into harmony with the
better part of the mind of that country—by which that which previously
existed in the minds only, of the more intelligent portion only of the
community, becomes the law of the land, and by consequence raises the
whole of the community to its own level. The greatest advance in the
national mind, until thus adopted by the government and incorporated in
the institutions of the country, is the advance only of the leading
minds, of those who already were furthest in advance: It does not bring
forward the whole nation, but widens the distance between the advanced
posts and the rear. Much as we have improved in the last 20 years, it is
only a part of us that has improved, there remained millions of men in a
state of the same brutal ignorance and obstinate prejudice in which they
were half a century ago. But this measure will bring forward the
rear-guard of civilization: it will give a new direction to the opinions
of those who never think for themselves, & who on that account can never
be changed unless you change their masters & guides. The intelligent
classes lead the government, & the government leads the Edition:
current; Page: [28] stupid classes.—Besides all this, the alteration of
so important and so old a law as that which excludes Catholics from
political privileges, has given a shake to men’s minds which has
loosened all old prejudices, and will render them far more accessible to
new ideas and to rational innovations on all other parts of our
institutions: our ministry, moreover, having been so reviled and
attacked by the Tory & high church party that it never can act in
concert with them again, must now throw itself wholly on the liberals
for support. As for the Tory party, it is broken; it is entirely gone.
It placed all on this stake, & it has lost it. What would not in itself
have taken much from their power, will now utterly destroy it, because,
as they had mustered all their strength to resist this question, it is
their decisive overthrow. Ten or twelve years ago, Lord Sidmouth11 said
to an acquaintance of mine, that the King’s government had not strength
to do any thing which the clergy opposed. That idea is now at an end;
the clergy have opposed this with all their might, & as they have
failed, the influence of the church, its moral influence at least, is
gone. The Church has no hold on the affections of the people: All its
influence rested upon the opinion of its power: It is now seen to have
very little power; and the effect of this discovery will be so great
that I really begin to think that I shall see the downfall of the church
in my time. I have said nothing to you on any subject except the
Catholic question, but it is so much the most important event now
happening that I could hardly have chosen a topic likely to be more
interesting to you. By the way, it is now certain that our ministers are
disposed to carry freedom of trade even further than their predecessors:
I hope that you will do the same. Believe me,

Yours ever

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wednesday April 15, 1829

India House

John Sterling

Sterling, John

25.


TO JOHN STERLING1

India House

Wednesday
 [
April 15, 1829

]

Dear Sterling

I have given a greater number of perusals to your note than I believe I
ever gave to any epistle before. I should not however have troubled you
with any answer to it, if you had not seemed to take sufficient interest
in Edition: current; Page: [29] what concerns me, to lead me to believe
that I might talk to you upon a subject so entirely personal as the
state of my own mind without your considering it a bore or an intrusion.
I was unwilling that you should leave the London Debating Society
without my telling you how much I should regret that circumstance if it
were to deprive me of the chance not only of retaining such portion as I
already possess, but of acquiring a still greater portion of your
intimacy—which I value highly for this reason among many others, that it
appears to me peculiarly adapted to the wants of my own mind; since I
know no person who possesses more, of what I have not, than yourself,
nor is this inconsistent with my believing you to be deficient in some
of the very few things which I have. But though I feared that this loss
to myself would, or at least might, be the consequence of your
resignation I never imputed that resignation to any other cause than
those which you have stated, and which are, in good truth, cause
sufficient. I am now chiefly anxious to explain to you, more clearly
than I fear I did, what I meant when I spoke to you of the comparative
loneliness of my probable future lot. Do not suppose me to mean that I
am conscious at present of any tendency to misanthropy—although among
the very various states of mind, some of them extremely painful ones,
through which I have passed during the last three years, something
distantly approximating to misanthropy was one.2 At present I believe
that my sympathies with society, which were never strong, are, on the
whole, stronger than they Edition: current; Page: [30] ever were. By
loneliness I mean the absence of that feeling which has accompanied me
through the greater part of my life, that which one fellow traveller, or
one fellow soldier has towards another—the feeling of being engaged in
the pursuit of a common object, and of mutually cheering one another on,
and helping one another in an arduous undertaking. This, which after all
is one of the strongest ties of individual sympathy, is at present, so
far as I am concerned, suspended at least, if not entirely broken off.
There is now no human being (with whom I can associate on terms of
equality) who acknowledges a common object with me, or with whom I can
cooperate even in any practical undertaking without the feeling, that I
am only using a man whose purposes are different, as an instrument for
the furtherance of my own. Idem sentire de republicâ, was thought by one
of the best men who ever lived to be the strongest bond of friendship:3
for republicâ I would read “all the great objects of life,” where the
parties concerned have at heart any great objects at all. I do not see
how there can be otherwise that idem velle, idem nolle, which is
necessary to perfect friendship.4 Being excluded therefore from this, I
am resolved hereafter to avoid all occasions for debate, since they
cannot now strengthen my sympathies with those who agree with me, & are
sure to weaken them with those who differ.—Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

15th May 1829

London

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

26.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

London

,
15th May 1829

My dear d’Eichthal,

Many thanks to you for your interesting letter, which has been read not
only by Tooke2 and myself but by several others of our friends with very
great pleasure. Before I say more, I will answer the question which
Edition: current; Page: [31] your brother has just put to me in your
name. The Parliamentary accounts of the expenses of management, amounts
of deposit, and other information relating to Saving Banks are not at
all mixed up with those of Benefit Societies. They are quite
separate.—Nothing of much importance or interest has taken place here
since the settlement of the Catholic question,3 except the discussion
respecting the duties on Silk,4 which shews that our ministry is
disposed not only to persevere in the measures of their predecessors
with respect to free trade, but to carry the principle still further. It
is much to be feared that they will not take the opportunity which the
present state of our relations with Portugal affords, for abrogating the
Methuen treaty,5 by which we are bound to admit the Portugal wines at a
lower duty than those of other countries. If we were free from this
engagement, it might be hoped that your ministry would consent to lower
the duties on some of our manufactures, on condition of our lowering
those on your wines. But I suppose the stupid affairs of Russia & Turkey
would prevent any discussions between the two Governments on commercial
policy at present.6—I am glad to hear that you have made so much
progress in your work on England.7 I am however inclined to think from
your letter to Tooke, that there is some danger of your praising this
country beyond its due. You were very naturally struck with the
superiority of the English to the French in all those qualities by which
a nation is enabled to turn its productive and commercial resources to
the best account. But this superiority is closely connected with the
very worst point in our national character, the disposition to sacrifice
every thing to accumulation, & that exclusive & engrossing selfishness
which accompanies it. I am well aware how much of this is owing to our
political institutions, under which every thing is accessible to wealth
and scarcely any thing to poverty. But I fear that the commercial
spirit, amidst all its good effects, is almost sure to bring with it
wherever it prevails, a certain amount of this evil; because that which
necessarily occupies every man’s time & thoughts for the greater part of
his life, naturally acquires an ascendency over his mind
disproportionate to its real importance; & when the pursuit of wealth,
in a degree Edition: current; Page: [32] greater than is required for
comfortable subsistence,—an occupation which concerns only a man himself
& his family,—becomes the main object of his life, it almost invariably
happens that his sympathies & his feelings of interest become incapable
of going much beyond himself & his family. You must have observed even
while you were here, although mixing as you did, with the best class of
Englishmen, how difficult it is to interest them in any thing which has
not some bearing upon what they call their advancement in life. In all
countries you find men in middle life in a great degree selfish &
worldly, but there are few countries besides this where even the young
men are many of them avowedly so. In France or Germany the laughable
aberrations of sentiment & enthusiasm are common, the odious ones of
coldness & selfishness rare. In this country the reverse is the case.
Here, it requires great tact & knowledge of society to enable a man to
appear deeply in earnest on any subject without exposing himself to be
laughed at—& the etiquette of what is called good society is to appear
profoundly insensible to every impression, external or internal. You say
that you dread to think what a great nation we shall be, now when we
have got rid of bigotry. I do not myself think that bigotry was, or is,
our worst point. It is indifference, moral insensibility, which we have
need to get rid of. I wish that I saw the least chance of our improving
in this respect, without either a political revolution, or such a change
in our national education as it would, I fear, require a revolution to
bring about. You are far ahead of us in France. You have only to teach
men what is right, & they will do it: they are uninformed, but they are
not prejudiced, & are desirous & eager to learn. Here, the grand
difficulty is to make them desire to learn. They have such an opinion of
their own wisdom that they do not think they can learn; & they have too
little regard for other people to care much whether they learn or no, in
things which only interest the nation in general, or mankind at large.
Our middle class moreover have but one object in life, to ape their
superiors; for whom they have an open-mouthed & besotted admiration,
attaching itself to the bad more than to the good points, being those
they can most easily comprehend & imitate. It is true that those who
wish to do good, are here enabled, by that esprit d’association which
you so much admire, to effect more, in proportion to their numbers, than
they do in France. It is a great fault in your nation to surround
themselves as you say with an atmosphere of personal vanity, which makes
them desire to get all the honour of every thing to themselves, & not to
call in the cooperation of others lest they should be compelled to share
the credit with them. The fault of your public men certainly is, a
desire for display. Here there is not so much anxiety of that kind.
Applause which “leads to nothing”, is less valued. But the applause
which has Edition: current; Page: [33] exchangeable value, that which
produces its worth in pounds sterling, or in substantial power, the
applause of the ruling classes, is as highly esteemed & as anxiously
sought after here as elsewhere. We are it is true improving rapidly;
chiefly however in throwing off prejudices. We no longer think our
institutions the best possible; but we commit gross blunders in every
attempt we make to mend them. Still it is something to have a fair field
open. Sound ideas and good sense applied to public affairs, have, I
believe, considerably more chance of being listened to & exercising
influence at the present moment than at any time in the last hundred
years. But where are they to be found? There are no men of talents among
us. Our writers & our orators are, almost to a man, des gens mediocres.
I do not know whether yours are any better; probably not; but they will
be. We have at any rate not one member of either house of parliament who
approaches within twenty degrees of M. de Broglie.8—Tooke desires me to
ask you, whether you can recommend to him any French works adapted for
the instruction of the people on the elements of the sciences of
politics & morals. It seems that the Society for the Diffusion of Useful
(or rather Useless) Knowledge9 has appointed a Translation Committee, of
which Tooke is likely to be one of the most active members. I suppose
that if there be any such works they must be very recent, I am almost
sure there are none prior to the present century.—He also wishes to know
whether you can point out any works which it would be worth while for
him to read, for his own instruction, on French Administration, & on the
science of Administration in general—a science so little studied here
that we are indebted to France both for the name & the very idea.—Of
course the thing goes on here as well as every where else, but it has
been so little thought of or studied scientifically that the very word
itself is not yet naturalized in our island. Tooke also wishes to know
whether a collection of the works of St Simon10 & his school, just
sufficient to give him an idea of their general views & Edition:
current; Page: [34] principles, would be voluminous or expensive. I am
only now about to begin to read the work of M. Comte11 which you so
strongly recommended to me. When I have read it, I shall be extremely
desirous of having some discussion with you on the principles of the
Producteur party, especially that respecting “l’hérédité de la
proprieté,” on which subject their doctrine as you express it seems to
me a great heresy, but of course I cannot tell what I should think of it
until I know with what qualifications & reservations they receive it. I
myself think, with Mr Bentham, that property ought to escheat to the
state in preference to collateral heirs, where there is no testamentary
disposition. You will probably have perceived from our debates that the
proposition of introducing some system of Poor Rates into Ireland is
about to be seriously entertained by our Government.12 The progress of
opinion on this subject within a few years has been very striking. I am
inclined to think that the discussions on this subject will be extremely
instructive, & well worthy of attentive consideration from your
statesmen.

Believe me yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

8th October 1829

London

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

27.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

London

8th October 1829

My dear d’Eichthal

I can hardly expect forgiveness for having allowed so long an interval
to elapse without writing to you, especially after you so warmly invited
me, not only to write, but to correspond and discuss with you on some of
the subjects on which it is of most importance that you, and I, and all
men, should think rightly. The truth is however that it was long before
I found time to read the books which you were so kind as to leave with
me, and since that time I have been too much occupied with other things
to be Edition: current; Page: [35] able to write to you at all. I have
not yet been able to read any of the articles of the Producteur.2 I
cannot therefore give you my opinion so fully as I may perhaps
hereafter, on the doctrines of the St Simon school. As far however as I
can judge at present, if I were ever to become a proselyte of that
school, it would rather be on the grounds of your last letter to me,
than of any of the books I have read. In your letter I do not know that
there is much in which I disagree though there are some things. I cannot
say as much for the books. When I read the “Opinions Littéraires,
Philosophiques et Industrielles”3 which I took up with some
expectations, I was perfectly astonished at the shallowness of it. It
appeared to me the production of men who had neither read nor thought,
but hastily put down the first crudities that would occur to a boy who
had just left school. When, however, I read Comte’s “Traité de Politique
Positive,”4 I was no longer surprised at the high opinion which I had
heard you express of the book, & the writer, and was even seduced by the
plausibility of his manner into forming a higher opinion of the
doctrines which he delivers than on reflexion they appear to me at all
entitled to. I find the same fault with his philosophy, that he does
with the philosophy of the eighteenth century [;] it is only the partie
critique which appears to me sound, the partie organique appears to me
liable to a hundred objections. It abounds indeed, with many very acute
remarks though all of them of a kind which the progress of events is
suggesting at this moment to all minds, which are au niveau du siècle
throughout Europe: but it is a great mistake, a very common one too,
which this sect seem to be in great danger of falling into to suppose
that a few striking and original observations, are sufficient to form
the foundation of a science positive. M. Comte is an exceedingly clear
and methodical writer, most agreeable in stile, and concatenates so
well, that one is apt to mistake the perfect coherence and logical
consistency of his system, for truth.5 This power of systematising, of
tracing a principle to its remotest consequences, and that power of
clear and consecutive exposition which generally accompanies it, seem to
me to be the characteristic excellencies of all the good French writers;
and are nearly connected with their characteristic defect, which seems
to me to be this: They are so well satisfied with the clearness with
which their conclusions Edition: current; Page: [36] flow from their
premisses, that they do not stop to compare the conclusions themselves
with the fact though it is only when they will stand this comparison
that we can be assured the premisses have included all which is
essential to the question. They deduce politics like mathematics from a
set of axioms & definitions, forgetting that in mathematics there is no
danger of partial views: a proposition is either true or it is not, & if
it is true, we may safely apply it to every case which the proposition
comprehends in its terms: but in politics & the social science, this is
so far from being the case, that error seldom arises from our assuming
premisses which are not true, but generally from our overlooking other
truths which limit, & modify the effect of the former. It appears to me
therefore that most French philosophers are chargeable with the fault
which Cousin imputes to Condillac,6 of insisting upon only seeing one
thing when there are many, or seeing a thing only on one side, only in
one point of view when there are many others equally essential to a just
estimate of it. If I were to point out all the instances in which this
fault is observable in Comte’s book, I must go through every page, for
it pervades his whole book; & as it seems to me, it is this fault which
alone enables him to give his ideas that compact & systematic form by
which they are rendered in appearance something like a science positive.
To begin with the very first and fundamental principle of the whole
system, that government and the social union exist for the purpose of
concentrating and directing all the forces of society to some one end.
He cannot mean that government should exist for more than one purpose,
or that this one purpose should be the direction of the united force of
society to more than one end. What a foundation for a system of
political science this is! Government exists for all purposes whatever
that are for man’s good: and the highest & most important of these
purposes is the improvement of man himself as a moral and intelligent
being, which is an end not included in M. Comte’s category at all. The
united forces of society never were, nor can be, directed to one single
end, nor is there, so far as I can perceive, any reason for desiring
that they should. Men do not come into the world to fulfil one single
end, and there is no single end which if fulfilled even in the most
complete manner would make them happy. Then again when M. Comte comes to
enquire what this end is, it must be either the dominion of man over
man, which is conquest, or the dominion of man over nature, which is
production: the first was the end of society in the ancient world & in
the feudal ages, (not true in the least)—this is gone by, therefore the
other must be the end of society now: why so, pray? Are conquest &
production, the only two Edition: current; Page: [37] conceivable
purposes that human beings can combine for! This is one of a thousand
things which shew that the St Simon philosophy could only originate in
France. If M. Comte were a native of England, where this idol
“production” has been set up and worshipped with incessant devotion for
a century back, & if he had seen how the disproportionate importance
attached to it lies at the root of all our worst national vices,
corrupts the measures of our statesmen, the doctrines of our
philosophers & hardens the minds of our people so as to make it almost
hopeless to inspire them with any elevation either of intellect or of
soul, he would have seen that a philosophy which makes production
expressly the one end of the social union, would render the only great
social evil, of which there is much danger in the present state of
civilisation, irremediable. It leads too, to the grand practical
conclusion of the St Simon school, that the business of government must
be placed in the hands of the principal industriels, the pouvoir
temporel at least, & the pouvoir spirituel in the savans & artistes: I
do not know how it may be in France, but I know that in England these
three are the very classes of persons you would pick out as the most
remarkable for a narrow & bigotted understanding, & a sordid &
contracted disposition as respects all things wider than their business
or families. I have a thousand things more to say on this subject, but I
must pass to another. There is according to M. Comte only one law of the
development of human civilisation. You who have been in England can say
whether this is true. Is it not clear that these two nations, England &
France, are examples of the advance of civilisation by two different
roads, & that neither of them has, nor probably ever will, pass through
the state which the other is in? It is the lower animals which have only
one law, that of their instinct. The order of the developement of man’s
faculties, is as various as the situations in which he is placed. It is
melancholy to observe how a man like M. Comte has had all his views of
history warped & distorted by the necessity of proving that civilisation
has but one law, & that a law of progressive advancement; how it blinds
him to all the merits of the Greeks & Romans (& the demerits of the
middle ages) because there was improvement in some things at such
periods, he thinks there must have been so in all: why not allow that
while mankind advanced in some things, they went back in others? There
is positively no place for England in M. Comte’s system: he has given a
list of all the states which the social system can be in, and England is
in none of them. Notwithstanding all this there are many excellent & new
remarks in M. Comte’s book: & if people could be contented to take part
& leave the rest, these doctrines would probably receive the proper
corrections & modifications & would be very valuable. But if the
proselytes of Saint Simon insist upon forming a sect, which is a
character above all to be avoided by independent Edition: current; Page:
[38] thinkers [,] & imagine themselves under a necessity, if they belong
to the sect, to take all its dogmas without exception or qualification,
they will not only do no good but I fear immense mischief. Substituting
one fragment of the truth for another is not what is wanted, but
combining them together so as to obtain as large a portion as possible
of the whole. I have not even left myself space to tell you with how
much pleasure I have read your pamphlet, which has made almost an entire
convert of me, and the few sheets which your brother shewed me of your
work on England.7 I shall however write to you again by your friend, I
hope I may now say our friend, M. Victor Lanjuinais,8 whom I hope I
shall see more of when he returns from Scotland; what I have seen of him
I like extremely. Meanwhile believe me

Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

7th November 1829

London

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

28.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

India House

London

7th November 1829

My dear d’Eichthal,

As I am several letters in your debt, I take advantage of the departure
of our friend M. Lanjuinais2 to pay one instalment. To my great regret I
have seen but little of M. Lanjuinais during his residence here, having
been prevented first by his absence from town, then by my own,
afterwards by his again, and finally by his departure before the
expected period. However he permits us to hope that we shall see him
again for a short time in the early part of next summer.—One object
which I have in writing to you at present is to inform you of a project
which we have formed and which there is some prospect though but a
doubtful one of our being able to realize, of starting a morning
newspaper, of which Chadwick should be the editor, and almost all your
friends in this country frequent writers.3 The prospects of success
would be very encouraging. You know in how low a state the newspaper
press of this country is. In France the best thinkers & writers of the
nation, write in the journals & direct public Edition: current; Page:
[39] opinion; but our daily & weekly writers are the lowest hacks of
literature, which when it is a trade, is the vilest & most degrading of
all trades, because more of affectation & hypocrisy, & more subservience
to the baser feelings of others, are necessary for carrying it on, than
for any other trade, from that of a brothelkeeper upwards. We are not in
so low a state here, as not to have in some measure found this out; &
there is consequently rather a general sense of the needfulness of some
newspaper conducted by men really in earnest about public objects, &
really forming their opinions from some previous knowledge & not from
the mere appearances of the moment, or the convenience of party
advocacy. The old ties of party and the attachment to established
opinions have at the same time been so greatly weakened among all the
reading classes, that the times are very favourable for starting new
opinions, and especially any which hold out sufficient hopes of
extensive good, to enlist in their behalf that enthusiasm and
dévouement, which are now wandering about the world seeking an object
worthy of them. We possess moreover the means of rendering this paper
the best as a mere vehicle of intelligence; as a mere newspaper in
short, which yet exists; & have therefore no doubt of its success
provided we can raise the money which of course is doubtful, but of
which we have considerable hopes. As this newspaper will pay very
particular attention to French affairs, and will endeavour, as one of
its grand objects to make its readers understand not only French
politics but the whole social state of France, including all that is
doing in the world of literature & philosophy by that active and
important member of the European community, & in short to explain the
character of that general movement which is taking place in the human
mind all over the Continent of Europe but especially in France, we shall
be very anxious to have a first rate correspondent at Paris, capable of
supplying, (along with the general news of the day in politics,
literature & philosophy) sound & enlarged views on all these subjects. I
imagine there is scarcely any person except yourself who, with the other
necessary qualifications, possesses that knowledge of England, which a
Frenchman writing for Englishmen would need, & I am speaking the
sentiments of all my expected collaborateurs when I request, that if we
succeed in realizing our scheme, you will undertake this department of
it. We should wish to have regular letters as often as you could find
time to write them, similar to those in the Times, which, though by no
means first rate, have done great good here. Of course we should not
wish you to undertake so great a portion of our labour without
participating in our reward (the pecuniary part of it I mean) either in
the shape of a regular engagement, or of a proportion of the profits in
case of success, according to your own preference, and to the amount of
capital which we can succeed in raising, to commence our operations. If
by ill fortune you should not Edition: current; Page: [40] be disposed
to undertake what I have proposed to you, I beg that you will consider
whether there is any other person whom you could recommend to us for the
same purpose, or with whom you could divide the task. In the mean time,
as it is best that a scheme of this sort should be known to as few
persons as possible until it is certain of being prosecuted, it will be
desirable that you should not speak of it more than may be necessary for
obtaining what we want.—I have not left myself room to say much to you
on the Saint Simon school, & indeed, having been out of town, I have not
yet had an opportunity of reading any of the articles of the
Producteur.4 I am chiefly anxious at present to tell you of the things
which I approve and admire in this school, as I am rather afraid that my
former letter may have left an impression on your mind, that I do not
think so highly of them as I actually do. In the first place then I
highly approve and commend one of the leading principles of their
system, which they have established to conviction, the necessity of a
Pouvoir Spirituel. They have held out as the ultimate end towards which
we are advancing & which we shall one day attain, a state in which the
body of the people, i.e. the uninstructed, shall entertain the same
feelings of deference & submission to the authority of the instructed,
in morals and politics, as they at present do in the physical sciences.
This, I am persuaded, is the only wholesome state of the human mind; &
the knowledge that we ought to look to it as the ultimate end, has a
great tendency to protect us from many errors which the philosophers of
the 18th century fell into, & which all will be liable to who suppose
that the diffusion of knowledge among the labouring classes & the
consequent improvement of their intellects is to be the grand instrument
of the regeneration of mankind. Before, however, this state can be
attained or even aimed at it is necessary that several great steps
should be taken in the improvement of the social organisation; &
principally that the great social sinister interests should be removed,
since while these exist, those, who would otherwise be the instructed
classes, have no motive to obtain real instruction in politics & morals,
& are subjected to biasses from which the students of the physical
sciences are exempt. They can drive a trade in the ignorance and
prejudices of others; they either write for the classes who have
sinister interests, and minister to their selfishness and malevolence,
or else, addressing themselves to the common people, they find in the
well grounded discontent of the people against their institutions
sufficient materials for acquiring popularity without either instructing
their intellects, or cultivating right habits of feeling and judging in
their minds. I object altogether to the means which the St Simonists
propose for organizing the pouvoir spirituel. It appears to me that you
cannot organise it at all. What is the pouvoir spirituel but the
Edition: current; Page: [41] insensible influence of mind over mind? The
instruments of this are private communication, the pulpit, & the press.
If you attempt to collect together the instructed, you must have
somebody to chuse them, & determine who they are: in what respect, then,
will this differ from an elective national assembly, with a
qualification for eligibility, not a qualification of property but of
education?—The second great service which in my opinion the St Simonists
have rendered, is not by having been the first to notice (for all
persons of course have adverted to it more or less) but having
illustrated more copiously than had been done before, and having paid
more attention & attached more importance than other philosophers to the
fact, that institutions which if we consider them in themselves, we can
hardly help thinking it impossible should ever have produced any thing
but the most unqualified mischief (the Catholic church for example) may
yet, at a particular stage in the progress of the human mind, have not
only been highly useful but absolutely indispensable; the only means by
which the human mind could have been brought forward to an ulterior
stage of improvement. A due attention to this great truth, which is the
result of enlarged views of the history of mankind, is also thereby a
necessary condition to those views. Without it, there is no possibility
of viewing or judging past times with candour, or trying them by any
standard but that of the present. And yet, he who does not do this, will
judge the present as ill as the past. For surely at every present epoch
there are many things which would be good for that epoch, though not
good for the being Man, at every epoch, nor perhaps at any other than
that one: & whoever does not make this distinction must be a bad
practical philosopher even for his own age, yet he will not make the
distinction for the present who does not make it for the past. Every age
contains countries, every country contains men, who are in every
possible state of civilisation, from the lowest of all, to the highest
which mankind have reached in that age, or in that country. Yet one
hardly meets with a single man who does not habitually think & talk as
if whatever was good or bad for one portion of these countries or of
these individuals was good or bad for all the other portions. It is very
unlikely that any person who is imbued with the spirit of the St Simon
school, should fall into this error. They have, and their system tends
to produce even as it appears to me in excess, that eclecticism, and
comprehensive liberality, which, as it widens the range both of our
ideas and of our feelings, is far more pardonable & less mischievous
even when most exagéré, than the opposite fault. They have that spirit
which is most opposed to the spirit of criticism and disceptation; that
which induces us, not to combat but to pass over & disregard the errors
in what is presented to us, in order to seize and appropriate to
ourselves that portion or fragment (however diminutive) of truth, which
there must necessarily Edition: current; Page: [42] be at the bottom of
every error, which is not a mere fallacy in ratiocination. As the great
danger to mankind is not from seeing what is not, but from overlooking
what is; since clever & intelligent men hardly ever err from the former
cause, but no powers of mind are any protection against the evils
arising from imperfect and partial views of what is real; since not
errors but half truths are the bane of human improvement, it seems to
follow that the proper mode of philosophizing & discussing for a person
who pursues the good of mankind & not the gratification of his own
vanity, should be the direct opposite of the philosophie critique of the
last century: it should consist, not in attacking men’s wrong opinions,
but in giving them that knowledge which will enable them to form right
ones that will push off the wrong ones, as the new leaves push off the
withered ones of the last year. The great instrument of improvement in
men, is to supply them with the other half of the truth, one side of
which only they have ever seen: to turn round to them the white side of
the shield, of which they seeing only the black side, have cut other
men’s throats & risked their own to prove that the shield is black. It
is not sufficiently considered by many zealots for even right opinions,
that you have done little or nothing for a man when you have merely
given him an opinion. An opinion suggests hardly anything to an
uninformed mind; it may become a watchword, but can never be a moving &
influencing and living principle within him. Words, or any thing which
can be stated in words, benefit none but those minds to whom the words
suggest an ample store of correct and clear ideas, & sound & accurate
knowledge previously acquired concerning the things which are meant by
the words. It is therefore of little use altering men’s opinions, & it
is often very mischievous to unsettle them, until you have brought their
minds to that higher state of cultivation, of which better opinions are
the natural & almost spontaneous growth. But merely in order to do this,
we must not attack their opinions en masse, but fix our attention on
what is good in those opinions, & endeavour to lead them on from this &
through this to something better. This is practical eclecticism. Without
intending it I have been illustrating at great length one of the most
valuable parts of the St Simon philosophy, though not at all peculiar to
it, the distinction between the partie critique & the partie organique
of any philosophy & between the critical, & the organical, epochs of the
human mind. I am inclined to think that one idea connected with this
matter, did really originate with them, viz. that a principle may be
valuable & in a certain sense even true comme principe critique which
comme principe organique or even as a simple logical proposition is
false. The logical explanation of this I take to be, that a proposition,
though false as a whole, may comprehend as part of itself, may logically
include the negation of some prevailing error. I think that the St
Simonists have also Edition: current; Page: [43] great merit in having
pointed out as the first step in the investigation of practical
political truths, to ascertain what is the state into which, in the
natural order of the advancement of civilisation the nation in question
will next come; in order that it may be the grand object of our
endeavours, to facilitate the transition to this state. Keeping this in
view, it will often follow, that we must uphold or even establish
institutions which are liable to produce great evils, evils which in
other states of society might be without alloy; provided that these
institutions have, at the same time, a tendency to counteract other
mischievous tendencies, which happen to be more prevailing or more to be
apprehended in that age, by which of course must always be meant, in
that state of the human mind. On this subject I should differ from the
St Simonists, chiefly in this respect; they seem to think that the mind
of man, by a sort of fatality or necessity, grows & unfolds its
different faculties always in one particular order, like the body; &
that therefore we must be always either standing still, or advancing, or
retrograding; whereas I am satisfied, that better consideration would
shew, that different nations, indeed different minds, may & do advance
to improvement by different roads; that nations, & men, nearly in an
equally advanced stage of civilization, may yet be very different in
character, & that changes may take place in a man or a nation, which are
neither steps forward nor backward, but steps to one side. Here ends, I
believe, all that I have to say at present on the St Simon school.—Tooke
has shewn me all your letters; in the last there are two things which
pleased me extremely. One is your remark that analysis & synthesis have
directly opposite meanings in mathematics from what they have in
philosophy: this, which is not only a just but a profound observation,
also occurred to Dugald Stewart,5 the second volume of whose Philosophy
of the Mind contains that with many other excellent remarks on similar
subjects. The other is, your observation that there is no
incompatibility between the morality of enlightened self-interest & that
of dévoûement: neither of these phrases comprises the principle of
morals, but they express two kinds of impulses, both of which might, &
do to a certain extent, lead men to virtue, & which it is desirable to
put forward alternately as incentives to it, according to the age, the
nation, or even the individual, whom you are addressing.

I hope soon to hear from you after having merited that pleasure by these
two long letters. For the present believe me

Yours most sincerely

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [44]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9th February 1830

London

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

29.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

London

,
9th February 1830

My dear Gustave

I had for several weeks been on the point of writing to you a long
letter on the great subject which you have so deeply at heart, and had
just for the first time obtained an interval of leisure for that
purpose, when the horrible event took place which has deprived me of one
whom I had counted upon as a friend and companion through my whole
life.2 I could not mix up the first intelligence of our loss with an
abstract philosophical discussion. Poor Mr Tooke3 was anxious that you
should be informed of it, and wished me to communicate it to you, but I
anxiously hoped that you might learn it first through some other
channel. I am deeply indebted to you, my dear Gustave, for your
expressions of sympathy in my own affliction.4 There is no ground for
the apprehensions which you express of my being overcome and crushed by
this unexpected blow. Many who knew him and loved him less than I did,
have felt the immediate shock much more forcibly. It is not the
intensity, but the durability of such grief, which bears hard upon me,
and I feel it most in the enervation, & almost extinction, for the
present, of all my activity, and all my concern for mankind or for my
duties. It seems to me as if I had never cared for any one but him, and
had never laboured but for his sympathy and approbation. Yet though I
should detest myself if I ever ceased to think and feel as I now do
concerning his loss, I know that this effect of it will not last. The
more affectionately I cherish his memory, the more ardently shall I
pursue those great objects in which he took so deep an interest. I
should care little for life or for mankind, but for the thought that
there are among them a few men like him, & that all have in them the
capacity of becoming at least an approximation to what he was. There are
yet two or three living, but for whom I should no longer value
existence: for though there have been a few, very few, who had
sufficient native energy and firmness to pursue cheerfully the good of
posterity, without being Edition: current; Page: [45] upheld by the aid
and encouragement of some in their own generation, I am so far removed
from that state of mind that I can just understand it sufficiently to
believe it possible. But as I have said before, those who made life
valuable to me are not all gone, and though scarcely any of them were
equal to Eyton and none superior to him in purity and singleness of mind
combined with warmth and kindliness of affection, yet I cannot entirely
droop or relax in my exertions while they survive, and remain unchanged
towards me, and progressively improving in the developement of their
intellectual and moral capabilities. I know too, that our loss will be
an additional bond of connexion to me with those who loved him and who
pursue the great objects of his life. The time however when I shall feel
this effect of it has not yet arrived.

While I write this, I have received your note enclosing Eyton’s last
letter to you:5 the expression of his last thoughts and feelings on the
great interests of humanity. It was kind in you to send it, particularly
now when the last relic of our friend must be so valuable to you. I had
however seen it already, as he shewed it to me before he sent it off. I
accept gratefully your offer of sending a reply to it, addressed to me;
but I do so, only because I should be interested by any thing which you
would write on those topics; for though I fundamentally agreed with him,
his objections to the St Simonian philosophy are not exactly those on
which I should mainly insist, nor are stated in the exact terms or
manner in which I should urge them. I am not about to make this letter a
controversial one, for this event has so scattered my thoughts that I
have been able to carry on no continued train of reflexion since it
occurred. Besides, I have a great dislike to controversy, and am
persuaded that discussion, as discussion, seldom did any good. This may
shew you how completely I am cured of those habitudes critiques, which,
you seem to suppose, are the only obstacle to my adopting the entire
doctrine of your school. The esprit critique is almost the only one
which prevails among the best and most instructed men of this country as
well as of France; and it will be one of the objects of my philosophical
and practical labours, (as it would have been one of those of poor Eyton
if he had happily lived to pursue his designs), to contribute to the
formation of a better spirit. This is a debt which I owe partly though
not entirely to the St Simonian school: I had much changed from what I
was, before I read any of their publications; but it was their works
which gave order and system to the ideas which I had already imbibed
from intercourse with others, and derived from my own reflexions. A part
of the objection I have to controversy, is that it keeps up the esprit
critique. I am averse to any mode of eradicating error, but by
establishing and inculcating (when that is practicable) the opposite
truth; a truth of some Edition: current; Page: [46] kind inconsistent
with that moral or intellectual state of mind from which the errors
arise. It is only thus that we can at once maintain the good that
already exists, and produce more. And I object to placing myself in the
situation of an advocate for or against a cause. I will read the books
of those from whom I differ, I will consider patiently and mature in my
own mind the ideas which they suggest, I will make up my own opinion,
and set it forth with the reasons. When I see any person going wrong, I
will try to find out the fragment of truth which is misleading him, &
will analyse and expound that; I will suggest to his own mind not
inculcate in him as from mine the idea which I think will save him. And
when this is done, or at least if it were universally done, no one’s
offended amour propre would make him cling to his errors; no one would
connect, with the adoption of truth, the idea of defeat; and no one
would feel impelled by the ardour of debate & the desire of triumph, to
reject, as almost all now do whatever of truth there really is in the
opinions of those whose ultimate conclusion differs from theirs. In
short, I do not insist upon making others give up their own point of
view & adopt mine, but I endeavour myself to unite whatever is not
optical illusion in both. When by this means I shall have clearly
embraced in my own view the entire truth, & shall be able to represent
to others that whole, of which they have before seen a part, I shall
have great confidence in their ultimate adoption of it. Truth will then
have no enemy but the esprit critique, which makes men unwilling to look
for truth in the midst of error; & I am unwilling to strengthen this
spirit by maintaining any opinions in the spirit of argumentation and
debate. This being the system which I have determined to act upon, I
shall of course apply it to my intercourse with you. I will read every
thing which you may be so kind as to send me, whether from yourself or
from the results of the united labours of your school. All that I have
read of their works is of a character to make me wish to be acquainted
with all their other speculations. If the result of the perusal of these
works should be, my entire conversion, which I regard as extremely
unlikely, I shall at once confess it; if I desire further explanations,
I shall solicit them from your kindness, and I will always state to you
my reasons for differing where I do differ. But on no account will I
discuss with you. And therefore I do not feel that I should be justified
in encouraging the project which you give me some hints that you have
formed, of coming to England with a view to my complete initiation in
the St Simonian doctrine. As a friend whom I extremely value, and who
shared with me the friendship of him whom we have lost, it would give me
great pleasure to see you, and to converse with you; and I am both
touched and flattered that you should think me of so much importance
either to yourself or to society, as to think of undertaking a journey
with the sole view of bringing me over to opinions identical with
Edition: current; Page: [47] your own. But I am well convinced that if
this be ever accomplished, it will not be the effect of any sudden or
rapid conviction produced by a few days or weeks of verbal discussion,
but the result of time and my own reflexions aided by those works, &
those suggestions, which I hope you will continue to furnish me with,
from time to time. I should therefore decline all verbal controversy
even if you were here. It would only risk the weakening or altering our
present feelings towards each other, as we should probably find each
other much more intractable than we expect, and as almost every man
shews himself in dispute worse than he really is & appears unreasonably
wedded to his opinions when called upon to defend them on a sudden, & is
apt to put forward other arguments than those which have really made an
impression on his own mind.

I no longer adhere to the objections I formerly urged against the St
Simonian school, as some of the points which I objected to, appeared
from a perusal of the Producteur (every word of which I have read with
as great care and interest as any book I ever saw) never to have been
held by them in the sense in which I thought them objectionable, & as
you informed me in your answer6 to my two letters that the other points
had been given up. I was much pleased to find that although you are a
sect, you are an improving sect, and that your creeds are not made up
never to be altered. Of all the improvements in your doctrine, mentioned
in your letter, I fully approve: but I still retain all my objections to
your practical views, to your organisation, which appears to me
impracticable, & not desirable if practicable, like that of Mr Owen.7
You know, however, that I have not yet read or heard the reasons which
you can adduce and my mind therefore remains open to conviction. But
your proposal that when I am convinced of the soundness of your views I
should correspond and cooperate with your society induces me to state to
you at once the reasons which would prevent me from doing so even if I
were convinced that the whole body of your doctrine is true. It appears
to me utterly hopeless and chimerical to suppose that the regeneration
of mankind can ever be wrought by means of working on their opinions. I
think that mankind, and I am sure that my own countrymen, are in a state
of mind which renders them incapable of receiving a true doctrine
générale, or of understanding it in a true sense if they did receive it.
In France it is perhaps possible that they might receive it, but not in
the sense in which it is meant, nor would it produce, even admitting its
truth, the good effects which you Edition: current; Page: [48]
anticipate from it. I can conceive a whole people professing St
Simonism, and acting precisely as they do now, just as there have been &
are many entire nations professing Christianity, & whose conduct is yet
utterly selfish and worldly, and in defiance of the whole scheme of
Christian ethics. In England, on the other hand, the very idea of
beginning a reformation in men’s minds by preaching to them a
comprehensive doctrine, is a notion which never would enter into the
head of any person who has lived long enough in England to know the
people. Englishmen habitually distrust the most obvious truths, if the
person who advances them is suspected of having any general views. To
produce any effect on their minds, you must carefully conceal the fact
of your having any system or body of opinions, and must instruct them on
insulated points, & endeavour to form their habits of thought by your
mode of treating single and practical questions. When you have gained a
high reputation with them for knowledge of facts, & skill and judgment
in the appreciation of details, you may then venture on enlarged views;
but even then, very cautiously and guardedly. A journal which should
start by a systematic exposition of far-sighted views and extended
principles, would not have twenty subscribers. I conceive therefore that
your school, in their method of proceeding, by declaring themselves the
apostles of a new doctrine, and seeking to inculcate that doctrine
first, and to produce all other kinds of good as consequences of that,
are violating the first & greatest rule of their own philosophy, which
is, that we ought to consider what is the stage through which, in the
progress of civilization, our country has next to pass, and to endeavour
to facilitate the transition & render it safe & healthy. I am convinced
that my own country & I suspect that France must pass through several
states before it arrives at St Simonism, even if that doctrine is true;
& that although we ought to arrive if we can at a general system of
social philosophy, and to keep it always in our own view, we ought not
to address it to the public, who are by no means ripe for its reception,
but to avail ourselves of the good which is in them, to educate their
minds by accustoming them to think rightly on those subjects on which
they already think, to communicate to them all the truths which they are
prepared for, and (in England at least where the philosophie critique
has never yet got the better of the doctrine théologique et féodale) to
endeavour to alter those parts of our social institutions and policy
which at present oppose improvement, degrade and brutalize the
intellects and morality of the people, & by giving all the ascendency to
mere wealth, which the possession of political power confers, prevents
the growth of a pouvoir spirituel capable of commanding the faith of the
majority, who must and do believe on authority. You are also I am
convinced mistaken in supposing that the religious feelings which
prevail here, are of a character with which St Simonism would at all be
Edition: current; Page: [49] capable of allying itself. But of this I
must write hereafter, and it shall be soon. Excuse the very imperfect
exposition of my sentiments which I have given. Mr Tooke I understand is
somewhat recovered from the dreadful shock, Mrs Tooke is still very ill.
I have seen neither since it occurred.

Yours affectionately

J. S. Mill.

On reading this letter again today (10th. February) I think I can
express my meaning better by saying that I conceive your error to be
this: you imagine that you can accomplish the perfection of mankind by
teaching them St Simonism, whereas it appears to me that their adoption
of St Simonism, if that doctrine be true, will be the natural result and
effect of a high state of moral and intellectual culture previously
received: that it should not be presented to the minds of any who have
not already attained a high degree of improvement, since if presented to
any others it will either be rejected by them, or received only as
Christianity is at present received by the majority, that is, in such a
manner as to be perfectly inefficacious.

I have a thousand other things to write, and your future letters shall
be answered without any repetition of this unseemly delay.

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 6, 1830

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

30.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

March 6, 1830

My dear Gustave

I take the opportunity of a friend who is going to Paris, for fulfilling
the intentions of our deceased friend as expressed in his last letter to
you, by sending you the enclosed pamphlet of Dr Channing,2 the American
preacher. I quite agree in his admiration of it, and I conceive that it
expresses very clearly and forcibly the great vice of your system as
well as that of Mr Owen, and many others qui courent le monde
aujourd’hui. I hope you will read it and tell me what you think of it.

I have read and forwarded the letter to Mr Burns.3 The report which it
Edition: current; Page: [50] contains of the proceedings at one of your
meetings would have convinced me if I were not already satisfied, of the
unfitness of your scheme for this country at least. It would be
impossible to induce any one here to look at it with a serious face. I
wonder how you have hitherto escaped the jokers and epigrammatists of
the Parisian salons.

Pray be so good as to make my remembrances to Adolphe. I will write to
him as soon as I have time & I hope he will write to me.

Yours in great haste

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

26 May. 1830

India House

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

31.


TO HENRY COLE1

India House

.
26 May. 1830

.

My dear Cole

As I know that you are acquainted with Dr Hooker,2 which is an honour I
have not attained to, I should be obliged to you if you would do me the
favour to communicate to him the accompanying notes which I made in
looking over his excellent British Flora3 just published. I request you
however to do so only in case you should think on reading them, that
there is any thing in them which might possibly be interesting to Dr
Hooker.

The only points which I myself think of any consequence, are those which
relate to Œnanthe aprifolia & Vicia sativa, & you would not be far wrong
if you were to suppose that most of the remainder are put down chiefly
to make up a number. However it is possible that some of the Stations
mentioned may be unknown to Dr Hooker.

As I am very favourably situated for observing the plants of Surrey,
which have hardly been observed at all since Ray’s4 time if we except
those in the immediate vicinity of London, which are figured in Curtis’s
Flora Edition: current; Page: [51] Londinensis5 and many of which appear
to have become extinct in the situations where Curtis found them I may
possibly be able hereafter to make other communications of a nature
similar to this, if the present one should prove to be of any use. I
have explored some parts of the County very fully, and almost every part
of it more or less, but I expect to make many more discoveries before I
have done.

Pray excuse my troubling you in this matter, and believe me

Yours ever,

John S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

7th August 1830

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

32.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

7th August 1830

Dear Mrs Austin

At your request I put into writing what I said to you the other night on
the subject of Mr Austin’s lectures.2 What appears to me of most
importance is that he should not spend time in endeavouring to make the
lectures which have been already delivered, better than they are. They
stand greatly in need of curtailment, but I do not believe that there is
a single member of the class who would wish them to be changed in any
other respect. There is only one opinion expressed in the lectures which
I have heard controverted at all; & the manner of exposition has excited
the admiration of every body. The only fault found is, that the
different points are over explained; that they are dwelt upon longer &
repeated oftener, than is necessary to a complete understanding of them.
I am certain that all which the class would desire in respect to the
earlier lectures is that they should be very much abridged & perhaps
many of the historical details dispensed with altogether: not because
those details are not considered Edition: current; Page: [52] useful &
interesting, but because it is impossible to do every thing, and because
there are other things which they are much more anxious to know.—Though
the class were extremely delighted with the course as far as it went,
they certainly were very much disappointed that Mr Austin did not get
through a greater portion of the subject; & they anticipate with great
pleasure the completion of it in the lectures on which he has obtained
for them the privilege of attendance, at the conclusion of the next
year’s course. The only thing which in my opinion could at all endanger
the permanent success & utility of the professorship, would be his not
being able to include a view of all the essential parts of the science
in his next series of lectures. Now the present class very well know
that next to his health, the great cause of his getting through so
little was his being obliged to prepare his lectures as he went on, not
having them ready written. If he spends any time in improving his
present lectures, more than is necessary for sufficiently shortening
them, he will be in precisely the same difficulty, with the remainder of
his subject, as he was this year with the whole of it. On the contrary,
if he contents himself with using the scissors abundantly, & sets about
the preparation of the subsequent lectures immediately, he will be
several months in advance, & will be able, without that fatigue &
harassing excitement which destroy his health, to prepare the lectures
carefully, include a large portion of the subject in each, & avoid
repetition & over explanation.

I would not recommend his continuing the Tables at present, as those
which are printed embrace the entire field of law, & it is of so much
more importance that he should complete his course of lectures next
year.

From the very high opinion which has been expressed of the last course
by those to whom I have lent my notes, I have considerable hopes that
the class next year will be satisfactory in respect of numbers. But I
should not be at all discouraged even if the number was small—because it
is only a complete course, which can do much to spread the reputation of
the lecturer. If he should be able to complete the subject next year, I
have not the least doubt that he will have a numerous class the year
after.

I deem it however of the greatest importance with a view to his class
next year, that he should deliver an interesting introductory lecture. I
know his well grounded aversion to vague generalities, & I know as
certainly as he does, that it is impossible to teach any thing that is
worth knowing of a whole science, in a short general view. But it is not
necessary that an introductory lecture should be an abridged view of the
science. The best introductory lectures extant are not so: Brown’s3
introductory lecture to Edition: current; Page: [53] his course of
metaphysics for example. The proper notion of an introductory lecture
seems to be that it should resemble the preface to a book, which gives
the reasons for writing the book & the reasons for reading it.
Especially on the moral sciences, whose rank as sciences or whose
scientific character itself is not generally recognized, there seems to
be an ample field for remarks of a most useful description in opening a
course of lectures. He might explain, what is meant by general
jurisprudence: in what respect a course of jurisprudence differs from a
course of lectures on the law of any particular country, & also from
lectures on the science or art of legislation: the grounds of the
opinion, that there really is a science of general jurisprudence, & that
it is worth studying: proof of the perverting & confusing effect of the
study of law as it is commonly pursued, without being accompanied by the
study of jurisprudence: examples of the erroneous notions usually formed
as to what jurisprudence is, & the silly talk of Blackstone,4 & others
of our lawyers, when they erect the technical maxims of their own law
into principles of jurisprudence. All these topics, with a hundred
others of the same kind, which will occur to Mr Austin himself, would
afford ample materials for a highly useful introductory lecture, & one
which need not be chargeable with vagueness or generality. I am
satisfied, & so are several others of the class, that if his
introductory lecture of last year had treated of these topics, in the
manner in which we all know he would have treated them if at all, his
class would have been twice as numerous as it was. I am quite convinced
that if he delivers a lecture of this kind next year, he will have a
numerous class, & that if he does not, he will have a comparatively
small one.

But if he will not write such a lecture as this, let him not think of
writing another but deliver the first lecture of the course itself as
his introductory lecture. The general remark last year in his class room
after the close of his lecture on Law in general, was, that it was very
unfortunate that he had not delivered that very lecture instead of his
introductory one.

Yours affectionately

J. S. Mill.

P.S. The one opinion which, as I mentioned in the letter, has been
controverted, is this: that every right of action must be founded on an
injury. Excuse bad penmanship, as I write unavoidably in haste.

Edition: current; Page: [54]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 13, 1830

Paris

James Mill

Mill, James

33.


TO JAMES MILL1

[
Paris

]

[
Aug. 13, 1830

]

I have had some conversation with M. Say,2 and a great deal with Adolphe
d’Eichthal and Victor Lanjuinais, and I have been a very assiduous
reader of all the newspapers since I arrived. . . . At present, if I
were to look only at the cowardice and imbecility of the existing
generation of public men, with scarcely a single exception, I should
expect very little good; but when I consider the spirit and intelligence
of the young men and of the people, the immense influence of the
journals, and the strength of the public voice, I am encouraged to hope
that as there has been an excellent revolution without leaders, leaders
will not be required in order to establish a good government. [He then
goes on to give a detailed account of how the revolution was
accomplished—the flinching of the generals of the army, the cowardice
and meanness of Dupin3 above everybody. He has the lowest opinion of the
ministry, not a Radical among them except Dupont de l’Eure;4 all mere
place-hunters. Thiers,5 at the meeting for organizing the resistance,
showed great weakness and pusillanimity. (I heard him long afterwards
say he detested Thiers.) Of the new measures he praises most the
lowering of the age-qualification to the Chamber from 40 to 30: he
Edition: current; Page: [55] has seen no one that attaches due
importance to this change.] I am going to the Chamber of Deputies
to-morrow with Mr. Austin, and next week, I am to be introduced to the
Society of “Aide-toi,”6 where I am to be brought in contact with almost
all the best of the young men, and there are few besides that I should
at all care to be acquainted with. . . . I have heard an immense number
of the most affecting instances of the virtue and good sense of the
common people.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

August 20th, 1830

Paris

James Mill

Mill, James

34.


TO JAMES MILL1

[
Paris

]

August 20th, 1830

.

I have mixed very much among the people since I arrived, and have taken
every opportunity which I could find or make of conversing with persons
of all classes. The result so far exceeds all my previous expectations
of good, that I can scarcely trust it without further experience. The
fact with which I have been most struck in the French people, is the
extraordinary simplicity of character which seems to pervade them all,
especially the working classes. I have conversed with many who have
taken part in the three days’ contest, not to mention the wives and
families of some of them, and I have invariably found that their sole
anxiety was to convince me that they had acted right, or rather there
seemed to be no design to make any particular impression upon me, but
they appeared to come out with what was uppermost in their own minds,
and that was the morality and lawfulness of their resistance. I have not
perceived the slightest tinge of fanfaronnade or vanity in their
language or in their sentiments. I have not heard one word of
self-applause, nor boasting about the heroism or dévouement of the
people of Paris, nor any credit taken to themselves for Edition:
current; Page: [56] having preserved order or avoided excesses; it does
not seem to occur to them at all that they have done any thing
extraordinary. They had but one idea, that of fighting for their legal
rights, and the observance of the legal rights of others followed as an
immediate corollary. The inconceivable purity and singleness of purpose,
almost amounting to naïveté, which they all shew in speaking of these
events, has given me a greater love for them than I thought myself
capable of feeling for so large a collection of human beings, and the
more exhilarating views which it opens of human nature will have a
beneficial effect on the whole of my future life. Though I mention
particularly their language and conduct with respect to politics, I have
seen the same simplicity of character in their every day intercourse,
and I could relate various traits of it, but I will not, because none of
them separately prove much, though their number, and the total absence
of all indications of a contrary nature, constitute a strong body of
evidence.

Another most striking circumstance, is the total absence of acrimony
with which they speak of the authors of the attempt to establish
despotism. This speaks wonderfully in favour of their character as a
people, even if it should lead them, as I fear it will, to a culpable
leniency in their treatment of these great offenders. The feeling of
satisfaction at having got rid of men whom they despised, appears to
have superseded all personal feelings of hostility against the
individuals, and the struggle bore in their minds so exclusively the
character of self-defence, that the ulterior purpose of executing
vengeance upon their enemies hardly occurred to them. The conduct of the
manufacturing population of the faubourgs has been exemplary. Attempts
were made to excite disturbances among them, with a view to the
destruction of machinery and the exclusion of foreign artizans. A large
body of them assembled and marched to the Prefecture of Police with a
petition on these two subjects. The prefect, M. Girod (de l’Ain)2 came
out and agreed [argued?] the matter quietly with them, in a short and
pithy speech, upon which they very peaceably marched back. The next day,
however, the attroupemens were rather more numerous and considerable,
and I know from several quarters, that the government were seriously
alarmed; they arrested some of the instigators, some of whom proved to
be criminals returned from the galleys, and three were printers of an
ultra-Catholic and royalist journal. But the next day all was quiet, and
people who had been much alarmed the day before, confessed that there
was no danger. It is very curious to see proclamations stuck about the
streets, from all sorts of obscure individuals, sometimes of the
humblest class, on all subjects which came uppermost. On this occasion
there Edition: current; Page: [57] appeared several excellent placards
from common workmen, explaining to their fellow-labourers the interest
which they had in maintaining the security of property, and the
advantage they ultimately derive from all improvements in the productive
power of labour. I will try to procure one or two of these placards and
take them to England with me, though I fear it will be rather difficult
to get them. Among other curious placards which are stuck up, there is
an exculpatory one from the charcoal-carriers (charbonniers). A
deputation of these people had waited upon Charles the Tenth a few days
before the coup d’etat on the occasion of a fête, and it had been
reported that one of them had used some expressions of encouragement to
him, which gave great offence to the remainder of the people. The
charbonniers finding themselves in consequence slighted and looked shy
upon by the other classes of the people, put forth this proclamation,
signed by several of them in behalf of the rest, saying, that they had
gone to the Tuileries because they could not help it, as they would have
been thrown out of employment and reduced to starvation if they had not,
but that none of their number had used any such expressions as those
described [ascribed?] to them, and that they had fought like the others
on the 28th and 29th. This vindication, which I have seen numbers of men
in ragged coats spelling out as they best could on the walls, did not,
it seems, produce the desired effect; consequently the charbonniers
assembled, hoisted an enormous tri-coloured flag, and proceeded to the
Prefecture of Police, where the eternal M. Girod de l’Ain came out and
was harangued by them; heard their justification of themselves, and
their complaint against the sort of stigma which had been thrown upon
them; told them that he believed their story, and hoped that nobody
would thereafter say any thing to their disadvantage, so thereupon they
marched back. I have seen as much of my former friends at Paris as their
time would allow, and have made a number of new acquaintances; this,
however, is a very bad time for making the acquaintance of any of the
known men, as they are for the most part employed, or are soon likely to
be employed on public duties. I have, however, been able to compare a
multitude of testimonies on the recent and present state of affairs, and
have found that what I have hitherto told you is perfectly correct in
the gross, though incorrect in many of the details. Thus, I have now
reason to believe that what I told you respecting the good conduct of
Lafitte3 during the revolution was at least exaggerated and that he was
scarcely an exception to the general apathy and cowardice Edition:
current; Page: [58] of the monied classes. On the other hand, it is not
true that none of the Deputies took part in the fight. There are about
fifteen or sixteen, all members of the extrême gauche, whom, as I am
assured by — of the Society Aide-toi the Society can perfectly count
upon as the devoted friends of the people (and this I already begin to
see in their Parliamentary conduct). Of these, as many as were at Paris,
took a share from the first in the whole business, and ran the same risk
with the others. You will not be surprised to hear that Lafayette4 and
his son are among these fifteen or sixteen, but Benjamin Constant5 is
not, nor Lafitte, nor Casimir Perier,6 nor almost any one whom you
probably knew by name. Though the libéraux in the Chamber of Deputies
are generally so little to be relied upon (and those in the Upper House
are in general much worse), I have the greatest confidence in the force
of circumstances and of public opinion. The cry is becoming general for
the dissolution of the Chamber, and there are already signs, that in
order to prolong their political existence, they will consent to make a
number of the required concessions. Within the last day or two the
newspapers have assumed a much more decided tone than before in favour
of important alterations in the constitution, and in particular a
considerable extension of the elective franchise. There are about 100
resignations or annullations of election, and a law is now passing
through the Chamber, compelling all who accept places to vacate their
seats, as in England. This law is retrospective to the beginning of the
present session, and it is said that many place-holders will lose their
seats. These elections are expected to strengthen exceedingly the bands
of the côté gauche. The Edition: current; Page: [59] Society Aide-toi,
which contributed so greatly to the success of the two last general
elections, will apply itself with the same rigour, and with a great
increase of power, to the management of the approaching partial one. My
next letter7 will relate chiefly to this Society, which is one of the
most powerful and best organized political bodies that ever existed, and
the leading members of which will most certainly, in a few years, direct
the destinies of France. They are quite eager to place me au courant of
all their proceedings, and to give me all kinds of information
concerning France, and I shall endeavour to keep up a correspondence
with some of them when I return to England, as I think it may be of
considerable use. I had almost forgotten to tell you that one of the
things most talked of here, is a proposition for reading [sending?] a
deputation to thank the people of England for their subscriptions. I
believe that an exaggerated notion of the amount of the money subscribed
had much to do with this scheme, and that it is not likely to be
realized immediately, if at all. If the deputation goes, * * * will
probably be a member of it.

I have not told you a tenth part of what I have to say. I shall write
again in a day or two.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 21, 1830

Paris

James Mill

Mill, James

35.


TO JAMES MILL1

Paris

,
Aug. 21, 1830

Affairs are now in so strange and critical a situation, that I have
determined to write you a letter to-day, in spite of my having sent you
a hasty, long epistle yesterday. I hope the matter it will contain will
prove a sufficient apology.

The Chamber of Deputies is now an Assemblée Constituante, possessing, in
fact, the power of working any reform, no matter how extensive. No
outward force opposes itself, or can oppose itself, to its
determinations, on any ground derived from right springing from existing
or past institutions. It has elected a monarch: it has suppressed the
religion of the state; it has declared every peer created by Charles to
be no longer a peer. Its power, in short, is illimitable, provided it
act in accordance with the will of the people. The fear is not, that it
will hazard too much, that it will exceed the people’s wishes, but that
it will fall far short of what the people most vehemently desire. It
seems the universal opinion, that both in ability and intention it is
unfit for its situation—that it is no fair representation of the French
nation—that it is calculated seriously to retard improvement, and in
Edition: current; Page: [60] great measure for the present moment to
nullify, in a beneficial sense, the effects of the present revolution.
Elected under circumstances widely different from the present, its
intended mission was of a different character from that which has now
devolved on it. Under Charles the electors and the vast body of the
people had identical interests; the popular candidates were then those
who combated Charles: under Philippe the electors and the people have
widely different interests; they who were popular candidates have lost
that character, and since the courage of the Parisian workmen has routed
the old enemy, and placed them at the head of affairs, they have begun
to play the master, and to attempt the subjugation of the very class to
whom they owe even their very existence. This is practised after various
forms and under various names; all their proceedings being replete with
deeply instructive lessons for those who are accustomed to abuse the
people.

When the workmen of Paris, after three days’ fighting, had driven out
Charles and dispersed his army, they were absolute masters of the city.
In the midst of their highest excitation, in the moment of victory,
surrounded by their dead and wounded brothers, fathers, aye, and
children and wives and mothers—these men, these ignorant, despised, and
long-abused people shrunk from all unnecessary carnage—the moment
resistance ceased, that moment they abstained from assault—they took
equal care of the soldier who had opposed and of the citizen who had
aided them. Surrounded by every temptation that perfect licence could
offer, not one excess was committed. Vast treasures passed through their
hands untouched, and signal punishment was immediately the lot of any
one who for one instant departed from the strictest honesty and decorum.
(One man was shot by his comrades for stealing a melon.) These men were
actually starving, and yet they would take no recompense. Having
effected their glorious object, they calmly retired to their homes and
resumed their accustomed avocations. The educated and the rich now came
upon the stage. The hour of danger was passed, one government was
overthrown, another was to be framed. Compare the conduct of this party
with that of the people, the mob, who had fought during the ever
memorable three days.

No sooner was it ascertained that all danger was really past, than a
hungry crowd appeared, eager for place and careless of public interests.
The old generals and courtiers of Napoleon, the abettors and fautors of
Charles, the rich bourgeois, all appeared in the character of
place-hunting courtiers of Philippe. A spectacle more disgusting can
hardly be imagined. The scoundrels who had been the willing instruments
of despotism under Charles, and Louis, and Napoleon, now came to be on
the watch for the good things that were to be anew distributed in
consequence of the popular victory. The Chamber of Deputies was, in
fact, now to be the distributor. In the first place the crown was given
to the Duke of Orleans: this was Edition: current; Page: [61] perhaps a
matter politically wise, or at least necessary. Then came the Ministers.
You know the choice. Sebastiani,2 who has never done, and is incapable
of doing any thing good: Gérard,3 whose first act has been to create
himself a Marshal of France: Dupin, who has lost all public confidence
by his cowardice and base servility: Guizot,4 a favourer of the new
Aristocracy: Louis,5 who is universally disliked, perhaps I might say
despised: in short, not one person, Dupont excepted, has been chosen who
has the confidence and good will of the people. Now come the acts of
those persons. First, a constant striving to shield the instruments of
the late Government from punishment. The magistrature continued. The
very men who had opposed the liberty of the press; who had condemned and
severely punished every writer who was bold enough to attack the
Ministry of Charles; who to their utmost had striven to maintain his
abominable despotism; these men are continued in their situations. Next,
in the moment when a new Government was to be framed, a mere juridical
law, viz. relating to punishment, is introduced, solely to preserve the
late Ministers from death. Then comes the series of operations carried
on to maintain power in their own hands. The first grand instrument to
this end is delay; this, in the first days of their sitting, was so
palpable, that it roused the indignation of the young men who surrounded
the door of the Chamber, and gave a healthy movement to this corrupt
body, by the salutary influence of fear. There was shown an
unwillingness to propose explicit and formal guarantees; these, however,
they were obliged to propose. The King, better than they, met them more
than half way; he was more willing to offer than they to propose
guarantees. The law of election next occupied their attention. It is
curious to see how this has been dealt with. When we first arrived,
every journal, with perhaps the single exception of the Courier,
Edition: current; Page: [62] endeavoured to stultify the people, and
convince them that no necessity for change existed. This would not do,
the public were too wise, so, gradually, step by step, and as slowly as
possible, the journals have turned round, and now the lowering the
suffrage is almost universally proposed; but the Chamber has done
nothing more than abolish the double vote and make the age required in
the elector 25, in the elected 30. The qualification has not been
touched, neither as regards the deputy nor the electors. They have been
exceedingly busy, however, in changing the prefects, the mayors, and all
the place-holders in the departments. Their friends have now come in,
and the situation of deputy has at length become a profitable
appointment. But as for regulating the internal government in a way to
secure peace and safety to the citizens, they seem never to dream of the
necessity of such a thing. Every thing really important is formally put
off to the next session, and matters by which humbug may have influence
are taken into consideration. They now pretend to be occupied with the
accusation of the Ministers. They have instituted a committee, which
committee yesterday moved for new powers, and obtained them; but they
have so completely mystified their very plain duty, that I can by no
means understand what they are driving at. One thing is plain, they are
doing every thing to create delay, in the hope that the public
indignation will subside.

During all these sad delays the country is really without a Government,
and here we cannot but compare the conduct of the people and the
Deputies, and offer homage to the former. Without a Government, the
country is nevertheless perfectly quiet: since the revolution not a
single murder or robbery has taken place in Paris. Again, the poor
starving workmen assembled some days since, and went in a body to the
Prefect, beseeching him to exclude all the foreign workmen. The Prefect
made them an excellent speech, pointing out to them the error under
which they lay, and the poor fellows immediately returned, and quietly
dispersed. Are not these speaking examples of true devotion to the cause
of good government; as splendid as the conduct of the Deputies is base?
I know no more important matter for investigation than would be now the
state of the popular mind at Paris, and the causes which produced it.
There appears among the victors of the three days no personal feeling,
nothing but a desire to manifest to the world the justice of their
cause, to prove that they have been actuated by no sinister interests,
but were led on solely first to defend themselves, and then to rid
themselves of an evil which was no longer supportable. The same spirit
which then directed still continues to influence them. No riot, no
attempt at pillage, no vain glory has been manifested by them. They
calmly await the requisite reform of their Government, despairing indeed
of much good from the present Chamber, but looking forward with hope to
the next. So far from the journals being now in advance of the Edition:
current; Page: [63] people, it is plain that the people are impelling
the journals forward. They have now to make a great advance, or others
will arise, and being au niveau of the people, will completely ruin the
existing papers. It is strange to see how little of true knowledge those
now in existence contain. They all can declaim well, but I have often
heard more real sense, and really applicable knowledge, in one
conversation, than has been contained in all the journals that have
appeared since I arrived here. A new and very different set of
instructors is now evidently required by the people.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

27 August 1830

Paris

James Mill

Mill, James

36.


TO JAMES MILL1

[
Paris

]

27 August 1830

 finished on the 28th

I have been exceedingly fortunate during my stay here, in having been
brought into contact with a much greater number of persons such as I
most desired to know, than I could possibly have had reason to expect at
a time when all persons of any note are so much occupied. I am even much
inclined to believe that I know more of the views and expectations
professed by the different coteries than many of the men themselves, as
it seems to me that most people at Paris associate chiefly with the men,
and read the journals, of their own precise nuance d’opinion. But I
consider myself particularly fortunate in having formed an acquaintance
with M. Tanneguy Duchâtel,2 and with the principal members of the
society Aide-toi.

I have had some most interesting conversations with M. Duchatel whose
correspondence with Mr. Wilmot Horton3 you probably remember. I knew him
by reputation as one of the most enlightened men in France, and
particularly as one of those who had profited most by the writings of
the English political economists. I found that this was perfectly true.
He seems to me to unite in an extraordinary degree the best qualities of
a young Frenchman (for he seems to be under thirty) with the
acquirements of an instructed Englishman, and especially with a
knowledge of details and a habit of reflection on important practical
questions, which few Frenchmen possess, the events of the last fifteen
years having called into exercise few Edition: current; Page: [64]
valuable qualities except those of a party pamphleteer, or at most a
writer on the first principles of government. Most of the men with whom
I converse seem to be well aware of this deficiency, or at least,
readily admit it when stated. If there were many young men like
Duchâtel, you would soon see a great difference in the character of
their newspapers and of their parliamentary debates. At present any one
of twenty men whom one could name in England could write every day the
leading articles of all their newspapers as rapidly as his pen could
move. But now when all the great questions of legislation, education, &
social improvement in general will be brought on the tapis successively,
the men who are already prepared to discuss these subjects avec
connaissance de cause will soon occupy almost exclusively the ear of the
public, & will also, if things go on smoothly, obtain the greatest
influence in the government. Duchâtel is already appointed a conseiller
d’état. What he told me about the present state of politics I will tell
you another time. The information he gave me concerning the state of the
labouring classes, the division of property, the restraints on
population, & the state of education I have not time to put on paper
just now, but I believe that Roebuck has written a long letter to Mr.
Grote4 on the subject, which he has probably shewn to you. I shall see
M. Duchâtel as often as I can while I remain here, & shall endeavour to
obtain his permission to correspond with him. He made very particular
enquiries respecting you and your occupations.

The society Aide toi et le Ciel t’aidera is composed of men probably
much less instructed than M. Duchâtel, but far more democratic in their
opinions and more capable of taking a leading part in turbulent times by
their qualifications as men of action. They are all young men, & most of
them have been engaged in active hostility to the government from very
early youth; several who belonged to the society have even suffered
capital punishment for having engaged in some of the numerous
conspiracies which have existed at different periods since the
restoration. M. Odilon-Barrot,5 the most distinguished avocat in the
Courts at Paris, was president of the society for some time, & is still
a member, but being now préfet of Paris he of course can take no part in
their proceedings. The present organisation of the society was, I
believe, formed for the purpose of facilitating anti-royalist elections
under the Villèle ministry:6 they had, and Edition: current; Page: [65]
have, correspondents all over France, and without some such association
these elections certainly would not have taken the turn they did,
especially as all the liberal newspapers were then tied up by the
censorship. The success of the last elections was also in a great degree
owing to the efforts of the society; & they were the first persons who
gave the signal for the late revolution, in which the little concert &
organisation which existed was wholly their work. They are in constant
communication with Lafayette, & with a very small number of deputies,
the few whom they believe to have a real wish for the establishment of a
popular government in France, the purpose for which they now remain
united, & in the pursuit of which they are willing, & believe themselves
able, to overturn the present ministry if it refuses the concessions
which they consider necessary. I have no doubt that when the exertions
of these people become more visible than they have been hitherto, they
will be called the republican party: but it certainly is not true that
they wish to establish a republic. If it had depended upon them, they
would have made the duke of Orleans king, but after making considerable
alterations in the constitution: and they appear now to regret extremely
that when they had arms in their hands, when the people looked to them
as their leaders & would have obeyed them before the hommes du lendemain
had made their appearance, they did not proceed to the Hotel de Ville
with Lafayette and Audry de Puyraveau7 & declare Lafayette lieutenant
general of the kingdom & themselves a provisional government, by a
proclamation signed by Lafayette & countersigned by their president: who
being in correspondence with every considerable town would have been
followed by the leading liberals all over France, all of whom are in the
habit of receiving L’Empulsion from the society. The society is not
wholly composed of men of the same shade of opinion but the committee
takes care to have a majority always on its side; the members of the
committee are agreed on the following points: that as an ultimate end,
universal suffrage should be aimed at: that however in the present stage
of education among the people, not above one third of whom can write (M.
Duchâtel told me that some members even of the departmental colleges
could not write their names) they ought to be satisfied with a
considerable extension of the suffrage; that the whole people might
however either now, or in a very little time, be admitted to chuse a
body of electors, that there should be no hereditary peerage, & no
conditions of eligibility except the age of 25. They are extremely
dissatisfied with the conduct of the ministry. They say, that the men
who have profited by the revolution are afraid of the men who made the
revolution, & for that very reason. In consequence, the ministers have
no confidence in what the society, who know more about Edition: current;
Page: [66] the state of the country than anyone else, tell them
respecting the general dissatisfaction they are exciting in the
departments by some of the appointments which they have made & by their
efforts to keep down l’élan révolutionnaire all over the country. The
situation of the ministers is certainly difficult, but they have the
folly to be guided in their appointments not by the wishes of the
district itself but by the recommendation of the deputy, who nine times
out of ten is a man who dreads the popular feeling, & who is so little
of the same mind with the public that he has not the slightest chance of
being reelected. The members of the society appear to be apprehensive
that in consequence of the pusillanimity of the ministry the royalists
may be able to raise disturbances in some of the provinces: but from
what I can learn, this appears to me very improbable. You may judge of
the degree of influence which the society is supposed to have among the
people, by the circumstance that Lafayette, a few days ago when there
was some danger of violent proceedings on the part of some bodies of
workmen, sent to request that the society would issue an address to the
labouring classes. Lafayette is in constant communication with the
society, & several of the leading members are on his staff. I am to be
presented to him by the president of the society next Tuesday, which is
the day on which he receives company. I find in all those people the
most friendly inclinations towards England: which I am glad to know as I
am convinced that I shall hear the contrary asserted in many quarters at
home, in the progress of events. They also seem to have a much better
comprehension of English politics than is common in France: they
understand the vices of our government, they see through the Whigs, & at
the same time they, or at least those of them who have been in England,
know enough of the state of feeling in English society to be aware of
the mischief that might arise from their fraternising with any party
among us, and especially from their connecting themselves with the
disreputable part of our radicals. I think that I have myself been of
some use in putting them on their guard against Sir Thomas Beevor and
Cobbett,8 against Bowring9 and people of that kind. If you see Mr.
Edition: current; Page: [67] Murray10 of The Times, pray tell him that
his visit to Lafayette has evidently been of great use. It is probable
that two or three members of the society will (as individuals) come to
England shortly. If they do, we must exert ourselves to the utmost to
make their stay there useful & agreeable and to make them as much our
friends as we possibly can, since the occasions will be innumerable when
they will need such information & such advice as we & our friends can
alone give them among Englishmen advice which they are at present very
well disposed to receive from us as they know how hearty we are in their
cause.

Lanjuinais will probably come—I am very anxious that he should be
acquainted with you.

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

12th October 1830

East India House

William Jackson Hooker

Hooker, William Jackson

37.


TO WILLIAM JACKSON HOOKER1

East India House

.

12th October
1830

.

Dear Sir,

Pray accept my most sincere thanks for the very interesting and handsome
present of specimens which you have been so obliging as to confer upon
me.

I will take an early opportunity of sending to you specimens of the few
plants, which I was so fortunate as to find that I had had greater
opportunities than yourself of observing. I shall also avail myself of
your permission to communicate to you any observations which I may
hereafter be able to make, that are likely to be at all interesting to
you. I had not the slightest idea when I made the former ones, that they
could be of any value to any one except myself.

I have gathered for you some specimens of what I imagine to be the
Atriplex erecta; it is certainly the only Atriplex to be found in the
station mentioned by Smith,2 and it has not the characters of any other
English Edition: current; Page: [68] Atriplex. The valves of the calyx
of the fruit are in many instances very thickly set with projecting
sharp points, but these points do not amount to prickles, being composed
of the same herbaceous substance with the calyx itself; and moreover the
calyx has not unfrequently, though in a slight degree, the appearance of
the leaves of the ice-plant, which must arise from a number of small
shining glands, easily rubbed off by the touch. I do not know whether
the specimens will preserve this character when dry, therefore I mention
it now, having examined the plant more minutely than I ever did before.
I have not Smith’s work by me at this instant, else I would consult it
to see whether his Atriplex erecta possesses the last mentioned
character.

I will endeavour to collect Fungi for you, indeed I have already picked
up some, but I am afraid I shall not be able to effect much this autumn.

Believe me
 most sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [69]


1831

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

26th January 1831

India House

William Jackson

Jackson, William

38.


TO WILLIAM JACKSON HOOKER1

India House

.

26th January 1831

.

My dear Sir,

I owe you many apologies for having so long delayed forwarding to you
the small parcel of specimens which is all I have to offer in return for
all those which you were so good as to send me. The fact is that I have
been so completely engrossed by other occupations that I have not been
able, till now, to perform the annual duty of looking over my herbarium.

The specimens I now send are, I regret to say, not in general very good
ones, but they are the best I have; I will endeavour to procure better
ones next summer. I began collecting fungi so late, & had so little time
to hunt for them, that I am able to send only two or three I am afraid
very common ones.

You will find however specimens such as they are of all the plants which
you expressed a wish to see, except one, as to which I must plead guilty
to having misinformed you, the Thalictrum majus. How I came to commit
this blunder I cannot conceive, as the plant is entered both in my
herbarium and in my catalogue as Thalictrum flavum. In compensation I
send you a plant which, I believe I did not mention before: the Lilium
martagon, a plant new to the British flora, but certainly wild, & as far
as it is possible to judge, indigenous.

It fills, as I imagine, nearly the whole of an extremely thick & close
coppice wood, near Headley in Surrey. I first saw it about four years
ago, when the coppice or rather a part of it was cut down, & the ground
was seen to be covered with this plant; but as it never flowered I did
not know what it was, though I wondered at it a good deal; but in June
this year (I believe shortly after I wrote the notes on your Flora2 to
which I owe the privilege of corresponding with you) I discovered in
another corner of the wood, a considerable number of full grown plants
all of them on the point of flowering, two of which I gathered & now
send to you. They are badly preserved, but there is no doubt of the
identity of the plant, & as little of its being completely wild: If it
ever escaped from a garden, it Edition: current; Page: [70] must have
been at a very remote period, for there is no garden near, & the immense
abundance of the plant in this coppice proves that if not indigenous, it
is as completely naturalized as a plant can possibly be.

If chance, or your zeal for science, should ever bring you into the
neighbourhood of Dorking3 (the most beautiful probably in the S. of
England) it would be a great pleasure to me to shew you this spot, as
well as the habitats of various other rare plants in that neighbourhood.

I have not been able to learn anything more respecting the Verbascum
ferrugineum in the vicinity of Hampton Court & the Moulseys [sic], as I
am no longer residing in that neighbourhood, but I will endeavour to
revisit the spot. It certainly is not indigenous there, but it appeared
to me to be completely naturalized. From your sending me the
Rhynchospora alba, I conclude that it may not be known to you that the
boggy or rather the wet parts of Cobham common in Surrey are covered
with it. Accept once more my best thanks for your letter & its
accompaniments & believe me

Most truly yours

J. S. Mill.

P.S. I send but one specimen of the Lycopodium from Esher Common, having
lost the other.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 1st 1831

India House

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

39.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

India House

March 1st
1831

My dear Gustave

I write to you merely a few lines to shew that I am not inclined to
neglect my absent friends. Adolphe will tell you every thing which I
could say in a letter, and much more.

Edition: current; Page: [71]
Your two friends, M. Janski and M. Bontemps,2 have not had more success
in converting me to St Simonism than Duverryer [sic]3 and you; but if
you are sufficiently catholic, in the original & correct sense of the
word, to rejoice at any progress which does not bring any proselytes
within your pale, I think you will be pleased with two or three articles
of mine in the Examiner, headed “The Spirit of the Age”,4 which Adolphe
is so kind as to take charge of for you.

Your doctrine begins to be talked of, & to excite some curiosity here—I
have been the means of making it known to some persons, at their
request: & in short, although I am not a St Simonist nor at all likely
to become one, je tiens bureau de St Simonisme chez moi.

Pray commend me to Duveyrier; and to your two chiefs,5 even; if their
haute mission has not prevented them from retaining any trace of me in
their remembrance.

tout à vous

J. S. Mill

Je vous félicite de l’acquisition de Globe.6

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Spring or summer 1831

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

40.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

[
Spring or summer 1831

]

How I wish I were by your side, and could speak to you instead of
writing. You may lay down your anxiety, my dear Mütterlein, I hope never
to resume it.

In the first place, the shutting up the University for a year is a
cock-and-bull Edition: current; Page: [72] story.2 Romilly3 tells me
that it was talked of by one or two of the members of council among
themselves, but never was proposed to the Council, & R. is firmly
persuaded it never will be proposed, & would have no chance of being
carried.

Romilly is in better spirits about the University than he has long been.
He says that he and my father and Mr Wm Tooke4 met together yesterday &
looked over papers &c. &c. to see what could be done to reduce the
expense, & the result was such as to convince Romilly that by the end of
next year the receipts will exceed the disbursements.

So much for the University. Then Romilly tells me that it is now certain
or nearly certain that a Professorship of Jurisprudence will be endowed
by subscription for three years.5 I do not know whether I ought to have
told you this as long as there could be even the slightest doubt: but I
do not think there can be the slightest, from the manner in which he
spoke of it, and besides I could not help telling you. However let us
keep our joy to ourselves for the present. I never could bring myself to
believe that we should lose you, and now I am sure we shall not.

Now you must write me a joyful note to make amends for your sorrowful
one.

Ihre Söhnchen,

J. S. M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

27 August 1831

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

41.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

27 August 1831

.

My dear Gustave

I suppose it is of no use writing to you about any thing except what
relates to the doctrine of St Simon. With respect to the translating of
the St Simonian books, I think the time has hardly come for it—indeed my
Edition: current; Page: [73] own opinion is that to have any chance of
making converts in this country it would be advisable not to translate
the existing books, but to write new ones better adapted to the state of
the English mind. However I was told some time ago by Mr Owen, that some
of his friends were translating your works.2 Whether they understand
them sufficiently to be able to translate them in the proper manner, I
do not know—but I suspect not.

I do not know to what merits of my own, as respects the doctrine of St
Simon, I am indebted for regularly receiving the Globe—but I beg you to
make my acknowledgments to your chiefs, and to accept them yourself, for
the great pleasure which it has afforded me. I read it regularly and
have derived great advantage from it, and though there is as little
chance as ever of my becoming one of you, I do not differ from you
nearly so much as I did.

I am much obliged to you for introducing me to the acquaintance of Mr
Silsey,3 and I hope you will confer on me a similar favour whenever any
of your friends comes to this place.

Pray make my affectionate remembrances to Adolphe and all friends. Is
there any chance that Lanjuinais will come here in the approaching
vacation?

Yours most truly

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 7, 1831

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

42.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

[
Oct. 7, 1831

]2

My dear Sir

When I wrote to you this morning that I was about to dine with a
Frenchman who was an intimate friend of mine I was not aware that both
the brother and the uncle of that friend were known to you, the first
(M. Edition: current; Page: [74] Gustave d’Eichthal) in correspondence
with you, and the uncle3 a friend of your brother. My friend is
extremely desirous of making your acquaintance, and as he leaves town
for Edinburgh on Tuesday, Monday next is the only day on which I could
have an opportunity of introducing him to you. If it is quite convenient
and agreeable to you, it would be a great pleasure both to me and to him
if you would permit us to call upon you on that evening. I think I may
promise that you will like him.

He is acquainted with no person at Edinburgh, and if when you see him
you should be disposed to give him any introductions there, I am sure
they will be well bestowed and properly appreciated.

Believe me
 Yours most truly

J. S. Mill

Friday
 evening.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

20th of October to the 22d. 1831

India House

John Sterling

Sterling, John

43.


TO JOHN STERLING1

India House

. From the 20th of October to the
22d. 1831

.

Dear Sterling

You must have wondered at not hearing from me sooner; and not without
good reason. It is true that I have not heard from you non plus, so that
we seem to have been equally neglectful of one another. But, 1. very
probably a letter from you is now on its way here. 2. Your silence ought
only to be counted from your arrival,2 and mine from your setting out.
3. I have had only my ordinary occupations, while you have had all the
trouble of settling in a new place, of commencing an entirely new mode
of life and kind of occupation, and when this was just done, you were
turned out by a vile hurricane & obliged to begin the whole thing over
again.3 4. A letter from home is still more precious than even the most
Edition: current; Page: [75] interesting letter from abroad. 5. Though
you have not written to me, you have to others, & I have seen part of
what you wrote: now when a man is a great way off, his letter to one of
his friends may be taken mutatis mutandis as a letter to all, but that
cannot be said of their letters to him.—You see I have stated the case
against myself as strongly as I can, in order to leave you nothing to
add to it. As I have no excuse to make which will not leave my case
worse than it is already, I can only make you the best reparation in my
power by writing you an exceedingly long letter this time. I suppose it
is right to assume that you must desire en premier lieu to hear about
public affairs, now when they are in so ticklish a state: but really I
can tell you little more than you will learn from the newspapers. The
rejection of the Reform Bill by the large majority of 41 in the House of
Lords,4 has given an immense impulse to the mouvement in this country.
All chance that the Bill when passed should prove a healing measure is
at an end. The House of Lords is now as much detested as ever the House
of Commons was. Nothing less than the creation of from 60 to 100 liberal
Peers, to change the character of the House, can now give it any chance
of remaining in existence. It is said that they flinch, and will pass
the Bill without any new creation, but that will not now save them. They
will come into collision with the Reformed House on some other point, &
will certainly go to the wall. You may consider the fate of the Church
as sealed. Only two Bishops voted for the Bill; about five more staid
away, the rest voted against it.5 The hierarchy being thus, as a body,
hostile to it, while the temporal Peers were almost equally divided, the
first brunt of public indignation has fallen upon the Prelacy. Every
voice is raised against allowing them to continue in the House of Lords,
and if I do not express my conviction that they will be excluded from it
before this day five years, it is only because I doubt whether the House
itself will last so long. I cannot say I regret either the approaching
downfall of the Peers or that of the Church. I certainly think it
desirable that there should be a conservative branch of the legislature;
and that there should be a national clergy or clerisy, like that of
which Coleridge traces the outline, in his work on Church & State.6 If
therefore I thought that the present Peerage & Clergy would ever consent
to become the peerage of a government constituted on anti-jobbing
principles, & the clergy of a non-sectarian church, I should Edition:
current; Page: [76] pray for their continuance. But they never will. Can
a Peerage so ignorant as ours is proved to be by its recent vote, of the
spirit of the age, & the feelings of the people, ever be able to fulfil
with judgment the ends of a checking body, which are, to yield to all
steady impulses of opinion, which are likely to be permanent, & to
resist those which are in their nature temporary & changeable? And as
for the clergy, who does not see that they are mainly divisible into two
great categories, the worldly-minded, & the sectarians? I know that you
will not agree with me, but I think that Coleridge would, in thinking
that a national clergy ought to be so constituted as to include all who
are capable of producing a beneficial effect on their age & country as
teachers of the knowledge which fits people to perform their duties &
exercise their rights, and as exhorters to the right performance &
exercise of them: now I contend that such persons are to be found among
all denominations of Christians, nay even among those who are not
Christians at all: provided (which I deem an essential condition in the
present stage of human progressiveness) they abstain from either
directly attacking, or indirectly undermining Christianity, & even adopt
(as far as without hypocrisy they can) those means of addressing the
feelings & the conscience, to which a connexion with Christianity has
given potency. An infidel who attempts to subvert or weaken the belief
of mankind in Christianity, ought not in my opinion to form a part of
the national clerisy; not because he may not be performing a
conscientious duty in so doing, but because it is to me a proof that he
misunderstands the wants & tendencies of his age, & that the effect of
his exertions would probably be to make men worse instead of better by
shaking the only firm convictions & feelings of duty which they have,
without having even a remote chance of furnishing them with any
effectual substitute. Accordingly in France, where Christianity has lost
its hold on men’s minds, my reasoning would not apply. There, I believe
that a Christian would be positively less fit than a St Simonian (for
example), to form part of a national church. These then are my ideas of
a church establishment; ideas which I shall promulgate to the public in
some shape or other when I shall see a good opportunity for their being
attended to. But I feel certain that no church, not founded on this
comprehensive principle, can, or ought to stand. I believe that if any
class of Christians, Socinians for example, or even Deists, or Atheists,
were excluded you could not select your clergy from the remainder of
mankind without including persons less fit in every respect than some
whom you would exclude. Besides, you would then retain that
encouragement to hypocrisy, that holding out of worldly motives first to
the adoption & next to the obstinate retention of particular creeds,
which has disgusted so many high-minded men with church establishments:
which has made them to be considered as obstacles to improvement, as the
Edition: current; Page: [77] creation of a class with an interest
adverse to the progressiveness of the species. In the present age of
transition, everything must be subordinate to freedom of inquiry: if
your opinions, or mine, are right, they will in time be unanimously
adopted by the instructed classes, and then it will be time to found the
national creed upon the assumption of their truth.—But what chance is
there that the Church as at present constituted, will consent to
undergo, even by the most insensible steps, this transformation? and
that, too, at a time when insensible steps will not suffice. If they
would, the recent elevation of Whately to the archbishopric of Dublin &
of Maltby7 to the bishopric of Chichester, would greatly encourage me;
the former because I think him one of the fittest men in the country to
hold a high station in a national church such as I conceive it should
be; the latter for the very reason which makes others disapprove of it,
his want of orthodoxy. But all this might do while the people were
attached to the Church. At present they are hostile to it: hostile
consequently, to all church establishments, because they know of none
better than this: & they would be more likely to accept an entirely new
one, than one which they considered to be a transformation of this. Why
is it almost the natural course of things in politics, that destruction
must precede renovation? It is because reform is delayed till the whole
attachment of the public to the entire of the institution is gone, &
then they feel a distrust of anything which looks like patching up the
old edifice. So I believe it to be both with Church & State at this
moment. You have no doubt seen in the English papers, the speeches at
public meetings and the various Resolutions which have been agreed to.
These are generally very strong; but they were, in every case, the
weakest which there was the least chance that the people would have
adopted. Almost everywhere, if any person came forward & proposed
stronger Resolutions, they were carried by acclamation, much to the
dissatisfaction of those who called the meeting & prepared the
proceedings. I am convinced that we are indebted for the preservation of
tranquillity solely to the organisation of the people in Political
Unions. All the other Unions look to the Birmingham one, & that looks to
its half dozen leaders, who consequently act under a most intense
consciousness of moral responsibility & are very careful neither to do
nor say anything without the most careful deliberation. I conversed the
other day with a Warwickshire magistrate who told me that the meeting of
150,000 men a few days previous would have done any thing without
exception which their leaders might have proposed. They would have
passed any resolutions, marched to any place, or burnt any man’s house.
The agricultural people are as determined as the manufacturers. The West
is as exalté as the North. Colonel Napier Edition: current; Page: [78]
made a speech at the Devizes meeting the other day8 for the express
purpose (as I hear) of letting the men in the North perceive, that the
West is ready to join in any popular movement if necessary; & since that
speech (which the leaders in vain attempted to prevent him from
delivering) he has received numbers of letters from all parts of the
country, saying that they all look to him as their leader, & are ready
to place themselves under his command. If the ministers flinch or the
Peers remain obstinate, I am firmly convinced that in six months a
national convention chosen by universal suffrage, will be sitting in
London. Should this happen, I have not made up my mind what would be
best to do: I incline to think it would be best to lie by and let the
tempest blow over, if one could but get a shilling a day to live upon
meanwhile: for until the whole of the existing institutions of society
are levelled with the ground, there will be nothing for a wise man to do
which the most pig-headed fool cannot do much better than he. A Turgot,9
even, could not do in the present state of England what Turgot himself
failed of doing in France—mend the old system. If it goes all at once,
let us wait till it is gone: if it goes piece by piece, why, let the
blockheads who will compose the first Parliament after the bill passes,
do what a blockhead can do, viz. overthrow, & the ground will be
cleared, & the passion of destruction sated, & a coalition prepared
between the wisest radicals & the wisest anti-radicals, between all the
wiser men who agree in their general views & differ only in their
estimate of the present condition of this country.—You will perhaps
think from this long prosing rambling talk about politics, that they
occupy much of my attention: but in fact I am myself often surprised,
how little I really care about them. The time is not yet come when a
calm & impartial person can intermeddle with advantage in the questions
& contests of the day. I never write in the Examiner now except on
France, which nobody else that I know of seems to know any thing about;
& now & then on some insulated question of political economy. The only
thing which I can usefully do at present, & which I am doing more & more
every day, is to work out principles: which are of use for all times,
though to be applied cautiously & circumspectly to any: principles of
morals, government, law, education, above all self-education. I am here
much more in my element: the only thing that I believe I am really fit
for, is the investigation of abstract truth, & the more abstract the
better. If there is any science which I am capable Edition: current;
Page: [79] of promoting, I think it is the science of science itself,
the science of investigation—of method. I once heard Maurice10 say (&
like many things which have dropped from him, its truth did not strike
me at first but it has been a source of endless reflexions since) that
almost all differences of opinion when analysed, were differences of
method. But if so, he who can throw most light upon the subject of
method, will do most to forward that alliance among the most advanced
intellects & characters of the age, which is the only definite object I
ever have in literature or philosophy so far as I have any general
object at all. Argal, I have put down upon paper a great many of my
ideas on logic, & shall in time bring forth a treatise: but whether it
will see the light until the Treaty of Westphalia is signed at the close
of another cycle of reformation & antagonism, no one can tell except
Messrs. Drummond,11 M’Niel,12 Irving,13 & others, who possess the hidden
key to the Interpretation of the Prophecies. I have just put the
finishing hand to my part of a work on Political Economy, which Graham &
I are writing jointly:14 our object is to clear up some points which
have been left doubtful, to correct some which we consider to be wrong,
& to shew what the science is & how it should be studied. I have written
five essays; four on detached questions & one on the science itself.
Graham is to write five more on the same subjects: we are then to
compare notes, throw our ideas into a common stock, talk over all
disputed points till we agree (which between us two, we know by
experience to be by no means an indefinite postponement) & then one of
us is to write a book out of the materials. Graham is to add a sixth
essay on a very important part of the subject which is above my reach, &
which I am only to criticize when it is done. I am now resting upon my
oars. Yesterday I completed my task, & having reached a sort of
landing-place (vide the Friend)15 I have asked Edition: current; Page:
[80] myself what recreation I could offer myself by way of reward for
past & encouragement to future exertions; & nothing better has yet
occurred to me, than writing to you. The next thing I shall do will be
to complete my speculations on Logic: very likely I shall not get to the
end of the subject yet, viewed as I understand it; but I shall at least
gather in another harvest of ideas, & then let the ground lie fallow a
while longer.16 After this I shall probably put down upon paper a vast
quantity of miscellaneous ideas which are wrought out to a certain
extent in my head, but which it would be quite premature to publish for
a long while to come. I have nothing in view for the public just now,
except (when the Reform Bill shall have past) to resume my series of
papers headed the Spirit of the Age;17 and to write an article or two
for the Jurist (now about to be revived) on some abstract questions of
general legislation.18 When I shall have completed all this, then if the
East India Company is abolished and funded property confiscated, I shall
perhaps scrape together the means of paying my passage to St Vincent’s &
see whether you will employ me to teach your niggers political economy.
I take it for granted that if a Reformed Parliament should begin taking
measures for the emancipation of the slaves, you will all join the
United States, who being lovers of liberty, will I trust go to war with
Republican England to restore you & the other colonists, to the
inalienable rights of freemen.

I have done nothing in this letter but talk to you about the world in
general and about myself. I must now talk to you about other people, and
particularly about several new acquaintances of mine that I had not made
or had only just begun to make when you left this white world. First of
all, I went this summer to the Lakes,19 where I saw much splendid
scenery, and also saw a great deal both of Wordsworth and Southey;20 and
I must tell you what I think of them both. In the case of Wordsworth, I
was particularly struck by several things. One was, the extensive range
of his Edition: current; Page: [81] thoughts and the largeness &
expansiveness of his feelings. This does not appear in his writings,
especially his poetry, where the contemplative part of his mind is the
only part of it that appears: & one would be tempted to infer from the
peculiar character of his poetry, that real life & the active pursuits
of men (except of farmers & other country people) did not interest him.
The fact however is that these very subjects occupy the greater part of
his thoughts, & he talks on no subject more instructively than on states
of society & forms of government. Those who best know him, seem to be
most impressed with the catholic character of his ability. I have been
told that Lockhart21 has said of him that he would have been an
admirable country attorney. Now a man who could have been either
Wordsworth or a country attorney, could certainly have been anything
else which circumstances had led him to desire to be. The next thing
that struck me was the extreme comprehensiveness and philosophic spirit
which is in him. By these expressions I mean the direct antithesis of
what the Germans most expressively call onesidedness. Wordsworth seems
always to know the pros and the cons of every question; & when you think
he strikes the balance wrong, it is only because you think he estimates
erroneously some matter of fact. Hence all my differences with him, or
with any other philosophic Tory, would be differences of matter-of-fact
or detail, while my differences with the radicals & utilitarians are
differences of principle: for these see generally only one side of the
subject, & in order to convince them, you must put some entirely new
idea into their heads, whereas Wordsworth has all the ideas there
already, & you have only to discuss with him concerning the “how much,”
the more or less of weight which is to be attached to a certain cause or
effect, as compared with others: thus the difference with him turns upon
a question of varying or fluctuating quantities, where what is plus in
one age or country is minus in another & the whole question is one of
observation & testimony & of the value of particular articles of
evidence. I need hardly say to you that if one’s own conclusions & his
were at variance on every question which a minister or a Parliament
could to-morrow be called upon to solve, his is nevertheless the mind
with which one would be really in communion: our principles would be the
same, and we should be like two travellers pursuing the same course on
the opposite banks of a river.—Then when you get Wordsworth on the
subjects which are peculiarly his, such as the theory of his own art—if
it be proper to call poetry an art, (that is, if art is to be defined
the expression or embodying in words or forms, of the highest & most
refined parts of nature) no one can converse with him without feeling
that he has advanced that great subject beyond any other man, being
probably the first Edition: current; Page: [82] person who ever
combined, with such eminent success in the practice of the art, such
high powers of generalization & habits of meditation on its principles.
Besides all this, he seems to me the best talker I ever heard (& I have
heard several first-rate ones); & there is a benignity & kindliness
about his whole demeanour which confirms what his poetry would lead one
to expect, along with a perfect simplicity of character which is
delightful in any one, but most of all in a person of first-rate
intellect. You see I am somewhat enthusiastic on the subject of
Wordsworth, having found him still more admirable & delightful a person
on a nearer view than I had figured to myself from his writings; which
is so seldom the case that it is impossible to see it without having
one’s faith in man greatly increased & being made greatly happier in
consequence. I also was very much pleased with Wordsworth’s family—at
least the female part of it. I am convinced that the proper place to see
him is in his own kingdom—I call the whole of that mountain region his
kingdom, as it will certainly be as much thought of hereafter by the
people of Natchitoches or of Swan River, as Mænalus and the Cephissus,
or Baiae and Soracte by ourselves, and this from the fortuitous
circumstance that he was born there & lived there. I believe it was not
there that you were acquainted with him, & therefore I am not telling
you an old story in talking about the little palace or pavilion which he
occupies in this poetic region, & which is perhaps the most delightful
residence in point of situation in the whole country. The different
views from it are a sort of abstract or abridgment of the whole
Westmoreland side of the mountains, & every spot visible from it has
been immortalised in his poems. I was much pleased with the universality
of his relish for all good poetry however dissimilar to his own: & with
the freedom & unaffected simplicity with which every person about him
seemed to be in the habit of discussing & attacking any passage or poem
in his own works which did not please them.—I also saw a great deal of
Southey, who is a very different kind of man, very inferior to
Wordsworth in the higher powers of intellect, & entirely destitute of
his philosophic spirit, but a remarkably pleasing & likeable man. I
never could understand him till lately; that is, I never could reconcile
the tone of such of his writings as I had read, with what his friends
said of him: I could only get rid of the notion of his being insincere,
by supposing him to be extremely fretful and irritable: but when I came
to read his Colloquies,22 in which he has put forth much more than in
any other work, of the natural man, as distinguished from the writer
aiming at a particular effect, I found there a kind of connecting link
between the two parts of his character, & formed very much the same
notion of him which I now have after seeing & conversing with him. He
seems to me to be a Edition: current; Page: [83] man of gentle feelings
& bitter opinions. His opinions make him think a great many things
abominable which are not so; against which accordingly he thinks it
would be right, & suitable to the fitness of things, to express great
indignation: but if he really feels this indignation, it is only by a
voluntary act of the imagination that he conjures it up, by representing
the thing to his own mind in colours suited to that passion: now, when
he knows an individual & feels disposed to like him, although that
individual may be placed in one of the condemned categories, he does not
conjure up this phantom & feels therefore no principle of repugnance,
nor excites any. No one can hold a greater number of the opinions & few
have more of the qualities, which he condemns, than some whom he has
known intimately & befriended for many years: at the same time he would
discuss their faults & weaknesses or vices with the greatest possible
freedom in talking about them. It seems to me that Southey is altogether
out of place in the existing order of society: his attachment to old
institutions & his condemnation of the practices of those who administer
them, cut him off from sympathy & communion with both halves of mankind.
Had he lived before radicalism & infidelity became prevalent, he would
have been the steady advocate of the moral & physical improvement of the
poorer classes & denouncer of the selfishness & supineness of those who
ought to have considered the welfare of those classes as confided to
their care. Possibly the essential one-sidedness of his mind might then
have rendered him a democrat: but now the evils which he expects from
increase of the power wielded by the democratic spirit such as it now
is, have rendered him an aristocrat in principle without inducing him to
make the slightest compromise with aristocratic vices and weaknesses.
Consequently he is not liked by the Tories, while the Whigs and radicals
abhor him. And after all, a man cannot complain of being misinterpreted,
who always puts the worst interpretation upon the words and deeds of
other people. As far as I have yet seen, speculative Toryism and
practical Toryism are direct contraries. Practical Toryism simply means,
being in, and availing yourself of your comfortable position inside the
vehicle without minding the poor devils who are freezing outside. To be
a Tory means either to be a place-hunter and jobber or else to think
that (as Turgot expressed it) tout va bien, parce que tout va bien pour
eux; to be one qui ayant leur lit bien fait, ne veulent pas qu’on le
remue. Such Toryism is essentially incompatible with any large and
generous aspirations; nor could any one who had such aspirations ever
have any power of realizing them under our system, whatever might be his
attachment to the forms of the Constitution, because the inert mass of
our sluggish and enervated higher classes can be moved by nothing that
does not come from without, & with a vengeance; they cannot be led, but
must be driven: the clamours of the “fierce democracy” Edition: current;
Page: [84] can alone stir their feeble and lazy minds, & awaken them
from the sleep of indifference. What can you do when there is no faith
in human improvement, & every glaring, disgusting evil which they cannot
deny is set down as the inevitable price we pay for social order, &
irremediable by human efforts? “It is all very true, but what can we
do?” is the ready answer of everybody who can possibly avoid doing
something; & you can say nothing in reply but this, “Then if you can do
nothing for that society which has hitherto made nobody the happier
unless it be yourselves, the rest of mankind must try what they can do
to improve their own lot without your assistance, & then perhaps you may
not like their manner of proceeding.” If there were but a few dozens of
persons safe (whom you & I could select) to be missionaries of the great
truths in which alone there is any well-being for mankind individually
or collectively, I should not care though a revolution were to
exterminate every person in Great Britain & Ireland who has £500 a year.
Many very amiable persons would perish, but what is the world the better
for such amiable persons.23 But among the missionaries whom I would
reserve, a large proportion would consist of speculative Tories: for it
is an ideal Toryism, an ideal King, Lords, & Commons, that they
venerate; it is old England as opposed to the new, but it is old England
as she might be, not as she is. It seems to me that the Toryism of
Wordsworth, of Coleridge (if he can be called a Tory) of Southey even, &
of many others whom I could mention, is tout bonnement a reverence for
government in the abstract: it means, that they are duly sensible that
it is good for man to be ruled; to submit both his body & mind to the
guidance of a higher intelligence & virtue. It is therefore the direct
antithesis of liberalism, which is for making every man his own guide &
sovereign master, & letting him think for himself & do exactly as he
judges best for himself, giving other men leave to persuade him if they
can by evidence, but forbidding him to give way to authority; and still
less allowing them to constrain him more than the existence & tolerable
security of every man’s person and property renders indispensably
necessary. It is difficult to conceive a more thorough ignorance of
man’s nature, & of what is necessary for his happiness or what degree of
happiness & virtue he is capable of attaining than this system implies.
But I cannot help regretting that the men who are best capable of
struggling against these narrow views & mischievous heresies should
chain themselves, full of life & vigour as they are, to the inanimate
corpses of dead political & religious systems, never more to be revived.
The same ends require altered means; we have no new principles, but we
want new machines constructed on the old principles; those we had before
are worn out. Instead of cutting a safe channel for the Edition:
current; Page: [85] stream of events, these people would dam it up till
it breaks down every thing & spreads devastation over a whole region.

Another acquaintance which I have recently made is that of Mr.
Carlyle,24 whom I believe you are also acquainted with.25 I have long
had a very keen relish for his articles in the Edinburgh & Foreign
Reviews, which I formerly thought to be such consummate nonsense; and I
think he improves upon a nearer acquaintance. He does not seem to me so
entirely the reflexion or shadow of the great German writers as I was
inclined to consider him; although undoubtedly his mind has derived from
their inspiration whatever breath of life is in it. He seems to me as a
man who has had his eyes unsealed, and who now looks round him & sees
the aspects of things with his own eyes, but by the light supplied by
others; not the pure light of day, but another light compounded of the
same simple rays but in different proportions. He has by far the largest
& widest liberality & tolerance (not in the sense which Coleridge justly
disavows,26 but in the good sense) that I have met with in any one; & he
differs from most men who see as much as he does into the defects of the
age, by a circumstance greatly to his advantage in my estimation, that
he looks for a safe landing before and not behind: he sees that if we
could replace things as they once were, we should only retard the final
issue, as we should in all human probability go on just as we then did,
& arrive again at the very place where we now stand. Carlyle intends
staying in town all the winter: he has brought his wife to town (whom I
have not seen enough of yet to be able to judge of her at all): his
object was to treat with booksellers about a work which he wishes to
publish,27 but he has given up this for the present, finding that no
bookseller will publish anything but a political pamphlet in the present
state of excitement. In fact literature is suspended; men neither read
nor write. Accordingly Carlyle means to employ his stay here in
improving his knowledge of what is going on in the world, at least in
this part of it, I mean in that part of the world of ideas and feelings
which corresponds to London. He is a great hunter-out of acquaintances;
he hunted me out, or rather hunted out the author of certain papers in
the Examiner28 (the first, as he said, which he had ever Edition:
current; Page: [86] seen in a newspaper, hinting that the age was not
the best of all possible ages): & his acquaintance is the only
substantial good I have yet derived from writing those papers, & a much
greater one than I expected when I wrote them. He has also, through me,
sought the acquaintance of Fonblanque29 (of the Examiner) whom I found
him to be an admirer of, and who though as little of a mystic as most
men, reads his writings with pleasure. I expect great good from
Fonblanque; he is fashioned for the work of the day, as befits one who
works for the day, but he is one of those on whom one may most
completely rely for being ready to turn over a new leaf when the old one
is read through.

I have to add yet another new acquaintance to all these, and one who is
by no means the least remarkable among them; I mean Stephen,30 the
Counsel to the Colonial Office, son of the Master in Chancery. I have
only yet seen him two or three times, but I hope to see much more of
him, especially as I have now gone to live in his immediate
neighbourhood, at Kensington.31 I have hardly met with any person who
seems to me to take such just views of the age and of futurity as he
does; to be so free from any exaggeration or one-sidedness, and to
combine the speculative & the practical in so just a proportion. He
cannot fail hereafter to exercise a great influence over the destinies
of his country, not so much perhaps by what he does, as by what he makes
other persons do. He is at this moment the directing spirit not only of
the Colonial Office but of several other departments of the government:
under great restraints & disadvantages of course, from the unteachable
quality of those placed over him & their dread of anything like a
principle, arising from their consciousness of inability to comprehend
in one view all that is involved in it & all the consequences to which
it leads. Stephen is reputed a saint: I do not know in what sense he is
one, though I know that he carries the observance of the Sabbath to the
extent of puritanism. But if all the English evangelicals were like him,
I think I should attend their Exeter Hall32 meetings myself, and
subscribe to their societies. I will write to you at greater length
about Stephen when I have seen more of him.

Edition: current; Page: [87]
As for our common friends and acquaintances here, I have but little to
tell you concerning them. Mrs. Austin will of course write to you. I do
not know whether the subscription for endowing the Jurisprudence chair
is yet full,33 but no doubt is entertained that it will be so. Mr.
Austin is still engaged in bringing out his first eight lectures, which
are soon to appear. He is in good health & spirits upon the whole. I
have not seen or heard anything about Maurice; I hope our separation is
not to be everlasting. Wilson34 has very recently returned from Germany,
where he has spent about a year. I have seen very little of Charles
Buller;35 you are probably aware that he is not in this Parliament, but
he is sure of being returned for Liskeard when the Bill passes. The
greatest change that has occurred in any one since I saw you is in
Roebuck; he has pulled off his strait jacket, and now moves freely: his
mental powers are no longer enslaved by fixed forms of words, and
phrases strung together syllogistically with the false appearance of
Euclidean demonstration. His intellect has greatly expanded, & the
asperities of his character are much softened: and though there still
remains, & possibly may always remain, much in his mental character
which you and I would greatly object to, I have now no doubt of his
being a useful, powerful, and constantly improving member of the only
Church which has now any real existence, namely that of writers and
orators.

The Colonization scheme36 is going on prosperously. They have formed a
plan for a new colony, to be settled on their principles on the coast of
Southern Australia near the place where the newly discovered navigable
river discharges itself into the sea. They are endeavouring to form a
Land-Company to settle the country, & have the promise of an excellent
Charter from Government when the company is formed. The Colonial Office
I believe to be heartily with them at present. Our friend Graham has
gone into the scheme with his usual vigour, & is now one of their
leading minds: he wrote their last two pamphlets. Wakefield37 now moves
openly in the thing, though it is not declared publicly that he was the
originator of it; but there is no reason now for keeping his connexion
with it altogether a secret, as he has made himself very advantageously
known to the public Edition: current; Page: [88] by, really, a most
remarkable book on the punishment of death, founded on the observations
he made while in Newgate.38 You are aware that our old enemy, Wilmot
Horton,39 has gone to Ceylon as governor, so that he no longer stands in
the way of a rational scheme of colonization.—The St Simonists are
making immense progress in France, & are doing great good there: France
has nobody comparable to them on the whole. They talk of sending
missionaries here; that will do them no good, I think.—This letter I
hope will call forth an equally long one from you. I beg to be duly
remembered to Mrs. John Sterling.

Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

30th November 1831

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

44.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

30th November
1831

My dear d’Eichthal

I know you too well to write to you on any subject except that of the
great, and truly apostolic work in which you are engaged, and to which,
though I am very far indeed from entirely agreeing with you, I have for
some time been accustomed to look, as the greatest enterprise now in
progress, for the regeneration of society.

I am greatly indebted to you and your associates, for being thought
worthy to receive the Globe. If I did not sympathize with you in any
other respect, it would still be a noble spectacle to see a body of men
standing erect and fronting the world as you do. But the daily reading
of the Globe, combined with various other causes, has brought me much
nearer to many of your opinions than I was before; and I regard you as
decidedly à la tête de la civilisation.

I am now inclined to think that your social organisation, under some
modification or other, which experience, no doubt, will one day suggest
to yourselves, is likely to be the final and permanent condition of the
human race. I chiefly differ from you in thinking that it will require
many, or at least several, ages, to bring mankind into a state in which
they will Edition: current; Page: [89] be capable of it; & that in the
mean time they are only capable of approximating to it by that gradual
series of changes which are so admirably indicated and discussed in the
writings of your body, and every one of which independently of what it
may afterwards lead to, has the advantage of being in itself a great
positive good. Your system, therefore, even supposing it to be
impracticable, differs from every other system which has ever proposed
to itself an unattainable end, in this, that many, indeed almost all
attainable good lies on the road to it.

You, I am aware, think that all who adopt your system, prove thereby
that they are capable of performing all which it would require of them
if it became universal. I think not. But since you think so, it was your
duty to commence, as you have done, the experiment of realizing it on
such a scale as is permitted to you. I watch the experiment; and watch
it with all the solicitude and anxiety of one, all whose hopes of the
very rapid and early improvement of human society are wrapt up in its
success.

If men of such ardent and generous enthusiasm, such strong and
penetrating intellects, and such extensive views, are found unable to
act up to their own conceptions of duty, what hope is there for the rest
of mankind? If the Saint-Simonian society holds together without schism
& heresy, and continues to propagate its faith and extend its numbers,
at the rate it has done for the last two years—if this shall continue
for a few years more, then I shall see something like a gleam of light
through the darkness. But if not—then what is done will not be of no
avail; I shall not despair, nor ought you. But it will be a grievous
downfal[l] to our hopes.

Write to me sometimes, my dear friend. Be not afraid that your labour
will be lost. I have never yet read a single article in the Globe which
has not wrought something within me; which I have not been in some
measure the better for. And if the hour were yet come for England—if it
were not as vain to seek a hearing for any “vues organiques” in England
now, as it would have been for your master St Simon in the height of the
revolution—I know not that I should not renounce every thing, and
become, not one of you, but as you.

But our 10 août, our 20 juin, and perhaps our 18 Brumaire,2 are yet to
come and which of us will be left standing when the hurricane has blown
over, Heaven only knows.

Yours ever

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [90]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

6th December 1831

London

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

45.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

London

6th December 1831

.

My dear d’Eichthal,

Ever since your note was given to me by M. Arlès,2 I have been turning
over in my mind your ideas concerning the dissemination of your
principles in this country, and considering to what persons the Globe
might be sent with prospect of advantage. I should not recommend its
being sent either to the leading newspapers or to the leading members of
parliament. It would not be read, or it would be read just enough to be
altogether misunderstood. I have however thought of a few persons to
whom it would be useful. Some of these I know to be in some measure
prepared to receive many of your opinions favorably. Others will make
your doctrine known by attacking it. Now since you have been violently
attacked already by Southey, in so widely circulated a work as the
Quarterly Review,3 & mentioned in several newspapers of large
circulation, as a set of dreamers and visionaries, it is desirable that
you should be attacked a great deal more, & by a great variety of
persons, in order that being attacked on all sides, your doctrine may
have all its sides laid bare and divulged. Each person in pointing out
the things which he dislikes, will shew to some other person that there
are things which he would like. While you are only attacked as
anarchists & levellers, you will excite no attention here, but when you
come to be represented by A as anarchists; by B as absolutists; by C as
levellers; by D as hierarchs; by E as infidels; by F as mystical
religionists; by G as sentimentalists; by H as metaphysicians &
political economists; & so forth; the public will see that an absurdity
which has so many different faces, cannot be quite an absurdity; or at
least, that it is an absurdity unlike others, & worth studying.

Among the young members of parliament (as for the old ones, they are
hopeless) I only know two to whom there would be the least use in
sending the Globe; & of them I am not sure. One is Mr T. Hyde Villiers,4
the same who originated in parliament the proposition for equalizing the
duties on French & on other foreign wines. He has now a place in the
government; Edition: current; Page: [91] he is secretary to the India
Board, & his address is there. (N.B. Do not confound the India Board
with the India House.) His brother5 is now at Paris as one of the
commissioners to negociate about free trade.

The other member of parliament to whom I allude is Mr Edward Lytton
Bulwer6 (his address is 36, Hertford Street, May-fair.) He is the author
of several literary productions which have been very successful; & he is
now the editor of the New Monthly Magazine, a periodical publication of
considerable sale, very frivolous until lately, but which under his
management has become very much the reverse. If you ever see it, you
will remark in it des vues d’avenir which are exceedingly rare in this
country.

It is not worth while to send the Globe to any of our daily newspapers;
but if you send it to Mr Sterling7 (South Place, Knightsbridge) who is
one of the principal writers in the Times, there is some chance of its
being of use. I know that he has read particular articles in the Globe,
& has been much pleased with them. It may be of use to send it to two of
our best provincial papers, if you can do so conveniently, the
“Scotsman”, an Edinburgh paper, and the “Brighton Guardian.” The former,
with some prejudices, is the most “progressif” of all our newspapers,
scarcely excepting the Examiner. The Brighton paper is remarkable for a
certain force and boldness of speculation, though the writer is sadly
abroad.

Your should certainly send the Globe to Colonel T. Perronet Thompson,8
the principal proprietor of the Westminster Review. He is partially
acquainted with your doctrine, & likes some things in it, but dislikes
others: I believe he has some notion of writing in his review about you.
I am satisfied no one can do so without going egregiously wrong, unless
he be a regular reader of the Globe. If your packets are sent to the
Westminster Review office, Wellington Street, Strand, they will reach
him.

If you like to send the Globe to Southey, his address is Robert Southey
Esq. Keswick, Cumberland. Your brother will be able to advise you about
sending it to Professor Wilson9 of Edinburgh, the principal writer in
Blackwood’s Magazine, the great organ of our Tories. If you do, he will
be sure to write about you; he will compliment you, and attack you, and
will say a great deal about you which the public will not hear from any
Edition: current; Page: [92] one else, and which will excite their
curiosity; he did all this for our utilitarian school of the old
Westminster Review. But it will be matter of accident & humour whether
he treats you as well-meaning men or impostors.

One of the most “progressif” men in this country is Dr Whately, lately
appointed Archbishop of Dublin; which is in itself equivalent to a
revolution in the Church. He is well entitled to receive the Globe. So
is the Reverend J. Blanco White,10 (Oriel College, Oxford), a Spanish
Catholic priest, of considerable abilities, now a clergyman of the
Church of England. He is acquainted at least with Comte’s book, & by
this time (I have no doubt) with your subsequent publications, & is on
the whole well disposed towards you. Any impression made upon these two
men will spread far and wide.

You should send the Globe to Mr Stephen (James Stephen Esq. Kensington
Gore) Council to the Colonial office; one of the ablest men connected
with our Government, & a very important man in it, whoever happens to be
minister. Although an Evangelical Christian, that is, a sort of Puritan
and connected with Puritans, he is one of the most progressif men we
have, & I have heard him speak of your master Saint Simon with
considerable praise. I think it would be of great use to send him the
Globe, & that it will interest him greatly if he has time to read it.

Mr Empson,11 (Harcourt Buildings, Inner Temple) Law Professor at the
East India College, and one of the principal writers in the Edinburgh
Review, is a very proper person to receive the Globe.

I believe you already send it to the Rev. W. J. Fox,12 the enlightened
and eloquent Unitarian preacher. If you do not, you should commence
doing so without delay.

Perhaps the Reverend Dr Arnold,13 Head Master of Rugby School near
Birmingham, would be a proper person. He is one of the most enlightened
and liberal of our clergy; but I am not sufficiently acquainted with his
turn of mind to be able to judge in what manner your doctrines would
affect him.

When I can think of any other fit persons, I will write to you again.

I will thank you not to shew this letter to any person except Adolphe,
and M. Enfantin or such other of your associates as it may specially
concern, as I should be sorry that any of the persons I have mentioned
should know that I had written to you any particulars concerning them.

Edition: current; Page: [93]
From what M. Arlès has told me concerning the late change in your
society, I am inclined to think that it is a beneficial one; but I
regret exceedingly to learn that it has detached M. Bazard & several
others altogether from your body. I suppose I shall learn from the Globe
such particulars as I am not yet acquainted with. If not, I beg you to
write to me, as there is nothing which I am more anxious to be apprised
of, than the internal history of your society.

Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [94]


1832

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wednesday 25 Jany. [1832]

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

46.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

Wednesday
25 Jany. [1832]

My dear Gustave

I will answer your questions one by one.

1. I do not think that M. Lemire2 could at first support himself here by
giving lessons in French. I think that in two or three months he might
be able to do so, if his friends and yours exert themselves. I am sorry
to say that my exertions are pre-engaged in behalf of another.

2. I shall have great pleasure in dining with you tomorrow to meet Mr
Crellin.3 I will come to you straight from the India House.

3. I will endeavour to obtain for you or Duveyrier an admission to the
London Institution.4

4. Most of those who receive the Globe in this country have received it
only a short time, and several of them are likely to be prejudiced
against you at first. Perronet Thompson, for instance, is thinking of
writing against you, in the Westminster Review,5 of which he is one of
the chief proprietors. Stephen, and Hyde Villiers, are men in office,
whose whole time is occupied; and though you should, I think, throw
yourself in their way if an opportunity offers, I do not think it would
answer any good purpose to call upon them. Most men in this country have
a strong prejudice against any attempt to talk them over as the vulgar
say; to talk to them with the view of effecting any particular change in
their general habits of thinking.

Of all whom you mention I think Bulwer and Empson are the only two with
whom there would be any use in your having a personal interview Edition:
current; Page: [95] for the present. I will give you an introduction to
Bulwer whenever you please. Empson I should like to speak to on the
subject before you make any attempt to see him; besides, he is seldom to
be found at home except by appointment. But I could easily contrive that
you should see him—& probably Perronet Thompson also.

Yours affectionately

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday Jan. 28, 1832

India House

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

47.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

India House

Saturday
 [
Jan. 28, 1832

]

My dear Gustave

Mr Grote desires me to say that he will have great pleasure in cashing
any bill of yours, whether signed by yourself or Duveyrier. I am also
desired by him & by Mrs Grote to say that they hope very much to see
you, & when you return from your journey to Paris they will ask you to
fix a day for visiting them at Dulwich & not returning till the next
day. Grote & I had much conversation respecting the St Simonian doctrine
during the evening: he has a tolerably accurate knowledge of its general
features, & I think you would not lose your time in conversing with him.

Would it be inconvenient to you to take with you to Paris some numbers
of the Examiner for Marchais2 & for M. de Lasteyrie?3

Edition: current; Page: [96]
I will give you a copy of tomorrow’s Examiner (which contains some
mention of St Simonism) for le père Michel Chevalier.4

The missing numbers of the Globe have not yet reached me, but I suppose
I shall find them here on Monday morning.

You will oblige me by making my best acknowledgments to le père
Enfantin, if he retains any recollection of me, for the great pleasure
and profit which I have derived and am continually deriving from his
words and deeds.

Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday Jan. 30, 1832

India House

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

48.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

India House

Monday
 [
Jan. 30, 1832

]2

My dear Gustave

I send you a copy of the Examiner which contains my notice of the St
Simonians. It is very incorrectly printed. This copy is for Chevalier;
if you wish for one for yourself in addition, I will procure it for you.

I would ask you to take with you a few numbers of the Examiner for
Marchais & for M. de Lasteyrie, if I had any means of sending them to
you soon enough.

A friend of mine whom I hope you will soon be acquainted with, has had
some conversation with Mr Sterling respecting St Simonism, and
represents him as so hostile to it, that I think there would be no use
whatever in my mentioning the subject to him or in your attempting to
see him. Indeed from all I hear of the opinions & feelings which your
doctrine is exciting in those who have but recently received the Globe,
I expect that for a considerable time much obloquy will fall not only
upon the St Simonians, but even on all who venture to hint the
possibility of their being other than madmen or rogues. My saying as
much for them in the Examiner as I have done, est déjà un acte de
courage.

Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [97]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 3d. 1832

India House

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

49.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

India House

April 3d. 1832

.

My dear Sir,

I am sorry that you should think of apologizing for a proposal by which
I ought to be, and am, very much flattered. There was no brusquerie on
your side to be apologized for, but much dullness and incapacity of
speaking intelligibly on mine: as is usual when I am taken unexpectedly
and have anything to say on the spur of the moment. I learn every day by
fresh instances, that only when I have a pen in my hand can I make
language and manner the true image of my thoughts. This is not only a
fault in itself, but an index to many other faults.

What I would say now, and would have said at the moment, but for my
habitual unreadiness, is, that nothing would be more agreeable to me
than to be allowed to insert in the Monthly Repository anything I might
write which might be so fortunate as to be deemed fit for it; but that I
would avoid, as I always do, any literary engagement, wishing to write
nothing for its own sake, but always because I am led to write it by the
course of my habitual pursuits, and in execution of the general purposes
of my life. Most persons, if I were to say this to them, would set me
down as a perfect monster of affectation and self-conceit; yet it is
only putting into words what all persons ought at all times to have in
their minds, as the guiding principle of their conduct. If it were my
vocation, as it is probably yours, to instruct the general public, by
preaching, public speaking, and popular writing, I should devote myself
to it; and there is scarcely any person with whom I should be so proud
to cooperate as with yourself. But this is not what I am fittest for;
nor do I find that time renders me fitter for it, but rather the
contrary. Times and circumstances may come in which I should probably
think it my duty, however unfit, to buckle to the task, and make it, for
the time, the principal aim of my life. But at present many things, far
less conspicuously useful, but yet not unworthy that some one should
make them his chief object of intellectual pursuit, must continue to
hold the first place in my thoughts. And no one can do anything well,
Edition: current; Page: [98] in this earthly pilgrimage of ours, in
doing which he steps out of his way and delays his journey.

I will not, therefore, make any promise, nor should I feel justified in
leading you to reckon upon my offering anything to the Monthly
Repository. But what I do not undertake, it by no means follows that I
shall not do; and I was even thinking at the very time when your note
reached me, of writing something which might possibly suit the design of
the Repository. At all events, whenever I do write anything of the kind,
I can find no mode of disposing of it that would be more pleasing to me
than by giving it to the world under your auspices.2

With many thanks for the extremely delicate and flattering tenour of
your note

Believe me

Most truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24th May 1832

London

John Sterling

Sterling, John

50.


TO JOHN STERLING1

London

24th May 1832

.

My dear Sterling

The manner in which time passes over our heads without our perceiving it
is quite frightful. It is now seven months since I wrote to you, and if
I had not referred to a memorandum-book to learn the fact, I should not
have thought it was three. Absence! All persons, some few excepted, are
sufficiently prone to neglect the absent, not because they forget them,
but because there is always something to be done for things or persons
near at hand, which, it seems at the moment, will less bear to be put
off. But I think this is peculiarly a fault of mine. I neglect almost
every person whose daily life is not intermixed with my own. However
this may be, accept my confession, and believe that, notwithstanding all
appearances, you are as much and as often in my thoughts as when you
were in England.—It seems to me that there is a very great significance
in letter-writing, and that it differs from daily intercourse as the
dramatic Edition: current; Page: [99] differs from the epic or
narrative. It is the life of man, and above all the chief part of his
life, his inner life, not gradually unfolded without break or sudden
transition, those changes which take place insensibly being also
manifested insensibly; but exhibited in a series of detached scenes,
taken at considerable intervals from one another, shewing the completed
change of position or feeling, without the process by which it was
effected; affording a glimpse or partial view of the mighty river of
life at some few points, and leaving the imagination to trace to itself
such figure or scheme as it can of the course of the stream in that far
larger portion of space where it winds its way through thickets or
impenetrable forests and is invisible: this alone being known to us,
that whatever may have been its course through the wilderness, it has
had some course, & that a continuous one, & which might by human
opportunity have been watched and discovered, though to us, too
probably, destined to be for ever unknown. What wonder therefore if when
seen at these distant intervals, the stream sometimes seems to run east,
sometimes west, and its general direction remains as mysterious as that
of the Niger? Yet if such glimpses are numerous, some general tendency
shall predominate even in the few furlongs of water-way which they may
chance to disclose, and it shall not remain doubtful towards what sea,
in the long run, the waters tend to discharge themselves.

I had no idea when I began this letter, that I should yield to the habit
of moralizing and poetizing which has grown upon me. But I meant to say
something very simple. When you wrote to me, you promised a longer
letter, which was to give me some notion of a slave colony; and glad
shall I be to receive it; but after all, that will be, in itself, no
more valuable to me, than any other information on the same subject from
any person with equal opportunities and deserving of equal reliance: but
what I can have only from you, and what would be far more valuable to
me, whether resulting from a letter respecting slave colonies or from
anything else, would be a knowledge of you, namely of what has passed
and is passing in your own mind, and how far your views of the world and
feelings towards it, and all that constitutes your individuality as a
human being, are or are not the same, are or are not changed. That is
the knowledge which it is the most proper object of letters, between
friends, to communicate; otherwise if their separation is prolonged,
they cannot help becoming more or less strangers to one another.

As for myself, I doubt not but that I have much to tell you of this kind
which you, and even myself eventually, might read with interest. For I
know that there never pass seven months of my existence without change,
and that not inconsiderable or unimportant: and I really do not
recollect what my last letter to you2 was about (except that part of it
was about Wordsworth Edition: current; Page: [100] and Southey) or what
was my state of mind when I wrote it; only I remember that I must have
had much to say, since my epistle amounted to a quarto volume. It is not
of much use to write to you about politics. You of course know from the
newspapers and from your other friends through what a sea of troubles
“the Bill”3 has at last been navigated in safety to within sight of
land. You know the utter prostration or rather annihilation of the Tory
party; how all the vitality has gone out of them; they having most
unwisely chosen to make this the decisive, the final struggle; which
accordingly it is. One unspeakable blessing I now believe that we shall
owe to the events of the last ten days; to whatever consummation the
spirit which is now in the ascendant, may conduct us, there is now a
probability that we shall accomplish it through other means than anarchy
& civil war. The irresistible strength of a unanimous people has been
put forth, and has triumphed without bloodshed: it having therefore been
proved, once for all, that the people can carry their point by pacific
means, the natural and habitual reluctance of mankind to suffer and to
inflict wounds and death, yet remains and may yet remain in its pristine
strength, being no longer liable to be gradually worn away by the
perpetual recurrence of the thought & feeling that these are the
necessary though bitter means to some ardently desired end. What will
come next it is quite vain to attempt to anticipate. Much grievous
disappointment—some consequent moral and intellectual good, some
evil;—some oversetting of evil and wrong; as yet little setting up of
right; but above all a clear field to work in and a consequent duty on
all whose vocation is not different, to address themselves to the work.

With regard to our common acquaintances, most of what I have to tell is,
I think, favorable; many, and some from whom it was scarcely to be
expected, have become “sadder and wiser men.”4 By sadder, I do not mean
gloomier, or more desponding: nor even less susceptible of enjoyment, or
even gaiety; but I mean that they look upon all things with far deeper
and more serious feelings, and are far more alive to those points in
human affairs, which excite an interest bordering on melancholy. Their
earnestness, if not greater, is of a more solemn kind, and certainly far
more unmixed with dreams of personal distinction or other reward. This
is also, in a measure, the case with myself; except that, so far as
respects the last point, the change had taken place long before. I have
long since renounced any hankering for being happier than I am; and only
since then have I enjoyed anything which can be called well-being. How
few are they who have discovered the wisdom of the precept, Take no
thought of the morrow; Edition: current; Page: [101] when considered as
all the sayings of Christ should be, not as laws laid down with strict
logical precision for regulating the details of our conduct; since such
must be, like all other maxims of prudence, variable: but as the bodying
forth in words of the spirit of all morality, right self-culture, the
principles of which cannot change, since man’s nature changes not,
though surrounding circumstances do. I do not mean by using the word
self-culture, to prejudge any thing as to whether such culture can come
from man himself, or must come directly from God: all I mean is that it
is culture of the man’s self, of his feelings and will, fitting him to
look abroad and see how he is to act, not imposing upon him by express
definition, a prescribed mode of action; which it is clear to me that
many of the precepts of the Gospel, were never intended to do, being
manifestly unsuited to that end: witness that which I have just cited;
or the great one of doing to all men as you desire that they should do
to you; or of turning the left cheek &c. which last the Quakers have
made themselves ridiculous by attempting to act upon a very little more
literally than other people. All these would be vicious as moral
statutes, binding the tribunal, but they are excellent as instruction to
the judge in the forum conscientiae, in what spirit he is to look at the
evidence; what posture he must assume in order that he may see clearly
the moral bearings of the thing which he is looking at.

I have not seen, nor scarcely heard, of Maurice, since you left England.
Can you tell me anything of him? Trench5 I have seen, and had some
correspondence with. He seems to me to take a most gloomy view of the
prospects of mankind—gloomier even than yours, in your letter to Mrs
Austin who (par parenthèse) has not been very well lately, but is
recovering. Carlyle passed the whole of a long winter in London; & rose
in my opinion, more than I know how to express, from a nearer
acquaintance. I do not think that you estimate him half highly enough;
but neither did I, when I last saw you.

It was worthy of your kindness to think not only of your friend, but of
your friend’s friends, and to pick up sea-shells for them on the other
side of the globe because we had once done so together at Looe.6 It is
one of the things which so few persons would have thought of besides
yourself.

I hope and believe that I shall not again allow so long an interval to
Edition: current; Page: [102] elapse without writing to you. I had great
compunction in not writing to you when we learned the melancholy fate of
poor Torrijos7—and I should have done so, but that I am little fitted
for comforting the afflicted, and I knew not in that case, of any
comfort to administer. It was chiefly with reference to you, and to
Madame Torrijos, that it seemed to me there was ground for sorrow;
though the extinction of such a man, even when there was little more for
him to do or to enjoy, seemed like the violent blotting out of a star
from heaven.

With many kind remembrances to Mrs Sterling, believe me, affectionately
yours,

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

29th May 1832

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

51.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

29th May
1832

.

My dear Friend,

To be moderate, I will only thank you twice: once for writing, and once
for being the first to write. The good-natured excuse which you make for
my silence will not serve me: I always felt that I ought to write first,
and not you; but it always seemed that there would be some better time
for writing than the present one. In particular, I have had an unusual
number of letters to write since I saw you: and to me it appears a very
weighty matter to write a letter: there is scarcely anything that we do,
which requires a more complete possession of our faculties, in their
greatest freshness and vigour; and all the more so, because if it is
elaborate it is good for little. Besides, I knew that I was
corresponding with you, in some Edition: current; Page: [103] measure,
through the Examiner.2 All this is not intended as an excuse, but a
confession; that you may see what paltry reasons sufficed with me for
putting off the discharge of a duty. But it is very idle to complain of
my own faults, instead of mending them; as every man can, if he will;
and as I trust I yet shall, all the less slowly from having known you.

I believe I have fulfilled most of your parting injunctions; some of
them, however, less soon than I might and ought. For several weeks after
your departure, I waited for some time when it would be quite convenient
to call upon poor Glen:3 till finding that no such moment arrived, I did
at last what I might have done at first, disregarded convenience and did
the thing out of hand: and the great joy which it seemed to give him,
satisfied me not that I had done right, for I was thinking much more of
you than of him; but that you had done right in instigating me to call
upon him. Since that time we have seen each other frequently: and I have
cultivated his acquaintance the more, because he has so few persons in
London besides me who are at all able to help or encourage him. I have
been much struck by the exact manner in which every opinion that you
have ever expressed to me about him has been proved true by what I have
since seen of him; Mrs Carlyle’s opinion in so far as it differed from
yours, was, I am satisfied, entirely groundless. I am somewhat doubtful
however, how far he is capable of deriving much advantage of an
intellectual kind from the intercourse of others: his mind seems to be
always in his own thoughts and in them only; & these not matured but
extemporaneous: it seems almost time thrown away to give out thoughts to
him; he seems never to lay hold of them. But if any one could teach him
to make a proper use of his own materials, it would be doing to him an
unspeakable service, & to others much good through his means. I do not
see my way clearly to being able to assist him in this respect, but I
see that our intercourse affords some sort of satisfaction to him, and
therefore, probably does him some kind of good: what, and how much, will
doubtless in time be made manifest. He talks of writing to you, and I am
sure that it would make him extremely happy to hear from you: what he
saw of you has evidently made a very deep impression upon him.—I have
also called upon Fraser:4 only once, however; but in his case there was
not the same strong inducement: I have no doubt that we shall see more
of each other.

Edition: current; Page: [104]
Your parting gift, the paper on Biography and on Johnson,5 has been more
precious to me than I well know how to state. I have read it over and
over till I could almost repeat it by heart; and have derived from it
more edification and more comfort, than from all else that I have read
for years past. I have moreover lent it to various persons, whom I
thought likely to reap the same benefit from it, and have in no instance
been disappointed: among others, to some in whom it has created, or
increased, a most earnest desire to see and know you, and who are most
worthy that this desire should be gratified; as I trust it one day will
be, if possible through my means, unless an iron Necessity, insuperable
by the free will of man, should hereafter, as heretofore, prevent.

Thanks for what you tell me respecting your recent occupations. I look
forward with very delightful anticipations to your review of the Corn
Law Rhymer,6 and to your paper on Göthe:7 it was a disappointment to me
that the former did not appear in the last Edinburgh, though I knew it
was scarcely possible. Taylor8 tells me that Southey is writing an
article9 on the same subject, & is in communication with the author, who
is a real working man, named Reuben Elliott.10 I have seen no review of
his poems as yet, except in the Monthly Repository, the Unitarian
periodical, edited by Mr Fox, whom I conjecture to be the author of this
particular paper.11 The tone of it is very good, and there are very few
persons who could have written it, but I think it misses the most
striking aspect under which the poems can be looked at; viz. as works
which will go down to posterity as one of the principal memorials of
this age; from which a large portion of its character will be known,
which is registered in little else of a permanent nature: being chiefly
those melancholy features in the position of the working class towards
the other classes and towards the world altogether, which have impressed
upon so earnest and so loving a heart, a character of almost unrelieved
gloom, bitterness, and resentment. The poet Edition: current; Page:
[105] just shews enough of his natural character to render the
portraiture of the artificial one which is superinduced upon it more
deeply impressive. I am convinced that these poems, having, as they
have, sufficient intrinsic merit to live, will hereafter be a text for
annotations, explanations, and commentaries without end, & that future
historians, (when such, worthy of the name, shall arise) will build
largely upon it.

With respect to Göthe, there was a short obituary notice of him in the
Examiner,12 which you would not like. I could have kept it out if I
would have undertaken to write something myself, at the instant; but as
I knew my own ignorance, and would not write at haphazard, the matter
was put into the hands of those who thought they knew, & in reality did
know, more, but yet (as seems pretty obvious) not enough. The article
was made up of two fragments written by two different persons. So rare
in this country is any, even the most common-place, knowledge of
Germany, that none of the other papers gave any observations at all on
the extinction of the greatest man then living in Europe: and Bulwer in
his next number, that is in the small print, drafted his notice almost
entirely from that in the Examiner. How yours in the next number,13 will
square with it, he probably cares as little, as I dare say you do.

As you see the Examiner, you are acquainted with the greater part of
what I have been busy about, since you left us. To the papers signed
A.B.14 you must add every thing which has been written about France,
except the notices of the cholera, and a review of a trumpery pamphlet.
If you should happen to see the second number of Tait’s Magazine, you
will see in it an article of mine,15 on a book which I have also
reviewed in the Examiner16 by our acquaintance Cornewall Lewis. If you
have not seen it and will let me know how I may best send you a copy, I
will do so, though unless it interest you as being mine, it scarcely
will otherwise. On the whole, the opinions I have put forth in these
different articles are, I think, rather not inconsistent with yours,
than exactly corresponding to them; & are expressed so coldly and
unimpressively that I can scarcely bear to look back upon such poor
stuff. I have not yet come up even with my friends the St Simonians; &
it would be saying very little even if I had.

Edition: current; Page: [106]
A propos of the St Simonians, they have been obliged to give up the
Globe and everything else which they had in hand. The immediate causes
of their stoppage are certain legal obstructions which have been thrown
in their way by some of the seceding members, & a demand of 130000
francs by the Government (very insidiously allowed to reach that amount
before it was brought forward) for arrears of stamps, & penalties for
infraction of the stamp laws. In the later numbers of the Globe, there
was, I think, on the whole some evidence of improvement in their views
and feelings—Enfantin and about fifty more, among whom are our two
friends d’Eichthal and Duveyrier, have now retired to a place called
Ménilmontant at a short distance out of Paris, where they are all living
together, and are employed, as they assert, in training themselves to
preach to the world by their example, which, they are beginning to find
out, is after all the most impressive and in every way profitable aspect
of the life even of those whose vocation it is to be the Speakers of the
Word. This is decidedly un progrès, as they would say; & if you believe
them, their present state, like every thing else which has happened to
them or to any son of Adam, is for the best; that is, for the greatest
ultimate success of the St Simonian faith. It is difficult to conjecture
how far this optimism of theirs is itself a faith, or a mere trick of
self-deluding vanity, determined to put the best face upon every thing
both to themselves and others. I do not know many of the particulars of
their life at Ménilmontant; but it appears that one feature of it is to
do without domestic servants, which they consider a vestige of slavery:
& they take their turns to perform all menial offices for one another. I
do not know how they reconcile this with their maxim, à chacun selon sa
capacité, but I suppose they have some salve or other for it. Their
adoration for Enfantin seems to be on the increase rather than on the
wane; & it is well to reverence the best man they know, but I wish they
had a better still.

With regard to politics, their aspect of things has somewhat changed
since you wrote, and the momentary check sustained by radicalism has
been converted into a triumph, far more complete than could have been
achieved otherwise. The Tory party, at least the present Tory party, is
now utterly annihilated. Peace be with it. All its elevated character
had long gone out of it, and instead of a Falkland17 it had but a
Croker,18 instead of a Johnson19 nothing better than a Philpotts.20
Wellington himself found that if he meant to be minister he must be a
Whig; and the rest of his Edition: current; Page: [107] party though in
the main Whigs already, did not chuse that particular phasis of Whiggery
& determined to be nothing at all; & truly they had no very great step
to make into absolute non-entity. There is now nothing definite and
determinate in politics except radicalism; & we shall have nothing but
radicals and whigs for a long time to come, until society shall have
worked itself into some new shape, not to be exactly foreseen and
described now.

Mrs. Austin has been very far from well of late, but is nearly
recovered. She often talks of Mrs Carlyle and you. Austin began
lecturing immediately after your departure, and part of my occupation
since you went away has been in attending his lectures.21 Buller is now
here and in good health: he has written a very pleasant article in the
Foreign Quarterly Review on Prince Pückler’s book,22 which I think you
would like to read.

On the very day on which you went away, Taylor wrote to me to propose
that we should call upon you together. He is very well, and as usual,
very busy governing the West Indies: a difficult work, of which he more
than all other persons is the workman.

I am in no immediate want of the three little volumes; therefore they
may wait any convenient opportunity.

I do not think I have any more facts to tell you; and I have filled my
letter with nothing else. Another time I shall not wait for such an
accumulation of what, after all, is very secondary material for a
letter—especially between you and me, so little of whose conversation
used ever to turn upon mere incidents. Make my heartiest remembrances to
Mrs Carlyle and believe me

Most truly yours (and hers)

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

30th May 1832

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

52.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL AND CHARLES DUVEYRIER1

30th May 1832

India House

My dear d’Eichthal and Duveyrier

Nothing but the pressure of a variety of occupations has hindered me for
so long a period from writing to you; not to tell you anything, for I
Edition: current; Page: [108] have nothing to tell; but to ask for news
of you and all that you do, as I no longer have regular intelligence of
you through the Globe.2

I am unable to be with you on the first of June, as I had previously
engaged myself to pass the short vacation which this house allows me, in
a different place and in a different manner.3 And I should prefer
visiting Paris, and you, at any other time. To attend such a summons as
that which was issued in the last number of the Globe, to those who have
placed their avenir in St Simon, would be to associate and identify
myself with the St Simonians: now this would be an act of religious
dévouement, and highly meritorious, in any person who was completely
associated with you par les sentiments; but in me, it would be nothing
of the kind; and would even give a false idea of the feelings I
entertain towards your society. I did not go to Weimar to attend the
funeral of Göthe, nor to Birmingham to join the Political Union, nor to
Warsaw to encourage the Poles; yet my sympathies were with all three,
just as they are with you.

For the same & various other reasons, I did not, as Duveyrier suggested,
write a series of letters on St Simonism for the Morning Chronicle. St
Simonism is all in all to you, St Simonians; but to me it is only one
among a variety of interesting and important features in the time we
live in, & there are other subjects & other occupations which have as
great a claim upon me as it has, in themselves, & a much greater from
being, just now, more in season. St Simonism therefore must wait its
time, & you may rely that it shall have justice done to it, as far as
that is possible from my point of view, on the first favorable
opportunity.

I have been extremely pleased with the later numbers of the Globe. The
seceders from your society certainly had excellent remplaçans: Cavel,
Delaporte, and Lagarmitte4 are anything but ordinary men. Now when I
have mentioned names, I beg that when you write, you will send me the
names of all the St Simonians who have retired to Ménilmontant or who
remain in the Rue Monsigny. I shall treasure up their names, and should
like much to be acquainted with them all. Tell me all you can about each
of them in particular.

Tell me also what are your pursuits, your thoughts & projects, where you
now are. I have some knowledge of the mere exterior of your lives from
Edition: current; Page: [109] Duveyrier’s letter to Mrs Crellin, but I
want to know what you are meditating, what are your studies, & travaux
d’élaboration, now that you are not propagating your ideas among the
public. This temporary secession might be for you the occasion of un
grand progrès. I suppose that a St Simonian can learn only from his own
thoughts or those of other St Simonians; but I who am not a St Simonian,
though I greatly admire the St Simonians, & think that they are in many
respects far ahead of all Europe, am yet firmly convinced that you have
yet much to learn, in political economy from the English economists
(inferior as they are to you in many points) and in the philosophy of
history, literature and the arts, from the Germans. Certainly I think
you have far surpassed all these people in some things, but have fallen
far short of them in others: & that a more diligent study of them would
change some of your opinions, and suggest to you many positive thoughts
of great value, which would bring down some of your generalities &
abstractions into detail.

I did as d’Eichthal wished in regard to Father Enfantin’s parting
address: after ascertaining that Black5 would print it, I translated it
for him & it appeared in the Morning Chronicle6 (it was however very
incorrectly printed). With regard to the delay in my letter which
appeared in the Globe,7 you are, I suppose, aware that Desprat8 kept it
for a fortnight or three weeks, in expectation of an opportunity. It was
very well translated, though with some omissions & abbreviations which
made it rather more St Simonian than I intended.

I wrote two letters to Adolphe d’Eichthal9 during our crise politique,
which contained all I had to say on that subject. I shall write to him a
longer letter very shortly, & request him to shew it to Gustave.

All your friends here, whom I know, are very well. I have seen Mrs
Crellin twice; elle est très intéressante. Write soon & often, now you
have leisure. Ever yours

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [110]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 29th 1832

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

53.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

June 29th
1832

My dear Gustave

The object of my present letter is not to tell you news, for I have none
to tell; nor to discuss, for I have not time. It is merely to thank you
for your letter; to say how glad I always am to hear from you, and how
much I wish that the exalted destiny which you still believe to await
you, may be realized; to send you two numbers of the Examiner in
continuation of those which I hope you have already received through
Desprat; & to beg you to ask of Duveyrier the two following questions;

1st. What he did with the ticket to the library of the London
Institution:2 William Prescott to whom it belongs, has asked me for it.

2dly. Whether he has done with my Examiners for 1831 and the beginning
of 1832.

The gentleman who takes this letter will bring any thing back. He will
be at Paris for a week or two, and his address is, Mr Rowland
Mackenzie,3 chez M. Roy, Route de Choisy, Barrière d’Italie.

Many remembrances to Duveyrier, and to all friends. In your letter you
say that you send me the list of the inhabitants of your retreat at
Ménilmontant, but it has not reached me.

Believe me
 Most truly yours

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

17th July 1832

London

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

54.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

London

,
17th July 1832

My dear friend

Many thanks for your little note.2 I hope this letter will find all your
perplexities at an end, and the paper on Göthe3 proceeding smoothly, or
perhaps long since finished and sent off. I recognise in your account of
Edition: current; Page: [111] what was passing in your mind, a very
perfect picture of what I often experience in mine; especially if I
attempt to give a general view of any great subject, when I feel bound
not merely to say something true, but to omit nothing which is material
to the truth. I also participate in what you call your superstition,
about never turning back when one has begun. Were it not that imperfect
and dim light is yet better than total darkness, there would be little
encouragement to attempt enlightening either oneself or the world. But
the real encouragement is, that he who does the best he can, always does
some good, even when in his direct aim he totally fails. For although
the task which we undertake is, to speak a certain portion of precious
Truth, and instead of speaking any Truth at all, it is possible our
light may be nothing but a feu follet, and we may leave ourselves and
others no wiser than we found them; still, that any one sincere mind,
doing all it can to gain insight into a thing, and endeavouring to
declare truthfully all it sees, declares this (be it what it may), is
itself a truth; no inconsiderable one; which at least it depends upon
ourselves to be fully assured of, and which is often not less, sometimes
perhaps more, profitable to the hearer or reader, than much sounder
doctrine delivered without intensity of conviction. And this is one
eternal and inestimable preeminence (even in the productions of pure
Intellect) which the doings of an honest heart possess over those men of
the strongest and most cultivated powers of mind when directed to any
other end in preference to, or even in conjunction with, Truth. He who
paints a thing as he actually saw it, though it were only by an optical
illusion, teaches us, if nothing else, at least the nature of Sight, and
of spectra and phantasms: but if somebody has not seen, or even believed
that he saw, anything at all, but has merely thrown together objects and
colours at random or to gain some point, it is all false and hollow, and
nobody is the wiser or better, or ever can be so, from what has been
done, but may be greatly the more ignorant, more confused, and worse.

I have read your little paper on Göthe in Bulwer’s Magazine.4 There was
little in it which I had not already heard from your lips, otherwise
there are passages which would if they had been entirely new to me, have
excited me to much thought, and may therefore do that service to any
other mind which is prepared for them. I do not myself, as yet,
sufficiently know Göthe, to feel certain that he is the great High
Priest and Pontiff you describe him; I know him as yet only as one of
the wisest men, and men of greatest genius, whom the world has yet
produced; but if he be not all that you say he is, certainly no other
man has arisen in our times, who can even for a moment be suspected of
being so. In him alone, of all the celebrated men of this and the last
age, does a more familiar knowledge, Edition: current; Page: [112] and
the growth of our own faculties, discover more and more to be admired
and less and less to be rejected or even doubted of. Who shall succeed
him? or when shall he find even an unworthy successor. There is need
that the “march of mind” should raise up new spiritual notabilities; for
it seems as though all the old ones with one accord were departing out
of the world together. In a few days or weeks the world has lost the
three greatest men in it, in their several departments; Göthe, Bentham,
and Cuvier;5 & during the same period what a mortality among those
second-rate great men, who are generally in their own time much more
celebrated than the first, because they take pains to be so; such men as
Casimir Périer, or Mackintosh,6 or Sir William Grant,7 or General
Lamarque,8 or the last of Scotch judges, John Clerk of Eldin,9 or even
(to descend low indeed) Charles Butler.10 And here is Sir Walter Scott
about to follow.11 I sometimes think that instead of mountains and
valleys, the domain of Intellect is about to become a dead flat, nothing
greatly above the general level, nothing very far below it. It is
curious that this particular time, in which there are fewer great
intellects above ground and in their vigour, than can be remembered for
many ages back, should be the precise time at which every body is
cackling about the progress of intelligence and the spread of knowledge.
I do believe that intelligence and knowledge are less valued just now,
except for purposes of money-making, than at any other period since the
Norman Conquest, or possibly since the invasion of the Romans. I mean,
in our own country. But even in Germany, the great men seem to have died
out, though much of their spirit remains after them, and is, we will
hope, permanently fixed in the national character.

I have not been idle since my last letter, but have rather read, than
either meditated or written: all that I have written you must have seen
in the Examiner; it consists of sundry papers on French politics and two
long articles on Pledges,12 which are in very bad odour with some of our
Edition: current; Page: [113] radicals. It is a proof of the honest and
brave character of Fonblanque, that he wished to have these articles:
every thing he ever prints that does not chime in with common-place
radicalism, costs him money; his paper is in a perpetual alternation of
slowly working its way upwards by its liveliness and ability and then
tumbling plump down all at once by some act of honesty. I do not know
that this has happened in the present case, but I have little doubt of
it.

I am about to make a short ramble in the country just now,13 after which
I shall return to work, and I hope with more solid and valuable results
than I have hitherto done: that so I may produce something worthy of the
title you give me, and in which I rejoice, that of one of your scholars.
You also call me one of your teachers; but if I am this, it is as yet
only in the sense in which a schoolmaster might speak of his teachers,
meaning those who teach under him. I certainly could not now write, and
perhaps shall never be able to write, any thing from which any person
can derive so much edification as I, and several others, have derived in
particular from your paper on Johnson.14 My vocation, as far as I yet
see, lies in a humbler sphere; I am rather fitted to be a logical
expounder than an artist. You I look upon as an artist, and perhaps the
only genuine one now living in this country: the highest destiny of all,
lies in that direction; for it is the artist alone in whose hands Truth
becomes impressive, and a living principle of action. Yet it is
something not inconsiderable (in an age in which the understanding is
more cultivated and developed than any of the other faculties, & is the
only faculty which men do not habitually distrust) if one could address
them through the understanding, & ostensibly with little besides mere
logical apparatus, yet in a spirit higher than was ever inspired by mere
logic, and in such sort that their understandings shall at least have to
be reconciled to those truths, which even then will not be felt until
they shall have been breathed upon by the breath of the artist. For, as
far as I have observed, the majority even of those who are capable of
receiving Truth into their minds, must have the logical side of it
turned first towards them; then it must be quite turned round before
them, that they may see it to be the same Truth in its poetic that it is
in its metaphysical aspect. Now this is what I seem to myself qualified
for, if for any thing, or at least capable of qualifying myself for; and
it is thus that I may be, and therefore ought to be, not useless as an
auxiliary even to you, though I am sensible that I can never give back
to you the value of what I receive from you.

I have no news worth telling you; scarcely any news of any kind. Mrs.
Edition: current; Page: [114] Austin is quite recovered. Charles Buller
is now in Cornwall; he was a little indisposed when he set out, but is
now I trust in good health. Pray make my most friendly remembrances to
Mrs. Carlyle, and let me hear from you in due season.

Yours ever faithfully,

J. S. Mill.

Glen bids me tell you that he has heard from your brother,15 who is at
Naples, very well, and comfortable. I told Glen that you had made
affectionate mention of him in your letter, at which he seemed much
gratified.16

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug., 1832

Harriet Taylor

Taylor, Harriet

55.


TO HARRIET TAYLOR1

[
Aug., 1832

?]

Benie soit la main qui a tracé ces caractères! Elle m’a écrit—il suffit;
bien que je ne me dissimule pas que c’est pour me dire un éternel adieu.

Cette adieu, qu’elle ne croie pas que je l’accepte jamais. Sa route et
la mienne sont séparées, elle l’a dit: mais elles peuvent, elles
doivent, se rencontrer. A quelqu’époque, dans quelqu’endroit, que ce
puisse être, elle me trouvera toujours ce que j’ai été, ce que je suis
encore.

Elle sera obéie: mes lettres n’iront plus troubler sa tranquillité, ou
verser une goutte de plus dans la coupe de ses chagrins. Elle sera
obéie, par les motifs qu’elle donne,—elle le serait quand même elle se
serait bornée à me communiquer ses volontés. Lui obéir est pour moi une
nécessité.

Elle ne refusera pas, j’espère, l’offrande de ces petites fleurs, que
j’ai apportées pour elle du fond de la Nouvelle-Forêt. Donnez-les lui
s’il le faut, de votre part.

Edition: current; Page: [115]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday Sept. 1, 1832

John Taylor

Taylor, John

56.


TO JOHN TAYLOR1

Saturday [Sept. 1, 1832]

I.H.

My dear Sir

Two acquaintances of mine, MM. Jules Bastide2 and Hippolyte Dussard,3
distinguished members of the republican party in France, have been
compelled to fly their country for a time in consequence of the affair
of the fifth & sixth of June. They were not conspirators, for there was
no conspiracy, but when they found the troops and the people at blows,
they took the side of the people. Now I am extremely desirous to render
their stay here as little disagreeable as possible, and to enable them
to profit by it, and to return with a knowledge of England and with
those favourable sentiments towards our English hommes du mouvement
which it is of so much importance that they and their friends should
entertain. I am particularly desirous of bringing them in contact with
the better members of the Political Union, that they may not suppose our
men of action to be all of them like the Revells and the Murphys whom
they saw and heard on Wednesday last.4 Yourself and Mr. Fox are [the]5
persons I should most wish them to see. But I do not like to give them a
letter of introduction to you without first ascertaining whether it
would be agreeable to yourself. Will you therefore oblige me with a line
to say, if possible, that you will allow me to tell them to call upon
you, or otherwise to say that you would rather not. I have not mentioned
the matter to them, nor shall I do so until I have the pleasure of
hearing from you.

Ever truly yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [116]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13th September, 1832

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

57.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

13th September, 1832

My dear Mutterlein

How could you so far misunderstand me as to suppose that it could be a
question with me whether I would sacrifice two days to you? I thought
that it would be sacrificing two days of you. That was one reason among
others why I wished you to be consulted.

The letter I have received this morning from Polvellen, & which informs
me of the cause which will unfortunately keep you there for some time
longer,2 decides the question, & I shall not set out from this place
till Thursday next. I do not expect to be at Devonport before Saturday,
as I shall probably take Bath in my way & bring on Roebuck along with
me.

But remember that whatever may happen, I stay at Polvellen no longer
than you do. So you must either stay there to the end of my time or be
punished for suspecting me by knowing that you carry me off prematurely.

The letters which accompany this have been here (one of them at least)
some time in expectation of some opportunity for conveying them. But I
believe there was no urgency. I have sent to Tait’s Magazine (for the
number which will appear on the 1st of next month) a notice of Mr.
Austin’s book,3 which though it is but short you will I think be pleased
with—& what I value much more, you will be pleased with me for writing
it.

Affectionately yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

17th September 1832

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

58.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

17th September 1832

My dear Carlyle

You did me but justice in supposing that I had for some time been in
hopes of a letter from you before I received your last.2 When it
arrived, it found me in a state of as impatient expectation as one
should be in Edition: current; Page: [117] for an event which does not
depend upon oneself. I plead guilty to having neglected the biographical
department, having nothing to relate which seemed important to myself,
and forgetting that all news is important to those who can see nothing
and have few opportunities even of hearing. To begin therefore with
myself, not only as the person whom I see oftenest and with whom I am
most intimate, but as almost the only person (known to you) whom I have
seen for the last two months, all others having long been absent from
this Babylon, or at least Babel, of ours.—Your letter found me still in
London, where I still am, but where I hope to be no longer after
Thursday next. I had not promised to pass more than a fortnight of my
holydays with the Bullers, & not wishing to lose entirely the benefit of
the long summer days, I made a walking tour for a previous fortnight
about the end of July, & then returned to allow others to be absent; and
have been kept in town ever since. During this interval of from five to
six weeks, I have worked if not harder, yet with more obvious fruits
than I have done during any period of equal length for years past,
having begun and finished three several papers on subjects extremely
various. The first & longest is a political and moral dissertation on
the rights and duties of the state with regard to endowments for public
purposes,3 or what you call in Scotland mortifications, including the
estates of ecclesiastical & other corporations, universities, &c. This
will appear in the Jurist, a quarterly journal or review of Legislation
& Jurisprudence, carried on by several friends of mine,
radical-utilitarians of a better than the ordinary sort, of whom I think
sufficiently well to be able to cooperate with them in their own field
of usefulness, though perhaps they would not always join me in mine. The
second & shortest of my three articles, I have sent to Tait; it is a
short review of Mr Austin’s book on Jurisprudence,4 & was chiefly
intended as a recommendation of that work, though there is besides, some
“doctrinal matter” as Napier5 I suppose would call it, & a good deal of
critical matter. Finally, I have written a rambling kind of article,6 in
which many, I will not say great, but big things are said on a small
occasion, namely in the form of strictures on a well-meaning but flimsy
article which recently appeared in the Monthly Repository. Touching this
Monthly Repository7 let me here say two or three words, as you probably
do not know what it is. Till lately it was conducted by a Committee of
Unitarian ministers & was a sectarian publication, the “Evangelical
Magazine” of Edition: current; Page: [118] the Unitarians. Not long
since, it was placed under the editorship, & soon after became the
property of Mr. Fox, the same who has figured in the Political Union in
London, and who, though no Göthe or Jean-Paul, is fit for better things
than to be either a Unitarian preacher or a radical orator. Since the
M.R. has been under his management, it has gradually divested itself of
its sectarian character, and is much improved in all respects, though
the editor & his writers are very far from seeing to the bottom of
things yet. They are but Unitarians & liberals, unsectarianized, & with
a larger & more tolerant spirit than common. Into my first parcel of
books I will put some numbers of this periodical, which will, I think,
like Bulwer’s,8 acquaint you with a new phasis of mind: at least I know
nothing that is exactly like it, & among the persons whom Mr Fox most
frequents I have met with several men & women who are decidedly
characters, realizing an idea of their own & free from halfness of all
sorts. I am not sure, indeed that much of this individuality appears in
the Monthly Repository. When you next come to town I think you would
like to know some of these people, as they also would to know you, for
they are mostly great admirers of your writings, which however I am very
doubtful whether they would find so much to their liking if they
understood them thoroughly. As for this article of mine, those who best
know me will see more character in it than in anything I have ever
published; other people will never guess it to be mine. You, I hope,
will find all the three articles true, the only praise I covet, &
certainly rarer than any other in our times. But in this last you will
find many things which I never saw, or never saw clearly till they were
shewn to me by you, nor even for some time after. I think that the M.R.
is read by persons with open improvable minds, & that ideas thrown among
them will find soil in which to germinate; especially as they read their
own magazines for doctrine, & others only for amusement. You see I
adhere to my system, which is to be as particular in the choice of my
vehicles, as you are indiscriminate, & I think we are both right. Do not
buy any of these things; I will send them to you, with the exception
perhaps of the no. of Tait, which in order to send I must first buy, &
which would be a sorry half-crown’s worth either to you or me; and which
moreover will not like claret improve by travelling, nor be taken in
gratis as ballast.

Every man’s work is the chief part of his life, and since my return to
town it has been the whole of mine, except some little reading, which is
also in some sort work. Among things read “during the period under
review,” as we at this house say in our despatches, are to be numbered
your two articles on the Corn Law Rhymer and on Göthe.9 The former I
Edition: current; Page: [119] found true: the latter I believe to be so,
rather on your authority & from such knowledge as I myself have of Göthe
than from what is said of him in the article: it does not, I think,
carry so much of its own evidence with it as might have been wished:
whether more might have been done is a question on which I can only
express a doubt. In the meantime, I think I can perceive that your
writings are making some way; awakening, though but partially, some
minds. At least I find more people than before, or certainly more than I
knew of, who do not dismiss them at once as “mysticism”, “raving”, &c.
&c. &c.

The Austins are still at Polvellen, where Mr. Austin has had two
successive attacks of illness, from the last of which he had not
completely recovered when I last heard. Mrs Austin was busy translating
Falk’s memoir of Göthe;10 & Charles Buller was writing an article for
the Foreign Quarterly, on I know not what subject, which he had delayed
beginning till they were obliged to shut him up for some hours a day for
the express purpose: so at least says Mrs Buller. I have seen Glen but
twice since I came to town, once for a moment only. He did not, it
seems, write anything about Fanny Kemble. The paper therefore to which
you allude must be the work of Diabolus.11 I think he (Glennus not
Diabolus) seemed less uneasy in mind than formerly; this might be
accidental: in other respects he is much the same. It always seems to
please him much when he hears that you continue to take interest in him.

You will have learnt from an article of mine in the Examiner,12 the only
one I have written for the last two months, that our friends the St
Simonians have been tried. Enfantin, Chevalier & Duveyrier have been
sentenced to a year’s imprisonment & a fine: Barrault13 & Rodrigues14
only to a trifling fine. They were convicted on the charge of forming a
society for the discussion of political & religious subjects without
leave of the government, & also on a charge of preaching immoral
doctrines, a charge founded on the theory of la femme libre.15 There
were other charges on which they were Edition: current; Page: [120]
acquitted. Duveyrier is said to have made a very striking defence:
Enfantin’s seems to have made little impression except that of the
ludicrous. There was much in the conduct of them all, which really one
cannot help suspecting of quackery. In the witness-box, none of them
would take the oath without Enfantin’s permission: this he refused, on
the ground that the name of God is not mentioned in the form of the
oath. In defending himself, he several times made a long pause pour
attendre des inspirations, & he gave strange looks at various people, to
shew as he said the power of a look. The St Simonians all wear beards,
and a peculiar costume, & marched to the place of trial in a body,
singing if I recollect right, a succession of hymns, written and set to
music by themselves. Enfantin claimed to have two women as his counsel,
one of whom was Cecile Fournel,16 who you may remember protested so
vehemently against the immorality of his doctrines, but who has since,
with her husband,17 returned into the bosom of his church. When one
remembers Irving, one believes that all this may be sincere. Yet surely
there is an admixture of charlatanerie in it, I mean on the part of the
Supreme Father.

Adolphe d’Eichthal has been here; I saw him for a few minutes only: he
has had the cholera, & looked in very indifferent health.

Now as to books. I have not either Dumont or Babbage,18 but I expect to
have the former very soon; when I do I will send it. My own collection
of books is a very strange one: it consists partly of books collected
when I was writing on some particular subject; these are chiefly on the
French Revolution, & French political history from Louis 14th downwards:
& partly of books which I bought because they were not to be found in my
father’s library: which accounts for my having scarcely any standard
English or French prose books. I am richest in the minor & the very
recent French writers. I have most of the standard German & Italian
books; the former you do not want, nor probably the latter. I have
various classics, chiefly the poets, as my father cares less about them.
For the same reason, I have many of the later English poets, whom my
father despises. I am rich in no other department nor can I give any
general idea of my other books.

Edition: current; Page: [121]
I have not yet received the books you took with you, but as I have not
particularly wanted them I have not enquired at Longman’s,19 & I will
give them a fortnight’s grace till I return. I have not yet hit upon any
arrangement that would do, for sending you the Examiner, but I hope to
find the means when I return to town. The only copy I have of my own, I
keep for reference, and cannot well do without: the only inconvenience
of sending it, would be that it must be sent back, but that is a
sufficiently considerable one to induce me to seek for some other
expedient before I resort to this, which may remain in reserve, as a
last resort.

Fonblanque is better, but not yet strong or well. He is at present in
the country. He goes on writing with his usual fertility, but I think he
feels himself a little at fault in the altered situation of politics, &
it is creditable to him that he is conscious of it. If coincidence were
proof of causation, I should say that the pledge-mania had been abated
by the tone which his paper has taken respecting it. What may be true
is, that the Examiner has furnished arguments to those who were not
disposed to give pledges, & has shewn that a person may refuse them
without being a Tory & all that is wicked, a tax-eater & what not. I
finish this letter in the presence of my friend John Wilson, who offers
to be the bearer of it as far as Edinburgh, but as he is not going
nearer to you I prefer availing myself of a Government frank which I can
generally have for the asking. With best remembrances to Mrs Carlyle,
believe me

Yours ever faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

18 October 1832

India House

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

59.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

India House

18 October
1832

.

My dear Sir

My friend André Marchais, who pays me the compliment of making me the
depository and instrument of all the plans he forms for bringing about a
good understanding between the patriotic party in France and the best of
the English radicals, has suggested something which appears to me
Edition: current; Page: [122] highly important and to which, if you
think well of it, you have it in your power to be mainly instrumental.

You are aware of the virulent and unceasing persecution which
Louis-Philippe keeps up against the liberal press, insomuch that the
Tribune has been prosecuted between sixty & seventy times. Out of the
first sixty prosecutions, resulted even against this violent paper only
five verdicts: but though the prosecutors succeed only in one case out
of twelve, the Court imposes such heavy fines that the liberal press
cannot long exist under such oppression and the editors are almost
always in prison. An association has therefore been formed at Paris, of
which my excellent friend Marchais is the secretary, for the purpose
generally of promoting the liberty of the press, and specially of
raising subscriptions to pay the fines. You will find the prospectus of
the Association in the third page of the enclosed Courrier Français.

Now those among the French patriots who know enough of the English
radicals to desire their cooperation & sympathy are anxious to obtain
subscribers in England for this association, and above all they wish
that the Political Unions should bear some public testimony of sympathy
and fraternity on this important occasion. No one can do more than you
can to bring both these things about, and no one can judge more soundly
what would be the best mode of doing it.

The more you see & converse with French people, the more importance you
will attach to things of this kind. Every such mark of sympathy produces
a great momentary effect; but they require to be, again & again,
repeated: for so few Frenchmen ever come here, that they do not learn,
except from such public occurrences, that the English people, all but
the Tories,2 esteem, and wish well to, the French. Bastide, for example,
came over as he confesses, full of prejudice against the English, but is
already quite an altered man & is most eager to convince those of his
countrymen who have never been here, that the English are not as many
Frenchmen think, aristocrats at heart even to a man, & full of jealousy
& selfish animosity against France.

I am anxious to say many things to you about this & other matters
connected with it, & particularly to engage most earnestly your good
offices in favour of Dussard & Bastide; to give the one all the
consolations possible in his exile, & the other every means of knowing
England, as he has begun a most interesting correspondence with the
French journals which from his high standing in the republican party
will carry weight. But of this hereafter as of much else which ought to
be in common between us two.

Ever faithfully yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [123]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

20th October 1832

India House

William Bridges Adams

Bridges Adams, William

60.


TO [WILLIAM BRIDGES ADAMS]1

India House

20th October 1832

My dear friend

I should have returned the Preface2 immediately after receiving your
note; but I had it not at this house, & all yesterday I was too much
engaged to be able to write to you. Now, however, I send the MS. with
the very few pencil marks which you will find on it. I am glad that you
want it, as I suppose I may conclude that the work itself is nearly or
quite finished.

I am as desirous as you can possibly be, that we should meet & converse
frequently at some length, and I had declined a very pressing &
agreeable invitation for Friday3 rather than put you off again—do not be
angry with me—it was not from “punctilious ceremony” which I should
never think of observing with a friend; but because I feared that you
would think I was indifferent to your repeated invitation, & that I did
not feel the value of friendship like yours. However the obstacle this
time came from your side & I consequently was able to accept the other
invitation, therefore do not regret that you happened to be engaged.

What you say respecting myself in your note I know you feel, and it is
therefore very precious to me. We two possess what, next to community of
purpose, is the greatest source of friendship between minds of any
capacity; this is, not equality, for nothing can be so little
interesting to a man as his own double; but, reciprocal superiority.
Each of us knows many things which the other knows not, & can do many
things which the other values but cannot himself do, or not so well.
There is also just that difference of character between us which renders
us highly valuable to Edition: current; Page: [124] each other in
another way for I require to be warmed, you perhaps occasionally to be
calmed. We are almost as much the natural complement of one another as
man and woman are: we are far stronger together than separately, &
whatever both of us agree in, has a very good chance, I think, of being
true. We are therefore made to encourage and assist one another. Our
intimacy is its own reward, & we have only to consider in what way it
may be made most useful to both of us.

Never express any regret at taking up my time with any of your
productions. I will not, (because I know you would not wish it) postpone
to them, anything which is really of more immediate urgency: I say more
immediate, because no employment of my time can be in itself better or
more useful. I know of no one man now living who, take him for all in
all, has a larger share of the qualifications (opportunity being
included) for effecting unspeakable good, than you have; at the same
time I feel that this good may be unboundedly increased by association &
collision with other minds, & that for this advantage you are thrown
principally on me, because your incognito4 cuts you off from so many
others from whom you might derive much of the same benefit. Although I
agree with you in thinking that on the whole the reasons predominate in
favor of your remaining unknown, I often regret that you are cut off by
it from any certain knowledge how many more persons there are than you
are aware of, who are qualified morally & intellectually to think, act,
and feel with you. In your loathing of the very idea of being patronized
I can fully sympathize—but you are in no danger of that; because you are
not a littérateur who administers to people’s amusement, but a thinker &
writer whose doings affect their substantial interests, & who therefore
when you are not valued & esteemed, will be disliked & feared, but at
least always treated de puissance en puissance. Moore5 or Campbell6
might be patronized, but Place7 or Cobbett never could, because nobody
ever gives himself airs with persons who have power of their own,
independent of, & for some purposes paramount to his.

Believe me
 Yours ever faithfully

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [125]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

22d October 1832

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

61.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

22d October 1832

My dear Carlyle

When I received your last,2 I was on the point of writing to you, for
the special purpose (in addition to all general ones) of giving you
intimation of the existence of a person who is willing to undertake for
the punctual transmission of the Examiner by Monday’s post on the
condition on which such things are frequently done, namely that he and
you shall each pay half the subscription. You have therefore this
resource in case of need, and though I have no experience by which to
judge of the punctuality of the person in question, I will undertake to
rebuke him for every breach of it which may be notified to me from you.
As you surmise, I have written nothing in the Examiner lately, except a
little article relating among other things to the trial of the St
Simonians.3 I write nothing regularly for the Examiner except the
articles on French affairs: everything else is the exception, not the
rule; and even of those little notices of France in the middle of the
paper, there has been a suspension since July last, owing partly to my
two absences from town, & partly to the uninteresting nature of all the
passing events in that country. The same post however which brings you
this letter, will bring an article of mine on the Doctrinaires & the new
French Ministry,4 & from this time you may expect to see these notices
resumed. As for other newspaper-writing, it has been suspended by the
more serious work mentioned in my last letter to you, which being over,
other things will now have once more their turn.

What you say of Fonblanque is partly true,5 or rather it is all true,
but not the whole truth. It is only accident that makes him attach
himself to Politics, but the bent & character of his mind renders war
against the False his vocation instead of effort towards the True. He is
essentially a commentator Edition: current; Page: [126] on sophistry,
hypocrisy, and folly. Under other circumstances he might have been a
writer on manners or morals, not politics, but it would always have been
in the same way: he used to write such things in the London Magazine &
other periodicals formerly. He has no systematic or solid acquirements,
& now unfortunately has no leisure to supply that want. To no one would
it be more important to “have leave to sit wholly silent for some three
years from this date, till he shall have got to the bottom of many
things.”6 But, as you too truly say, jacta est alea; he must toil day
and night to gain a subsistence by giving out what is in him, never
stopping to take in more; even that problem is a hard enough one,
determined as he is to have nothing to do with Lying in any form, and
having other mouths to feed besides his own, with, I greatly fear,
little prudence in pecuniary matters to keep his course which is impeded
by so many unavoidable obstacles, clear of any avoidable ones.

I will immediately send you Thiers’s History of the French Revolution7
with perhaps some other French books, and some numbers of the Fox
periodical.8 What you say of Unitarians9 is true of them as a class, but
not of every individual among them. They seem to me to be a conceited
sect, who think that God has given them a book for their guidance and
that yet they are so wise that they can set the book itself right when
it tells them anything different from what they could have found out of
themselves. Fox, however, is not a half-man, but three quarters of a man
at least: I do not know him sufficiently to be able to affirm more, but
what I do know, makes me feel sure that a time will come when he will
part company with Unitarianism and Unitarian preaching. I am satisfied
that he would have done it long ago but that a Unitarian preacher may
preach almost anything he pleases. It is the sort of necessity he is
under of addressing himself to a set of Pharisaical formalists and
word-mongers twice every Sunday when he could find fitter audience
elsewhere, that will ultimately disgust him with his present ostensible
calling. As for his political speeches, I only know them as you do by
bad reports, very bad indeed, for they make the speeches feeble, when
all who ever heard them concur in saying that they are very powerful &
effective. But his politics are but a small part of himself, & few
people so well qualified to have influence over others in that walk,
overvalue its importance so little. Him among others you should know
personally, & Edition: current; Page: [127] the first time you are in
London this among many other good works of the same sort do I reserve
for myself to bring about. I do not think he writes much in his own
Magazine. One paper “An Autumn in London”10 I know to be his; it is very
unlike his usual manner, but shews greater powers of a certain sort than
I think he commonly evinces. The articles on Goethe are by Crabbe
Robinson,11 you therefore know all that is in them. A curious sort of
man, Talfourd12 the barrister, who wrote the paper on Hazlitt in the
Examiner13 (interesting but hollow & unsatisfactory) told me the other
day that Goethe must be an impostor because Robinson praises him so
highly. N.B. Talfourd admires Schiller exceedingly in Coleridge’s
translation.14

The Westminster Reviewer whom you are curious about is
Lieutenant-Colonel T. Perronet Thompson, author of various pamphlets on
Political Economy, part proprietor & now almost sole writer of the
Westminster Review. He is a man of very extensive acquirements, besides
having seen much of the world. Among other things he is a considerable
mathematician, & has written what I believe to be the only good
systematic book ever written on the physical principles of Music.15 That
book is the only work of his I ever saw which shews him to be capable of
looking at more than one single aspect of each individual thing. He has
an understanding like a pin, going very far into a thing, but never
covering a larger portion of it than the area of a pin’s point. He is a
singular man, very clever in his way, & possessed of a rare faculty of
familiarly illustrating & pushing into every corner of a large &
complicated subject the one idea which is all he ever has thereon. From
his writings you would judge him to be much of a coxcomb, from his
conversation & demeanour one of the most modest of men. He is the most
unalloyed of Radicals past, present, & to come, in every acceptation of
that title whether among men or gods.

Tait, I am inclined to think, will succeed: narrow as it is, there is
more heartiness and resolvedness about that magazine than about
Bulwer’s,16 or any other so-called Liberal periodical now going. Then it
is radical, which Edition: current; Page: [128] the others are not, & so
far better adapted to the inclinations of the mass. There is besides I
think, a possibility of improvement in those writers: they have nothing
or but little to give up, only to take in a wider range. I know none of
them personally except one, that one however has written most of their
best articles; he is an early & valued friend of mine, whom I once
thought incurably narrow, but who has made such advances within the last
eighteen months that I have the greatest hopes of him: Roebuck, who has
lately made so much noise at Bath.17 If No 3 of Tait, & the number for
this month (October) should fall in your way, it may be interesting to
you to run through his two articles on Rousseau.18 Though you will
desiderate much that is not there, yet if you know our Benthamic
Utilitarians, you will acknowledge that it requires much vigour of
intellect in one trained in that school, to be capable of writing those
articles they are so unlike all that he can have learned from his
instructors. I shall be much surprised if he do not turn out to be one
of the very few men whom we have any chance of seeing in politics for an
indefinite period. He has a strength of will which has had no parallel
in that field since Napoleon. Would not a Napoleon-idéologue be an odd
combination?

On the whole there are scarcely any left of the old narrow school of
Utilitarians; what now distinguishes those who were so, (besides that as
you say they were the reoriginators of any belief among us) is that they
are decidedly less narrow than almost any other persons who aspire to
the character of Thinkers in this country. The character of the school
if such it could be termed, was to see clearly what they did see, though
it was but little. This quality I have hopes that they will retain, as
their views expand. You say that young minds do not end as they began;
but besides this, the young minds have already far larger views than the
old. Among those whom I know, the older a man is, the more of his belief
is negative, & the less he thinks it worth while for him to throw his
mind into that of any other man, or look at Truth from any other man’s
position. None however of them all has become so unlike what he once was
as I myself, who originally was the narrowest of them all, having been
brought up more exclusively under the influence of a peculiar kind of
impressions than any other person ever was. Fortunately however I was
not crammed; my own thinking faculties were called into strong though
but partial play; & by their means I have been enabled to remake all my
opinions.

Charles Buller is not only sure of Liskeard,19 but is at this time one
of the most popular and important men in the Eastern Division of
Cornwall; Edition: current; Page: [129] he speaks at all the meetings
where the radical candidates face their constituents, & always makes the
best speech of the day. Unhappily his health continues delicate &
uncertain; & he has not acquired what was chiefly deficient in him, the
power of continued & persevering application to business. I almost
despair of his ever doing anything considerable, for want of this one
quality. All the members for the Eastern Division of Cornwall, both
county & towns, will be radicals, with perhaps one exception. It is a
good genial kind of radicalism, that of the Cornish people, not mere
hunger speaking out its cravings in maxims of politics. The rest of the
Buller family are in their usual condition of mind, & body, & estate.

Austin was very ill for a time in Cornwall but recovered, & was
completely set up in health & spirits by a little tour to the Land’s End
in which I accompanied him & Mrs Austin.20 Her silence therefore cannot
be occasioned by any untoward circumstance, but probably by her
translation of Falk, about which she is very busy. I go there tonight to
help resolve some doubts about a metaphysical chapter. I must resolve
them in my own head first for it is a chapter which I was able to make
nothing of when I tried it at Polvellen. I doubt not that she will
speedily write; you & Mrs Carlyle are perpetually in her thoughts &
frequently on her lips. I have not seen Glen since my return, but will
very speedily call on him if he does not on me. I will also call on
Fraser21 whom I have not seen at all this summer.—Tell me when you go to
Edinburgh, & where to address you there. We must as you say, see
Edinburgh together one day, & (I will add) soon. If it be in summer,
that will be a more convenient mode to me of passing a vacation in your
company than visiting you at Craigenputtoch. There are several reasons
for this.

Ever yours affectionately

J. S. Mill.

I understand from Napier’s son that the books were sent, the neglect
therefore is at Longman’s & the remedy is in my own hands.—The St
Simonians are not yet in prison, having appealed to the Court of
Cassation: more of them hereafter. They have in the press (or by this
time out of it) a full account of their trial: They will doubtless send
it to me, & so will I to you. The article on them in the Westminster
Review22 is as you surmise by the man I told you of, Col. Thompson. I
look forward with great interest to your paper on Diderot:23 I have long
wished for such a Edition: current; Page: [130] paper from you. Buller
has written a paper for the same review (it is out by this time) on the
reign of Louis 18th.24 I have not yet seen “The Tale.”25

Assure Mrs Carlyle of my best regards.26

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

7th November 1832

India House

William Tait

Tait, William

62.


TO WILLIAM TAIT1

India House

7th November
1832

My dear Sir

I am highly gratified by what you say of my paper on Currency,2 and no
less so at the notes you propose to add as from yourself, as I agree
with you so decidedly and so warmly on both points that if we could have
known each other’s minds before I wrote the article, I would gladly have
touched upon those collateral questions in the text.

As to the excellence of the Scottish system of banking I have no doubt
of it, nor that the issue of notes down to £1, where the solvency of the
issues is as well provided for as it is under that system, should be
subject to no restriction except convertibility, into cash or into the
notes of some Government Bank. I rejoice much at the view your Magazine
has taken of this question, because many of our most enlightened
radicals and political economists in this part of the world are of a
contrary, and therefore in my view a wrong, opinion upon this point.

Then as to the National Debt, I agree with you and with Jefferson in
thinking that no generation is entitled to mortgage the fruits of the
labours of posterity: on us who have only our earnings (I mean myself
for example) the National Debt is not, I admit, a sacred obligation: but
it is so, on all who have inherited property from the generation which
borrowed the money, for no one has a moral right to take his father’s
property and leave his father’s debts unpaid. But we cannot distinguish
between inherited and acquired property after so many years, and
therefore, agreeing with you that it is a question of choice between one
injustice and another, I hold Edition: current; Page: [131] that the
least injustice would be done by paying off the debt at once by a tax on
all actually acquired and accumulated property; viz. the funds
themselves, the land, and all capital, but not laying any part of the
burthen upon income not derived from property.

If [it]3 was possible to leave the debt unpaid and throw the interest of
it upon property exclusively, I should consider that still better; but
it would not do, since it would be a penalty on future accumulation,
taxing those who save, and letting the prodigal go free.

I shall be happy to hear whether you agree with me in these opinions. At
all events you have a right to add any notes you please, as from
yourself. Believe me, my dear Sir

Very truly yours

J. S. Mill

I will write to Mr Nichol very soon;4 in the mean while, accept my
thanks for the introduction.5

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

29th November 1832

India House

William Tait

Tait, William

63.


TO WILLIAM TAIT1

India House

29th November 1832

My dear Sir,

Finding it impossible to recast the article,2 or find any place at which
the matter you require could be inserted without breaking the thread of
the argument, I have thrown the whole into a note, which may be annexed
at the end, or may, if you prefer it, form a Supplement to the article.
But on the whole, I think it should rather be a note, as that will
excuse the very general and summary mode in which the questions are
disposed of.

I think the hints I have thrown out respecting the National Debt will at
least afford a subject of reflexion to thinking men—I should like much
to learn from you what is thought of them by any of the persons whom you
consider as authorities on this class of subjects.

I am much gratified by what you say of the success of the Magazine;
which deserves it so well that I am not surprised it should obtain it.

Believe me
 My dear Sir
 Most truly yours

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [132]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

27th December 1832

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

64.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

,
27th December 1832

My dear Carlyle

In your last letter,2 received now upwards of a month, you said, “you
will write soon again”—ill have I responded to this call; having been
hindered therefrom by various occupations and thoughts, some of a
pleasant, but more of a disagreeable kind, whereof the last alone are
entitled to be received as any even the poorest excuse for this
negligence. My conscience, however, now speaks to me in so reproachful a
voice that I can no longer resist its commands.

During the interval you will have received my packet of books; of each
and all of them save one I have spoken to you: that one is “The English
in France”3 a sketchy kind of book, composed of essays & tales, all
intended to throw light upon France, painting it & all it contains en
beau, a view of the matter which is entitled to be attended to, were it
only because of its rarity: there is also much truth in the book, though
not much depth, and on the whole it is as worth your reading as any
other book in that parcel. A propos of writings about France, that
article in the last number of the Foreign Quarterly was not Buller’s;
his was on the reign of Louis 18th & has not yet appeared, it will
doubtless appear in the next number along with your Diderot4 which I am
very anxious to see. Cochrane5 seems to me much what you describe him; a
man he seems too who has a great love of fairness, and is above all an
enemy of extremes—and who proves himself an impartial arbitrater between
conflicting opinions by letting each in its turn speak through his
pages, in as softened a voice as may be, whereby in truth his Review the
better fulfils its mission, by representing the more correctly the
attitude which English minds of all parties and sorts have taken up
towards foreign nations. All reviews are hotch-potches with no definite
object or presiding principle—but this kind of review can perhaps be so
with less incongruity and absurdity than any of the others: so that if
you & the Right Hon. T. P. Courtenay6 appear side by side in it, we must
not be shocked at the proximity.—As for myself, I have not written much
Edition: current; Page: [133] since you last heard from me: except one
or two articles in the Examiner, among which may be mentioned one on the
French & English newspapers7 & one last Sunday on Corn Laws & Tithes,8
besides one not yet published, on Taxation:9 also an article which will
appear in Tait’s January number, on Currency & the National Debt,10 & a
paper for Fox’s January number.11 This last attempts something much
higher, and intrinsically more valuable, than all these writings on
politics, but with far less success: it is not nearly so good of its
kind, because I am not so well versed in the subject. It embodies some
loose thoughts, which had long been floating in my mind, about Poetry
and Art, but the result is not satisfactory to me and will probably be
far less so to you—but you will tell me to what extent you think me
wrong, or shallow. I wrote the paper from conviction (else it had never
been written) but not from that strong conviction which forces to write:
rather because I wished to write something for Fox, and thought there
was a clearer field open for him in that direction than in the political
one. This number of Fox shall be sent to you in the next parcel. The
periodicals which I send you are given, you will recollect; not to be
returned. I have also to send you, when I have done reading it, a
printed copy which I have received of the trial of the St Simonians.12
Of the speeches I have read Duveyrier’s alone appears to me to have any
other merit than that of a strong conviction. I have heard, but not from
themselves, that Duveyrier and Eichthal have given up St Simonism. This
as the newspapers say “needs confirmation,” & if true, will excite in
you as in me, great curiosity to know how it took place and what they
are to be henceforth. I have been reading with considerable interest
some numbers of the Revue Encyclopédique, which is conducted by a body
of seceded St Simonians: I am on the whole much pleased with them: they
have retained almost all the good which ever was in St Simonism, & are
not become sceptics but rather prophets of a religion to come—they see
that St Simon though a man far beyond his generation, was but a false
Christ, and they appear to be expecting the true. Jules Lechevalier13
and Abel Transon14 have taken up with the system of M. Charles
Fourier,15 a man who has been writing for many years large and obscure
books shewing how the Edition: current; Page: [134] world is to be
saved. From an account of part of his system given by Transon in an
article in the Revue Encyclopédique,16 I gather that the moving force
which is to change the world is to be “l’attraction passionée,” mankind
are to be made to Love le travail by various contrivances, which are to
end in making them masters and controllers of physical nature: the sea I
believe is ultimately to consist not of salt water but lemonade; I
understand this is no joke, but the serious persuasion of M.
Fourier.—Tell me if you have yet seen Dumont’s Mirabeau or Babbage’s
books;17 if not I will endeavour to put them also into the next
parcel.—The books you sent were never received at Longman’s; they were
sent by Mr Napier to Black’s: so that the fault lies either with the
last-named bookseller or with the carriers of whatever description.
Napier’s son, who is here, has written to his father about it, & traced
the matter thus far: if it can be traced further, it will be, so give
yourself no trouble about it.

So the Elections are over. Almost all the candidates in whose success I
took any personal interest, have succeeded. Among them are three men
who, I expect, will do something: these are, Grote, Roebuck, & John
Romilly: to these, if his inapplication will let him, we shall both be
happy to add Charles Buller. All the rest will talk, & not do: nor will
anything worth doing be really done for a while to come. One of the most
likely doers among the young men, the only one among the official young
men, has departed from us: poor Hyde Villiers.18 He was an earnest
workman, who would have plied his trade of politics honestly, and if not
with first rate talents, yet with such as well used had been sufficient
to do much. Take him for all in all we shall not soon find his equal
among that class of men.—I suspect that I shall have to dip my pen in
politics oftener and deeper than in proportion to the value I attach to
it compared with other things; for it is the only subject to which, just
at present, anybody will listen; and now that my friends have buckled to
that work I must not desert them, but give such help as lies in me.
Fonblanque still labours on, in his unsatisfactory, yet not wholly
unprofitable vocation. You will have seen that he has gained an
accession of power, that is of circulation, by the purchase of a rival
radical paper.19—Austin is in tolerably good spirits, lecturing to a
very small but really select class, and getting daily a clearer insight
into his subject, as well as into other subjects still more important.
But of him you will have heard at full length, for two days ago I saw at
his Edition: current; Page: [135] house a letter to Mrs Carlyle from Mrs
Austin, ready folded up and sealed.—For various reasons I did not make
use of your note to Leigh Hunt20 as an introduction to him, though
hereafter I shall be very happy to have another such opportunity: the
note, however, went to him; the address (as I learnt at Moxon’s)21 was
correct. Does the Examiner now reach you regularly? You will see in it
very soon a paper of Charles Buller’s on certain Election matters22—it
will be either a letter or an article. His health I am sorry to say is
still precarious—very slight causes are enough to derange it. I called
on Glen a short time after my return from Cornwall, but found he had
left his lodgings and gone into Scotland, where I suppose you have seen
him. He must be back by this time, but whether to the same place I have
not yet enquired, for which I have no excuse to make but the poor one I
made for my delay in writing to you. I have seen, I believe, no one else
in whom you take an interest. I shall send this letter to Messrs Bell &
Bradfute,23 as it is probable you will be at Edinburgh or on your way
thither before this reaches you: do not punish my sins of omission by
delaying to write to me, but write soon and at length. I trust you will
soon hear from me again—I say I trust when if I really trusted in
myself, I should say I am sure.

Yours ever faithfully

J. S. Mill

Kindest remembrances to Mrs Carlyle, who I hope still thinks of me
sometimes.24

Edition: current; Page: [136]


1833

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

16th January, 1833

India House

John Pringle

Pringle, John

65.


TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1

India House

,

16th January, 1833

.

My dear Sir,

I had fully resolved that of us two, you should not be the first to
write; and here have I allowed a fortnight to elapse since receiving
your letter before I have ever acknowledged the reception of it. This
you would I am sure excuse if I could tell you in what manner my time
and thoughts have been engrossed. From the time when I first saw your
papers2 in Tait’s Magazine, I have been ambitious of the honour of your
acquaintance, and now that I am privileged to communicate with you I am
not disposed to let the privilege lapse from disuse. It has often struck
me that one of the many causes which prevent those who cultivate moral
and political truth from occupying the place and possessing the
influence which properly belong to them as the instructors and leaders
of mankind, is that they never consider themselves as other labourers
do, to constitute a guild or fraternity, combining their exertions for
certain common ends, and freely communicating to each other everything
they possess which can be used to promote these ends. As to the
particular subject which has made us two known to each other—political
economy—there are so many talkers about it, and so few (you will I am
sure agree with me), even among professed economists, who study it
scientifically, that all who do, ought to know each other.

[. . . .]3

I long to see the article which it was my luck to anticipate—that we
should agree on such a point was to be expected, as it is evident we
look at these subjects from the same station or Standpunkt, as the
Germans call it.

Is there any chance of your coming to town? I fear there is little of my
soon visiting your part of the world—though my father’s birthplace is
Edition: current; Page: [137] very near Montrose,4 at the foot of the
Grampians. I fear there are not many persons in your neighbourhood with
whom you can profitably discuss these subjects, or who even take any
interest in them. On selfish principles I ought to be glad of this, as
it gives me a chance of oftener hearing from you. Pray write soon, if
you have time, and believe me,

Most sincerely yours,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 23, 1833

William Tait

Tait, William

66.


TO WILLIAM TAIT1

[
Jan. 23, 1833

]

I shall probably send you, in time for your March number, a short review
of an excellent book, the Producing Man’s Companion, by Junius
Redivivus2—whom I think the very best popular writer whom the
enlightened radicals count in their ranks—though I like his personal
articles in the Examiner less than the many admirable papers he has
written in the True Sun, Mechanics Magazine & various other periodicals.

Believe me
 Yours ever truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2d February 1833

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

67.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

2d February 1833

My dear Carlyle

First let me dispatch the matters of business. Cochrane is apprised of
your present residence: That Holcroft2 is so you will have learnt before
this by receiving the Examiner direct. Holcroft’s address is 13
Bartlett’s Edition: current; Page: [138] Buildings, Holborn: as the
people at the Adelphi, he says, well knew: Mr Badams’s3 address is 8,
Old Church Street, Paddington. Holcroft writes, speaking of you “I am
sure he must have given me up as a careless & negligent person &
unworthy of having any thought bestowed upon him, for to my shame be it
said that I have written but once to him since he left London. I
earnestly respect & love him and could have wished for more frequent
interchange of ideas, but I really dread to expose myself to his
critical lash as an unauthorized correspondent. When you write, ask him
if he will let me know under his own hand and seal how he and his wife
are, and also whether I may venture to send him a frank.”—I ought to
have apprised you sooner of his address and Mr Badams’s; however, you
know them now—the fault is not repaired but it is stopped.—You shall
very soon receive another packet of books. Let me hear from you first,
however, whether you have access to the books I am going to mention.
There exists a very voluminous collection of Memoirs of the French
Revolution.4 A considerable part of this I have, & among others two
volumes of Mémoires sur les Prisons,5 chiefly the “personal narratives”
of people who were in confinement during the epoch of “Terror”: I never
have read those two volumes, strange as it may seem, & know not exactly
the worth of the contents—but I should think they could not fail to be
interesting, and to answer your purpose in some degree. If you have not
access to these two volumes where you are, I will send them. Next—have
you the means of getting the Memoirs of Levasseur?6 He was one of the
less noted members of the montagne party, & wrote his life or rather got
it written very recently in order to justify that party—he is evidently
a highly conscientious, well meaning man, with something of the spirit
of an old Roman, and his book lets one into the aspect of that period as
it presented itself to the honester minds among the actors, in a manner
which has interested me deeply. Your friend Fraser lent it to me, and
would, I am sure, allow me to forward it to you if you cannot get it at
Edinburgh. You would learn more about Danton from this book than from
any other I know—it is astonishing how little is known of such a man.
Then, I have in the collection already mentioned the “Vieux Cordelier”7
of Camille Desmoulins, which I think would interest you. The Memoirs of
Mme Edition: current; Page: [139] Roland8 you have, of course, read. I
have several other memoirs of girondists but they are little more than
long elegies.—Mirabeau, Danton, and Bonaparte are the only men who
appear other than common in Thiers’ pages:9 but there were other
remarkable men besides those three: Robespierre especially, who
strangely enough, has been spoken of by all parties as a mediocre man, &
Thiers thinks him so: it was always a puzzle to me how a mediocre man
could remain master of the field among so many competitors, until I read
some of his speeches and then saw that he was by far the most skilful of
the combatants in every sense of the word.—On the whole, however, it is
wonderful how little can be traced of the private and social life of
that period. There is positively much more of it in Thiers than in any
other of the innumerable books on the revolution which I have read.
There is more of it (as is often the case) in their professed fictions
than in their histories: a novel by Picard which I have, entitled “Le
Gil Blas de la Revolution”10 is worthy of some account in this respect,
& I have been told that there are novels of Pigault Lebrun11 which paint
several periods of the revolution very vividly.—You have characterized
Thiers’ system of ethics most accurately.12 I am afraid it is too just a
specimen of the young French littérateurs, and that this is all they
have made, ethically speaking, of their attempt to imitate the Germans
in identifying themselves with the past. By dint of shifting their point
of view to make it accord with that of whomsoever they are affecting to
judge, coupled with their historical fatalism, they have arrived at the
annihilation of all moral distinctions except success and not
success.—The “Soirées de Neuilly”13 mentioned by that “English in
France” man,14 I have, & admire it much as a literary work; it also
paints, as I believe correctly, some of the aspects of French life under
the restoration. But above all, to have a notion of French life as it
is, you should get hold of the “Livre des cent et un”.15 It professes to
be a description of Paris under all its aspects; & as all the French
writers of the day who are deemed fit to write in it, do so, it must be
instructive even if the 101 have painted nothing but the state of their
own minds. Then I have various St Simonian documents Edition: current;
Page: [140] to send to you. The society is broken up, & a large portion
including Duveyrier and d’Eichthal is at Naples: Duveyrier and Stéphane
[Flachat?]16 are now editing a daily paper. I will send you
Duveyr[ier’s]17 letter to me on the subject, which is a very odd one. He
professes not to have changed a single opinion, and yet he admits that
his whole line of conduct is changed. Those of the St Simonians who
retain their connexion with the Pere Suprême and with each other, have
made themselves prolètaires and gone off in a body to Lyons to work on
the canals and railroads. Enfantin & Michel Chevalier are in prison.
Bazard, I think I told you, is dead. The writers in the Revue
Encyclopédique have retained all or nearly all that was good in the
doctrines of the St Simonians, & now content themselves with prophesying
a new religion. Latterly some of them seem to be looking out for it in a
strange enough quarter—the East—they think that as the East only
partially known, has given us something so good as the Bible, when we
know it perfectly it will give us something infinitely better. This
seems to me a stranger delusion than even Fourier’s.—Do you know
anything of the writings of somebody who writes everywhere & on all
subjects and signs Junius Redivivus?18 probably you only know what he
has written in the Examiner, which are chiefly radical personalities and
good for very little; but the man has great worth in him, & I should
like to send to you various productions of his. He takes so much pains
to conceal his name and properties, that he is probably some obscure
person who thinks that the disclosure of his obscurity would diminish,
not increase, the attention paid to his writings. You should know him
however, as far as he can be known from his writings, for I am sure he
would interest you more than most people would.—I know something of Miss
Martineau19 personally: her books, some of them at least, deserve I
think all the praise they have received: I suspect all the good in her,
comes out in them. She is about thirty, bred a “Socinian liberal,” and I
believe substantially so still: narrow, and matter-of-fact I should say,
in the bad sense; the best about her, being indefatigable industry and a
ravenous thirst for knowledge & acquirement of all kinds, at least all
intellectual kinds. Brougham20 has been taking pains to attach her to
his car, and has paid so many attentions to her that for the present he
has spoiled her: she will, however I think, end by finding him out. She
has, I find, the faculty of making herself Edition: current; Page: [141]
personally disliked, by means it would seem of inattention to Christ’s
percept “judge not, that ye be not judged.”

I hoped to have found your Diderot in the pre[sent]21 Foreign Quarterly,
but was disappointed. I myself have written little, published nothing
except some matters on a property tax, which you will have seen in the
Examiner.22 Meanwhile my time, though I can scarcely say it has been
employed, has not been wasted; something either good or bad will come of
it—let us hope the best.

I have not received those books yet—at all events the loss must be mine,
not yours, as it could in no way have been averted by you—perhaps,
though that is little to the purpose, it might by me, had I not delayed
so long making any enquiry at Longman’s. I have little news of anybody.
The Austins are in their usual state—Austin lecturing to six or seven
persons only, but those of a kind he likes. This strange Wittenagemote
calling itself a reformed parliament is just meeting, & we are to see
what it is to do: all that seems certain is, that it is to reform the
Church—heaven bless the mark! where, I wonder, will they find a Church
to reform.—Buller is by this time in town, but I have not seen him: did
you recognize a letter of his in The Examiner respecting election
petitions?23 there will be another tomorrow on the private business of
the House24—good symptoms—he can work if he chuses, well, & I will hope
that he will.

Write again soon, in spite of the slackness of my correspondence—I do
not want any of those books25 and shall not, for a long time to
come—keep them therefore as long as you like or till a convenient
opportunity offers for sending them. Commend me to Mrs Carlyle, and
believe me

Ever faithfully yours,

J. S. Mill

I have been reading Bourrienne26—it gives one a much more distinct idea
of Napoleon than I had before: but I still cannot, with you, allow the
one excellence strength of will, to outweigh the entire want of any
virtuous purpose, and the willingness to employ any even the most paltry
means.27

Edition: current; Page: [142]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

28 February 1833

India House

William Tait

Tait, William

68.


TO WILLIAM TAIT1

India House

28 February 1833

My dear Sir

I send you a paper on Junius Redivivus,2 for your Magazine, in case you
think it worthy of insertion.

By the same opportunity I send a copy of a tract of mine on a topic of
great immediate interest3—I add another copy which I will thank you to
forward to Mr Nichol when you have an opportunity.

Many thanks for the trouble you took about the Professorship.4 Nobody in
this country has been heard of whose claims are at all equal to those of
Mr Nichol. When I have anything definite to communicate—I will write to
that gentleman direct.

Believe me
 My dear Sir
 Ever sincerely yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday March 1, 1833

India House

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

69.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

India House

Friday [March 1, 1833]

Dear Mr Fox

I will write a short paper for the next M.R. on Junius Redivivus.2

That article on Mehetabel Wesley3 is very painful—as it ought to be—but
beautiful and valuable, beyond anything that I have read either in the
M.R. or elsewhere for many, many months. It is a good number,
altogether, though the first article4 is, I think, the weakest. You seem
to me to overpraise Edition: current; Page: [143] Leigh Hunt5—I say you,
that is, I assume that you are the writer, partly for that reason—I
think you often overpraise, & the cause is, the keen sense of enjoyment
which all things give you, that have anything of good or beautiful in
them. I have fallen under the same accusation but for an opposite
reason—the best gave me so little enjoyment compared with what it should
give, that I could not afford not to like, even things which were very
imperfect indeed.

That at least is over—I have grown excessively fastidious now.

I got home by one o’clock the other night—thanks to an accidental
meeting with a cab at the beginning of Islington.

Ever yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9th March 1833

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

70.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

,
9th March 1833

.

My dear Carlyle

I ought to write oftener; though not exactly for the reason you
jocularly give. I ought; and I would, if my letters were, or could be,
better worth having: yet, even such as they are, not being altogether
valueless to you, they shall become more frequent. Truly I do not wonder
that you should desiderate more “heartiness” in my letters,2 and should
complain of being told my thoughts only, not my feelings; especially
when, as is evident from your last letter, you stand more than usually
in need of the consolation and encouragement of sympathy. But alas! when
I give my thoughts, I give the best I have. You wonder at “the boundless
capacity Man has of loving”—boundless indeed it is in some natures,
immeasurable and inexhaustible: but I also wonder, judging from myself,
at the limitedness and even narrowness of that capacity in others. That
seems to me the only really insuperable calamity in life; the only one
which is not conquerable by the power of a strong will. It seems the
eternal barrier between man and man; the natural and impassable limit
both to the happiness and to the Edition: current; Page: [144] spiritual
perfection of (I fear) a large majority of our race. But few, whose
power of either giving or receiving good in any form through that
channel, is so scanty as mine, are so painfully conscious of that
scantiness as a want and an imperfection: and being thus conscious I am
in a higher, though a less happy, state, than the self-satisfied many
who have my wants without my power of appreciation. You speak of
obstacles which exist for others, but not for me. There are many of
Earth’s noblest beings, with boundless capacity of love, whom the
falseness and halfness which you speak of, have so hemmed round and so
filled with distrust and fear that “they dare not love”. But mine is a
trustful nature, and I have an unshakeable faith in others though not in
myself. So my case must be left to Nature, I fear: there is no
mind-physician who can prescribe for me, not even you, who could help
whosoever is helpable: I can do nothing for myself, and others can do
nothing for me; all the advice which can be given, (and that is not
easily taken) is, not to beat against the bars of my iron cage; it is
hard to have no aspiration and no reverence but for an Ideal towards
which striving is of no use: is there not something very pitiful in idle
Hoping? but to be without Hope were worse?

You see it is cold comfort which I can give to any who need the greatest
of comforts, sympathy in moments of dejection; I, who am so far from
being in better mental health than yourself, that I need sympathy quite
as much, with the added misfortune that if I had it, it could do me no
good. When you knew me in London I was in circumstances favourable to
your mistaking my character, and judging of it far too advantageously:
it was a period of fallacious calm; grounded in an extravagant
over-estimate of what I had succeeded in accomplishing for myself, and
an unconscious self-flattery and self-worship. All that is at an end;
which is a “progress” surely. I would not now take the greatest human
felicity on such terms.

But this is enough for the present, in this strain; perhaps I may say
more another time. Let me rather think of you, and what can be done to
improve your environment. Your picture of Edinburgh is triste enough,
and might serve, I fear, a fortiori, for all other provincial towns:
there is an odour of literature and intellect about Edinburgh; at
Glasgow, Liverpool, & the like, there is little else than the stench of
Trade. London is better; far better; bad though even it be. There are
here, in infinitesimal proportion indeed, but in absolute number more
than a very few, actual believers some, whom I and even you could call
true believers; to a very great extent, or entirely: among whom your
thoughts would not fall like hand-grenades and put them to flight, but
would at least be caught up and cherished, probably planted and reared
into fruit. If you determine to leave Craigenputtock, there is surely no
place so good as this; at least in the most important of all good things
which locality can bring—kindred Edition: current; Page: [145]
companionship. But you will have more things to consider, doubtless,
that even that greatest of all, and you will not give that less than its
proper weight.

I have no news to tell—the Reformed Parliament has not disappointed me
any more than you; it is (as Miss Martineau, I understand, says of
Brougham) so ridiculously like what I expected: but some of our
Utilitarian Radicals are downcast enough, having deemed that the nation
had in it more of wisdom and virtue than they now see it has, and that
the vicious state of the representation kept this wisdom & virtue out of
parliament. At least this good will come out of their disappointment,
that they will no longer rely upon the infallibility of
Constitution-mongering: they admit that we have as good a House of
Commons as any mode of election would have given us, in the present
state of cultivation of our people. They are digging a little nearer to
the root of the evil now, though they have not got to the tap-root: read
Roebuck’s paper on National Education in Tait’s last number;3 while you
have the number in your hand, look at the first article4 in it, which is
his also. He is narrow, still, but the other parliamentary radicals are
narrower; all but our friend Charles [Buller], who has the finest
understanding of the set, but wants strength of will. For myself, I have
well-nigh ceased to feel interested in politics. The time is not yet
come for renovation, and the work of destruction goes on of itself
without the aid of hands. If any man of clear Insight were in parliament
just now, I hardly know what he could hope or aim at, unless to sow in
some few of the more impressible minds, the seeds of a renovation which
will not be yet, nor soon. The Bad, God wot, is tumbling down quite as
fast as is safe where there is nothing of Good ready to be put into its
place: what need of help in rolling the ball down hill? I was wont to
think that the benches of the House of Commons might be as a pulpit,
from whence a voice might make itself heard further and more widely than
even from your pulpit and mine, the Periodical Press. But what sort of a
voice must it be which could be heard through all this din: what were a
single nightingale amidst the cawing and chattering of 657 rooks and
magpies and jackdaws? Truly if there were not in the world two or three
persons who seem placed here only to shew that all is not hollow and
empty and insufficient, one would despair utterly. It is only the
knowledge that such persons have an actual existence on the sa[me
globe]5 with us, which keeps alive any interest in anything besides
oneself, or even could I but believe that the good I see in a few comes
note from any peculiarity of nature, but from the more perfect
developement of capacities and powers common Edition: current; Page:
[146] to us all—and that the whole race were destined, at however remote
a period either of individual or collective existence, to resemble the
best specimen of it whom I have myself known—I verily believe, with that
faith, I could be content to remain to eternity the solitary exception—

As for work, I have written perhaps of late not less than usual: but
(except what has been already mentioned to you) nothing noteworthy that
is likely to be soon published, except a notice6 for Tait of that book
of Junius Redivivus, which same book you will soon receive in a parcel
through Fraser; along with two articles of mine which I have formerly
written to you about; sundry Memoirs of the French Revolution; the Trial
of the St Simonians; & two letters which contain all I know of their
subsequent proceedings & present state. (Those former books which
miscarried have been traced to this house, though I have not been able
to recover them.) My parcel for you at present waits only for William
Fraser’s permission to send you his copy of Levasseur’s Memoirs:7 a
permission too late applied for, & which has not yet reached me.—Junius
Redivivus will interest you, were it only for this, that he too is
evidently a believer: a true believer I think it may be said, so far as
his faith has yet reached. There is vigour, & a capacity of Insight in
him; & if we may judge from the quantity he writes (the quality being
never positively bad, & often very good), an altogether indomitable
power of work.—I have seen nothing of your writing for a long time:
Cochrane, I see, has not yet printed your paper on Diderot; when shall
we see it? deeply interesting it is sure to be.—You know something of
Fraser’s Magazine: do you know, or can you guess, the authorship of a
recent paper on Byron?8 it looks like the production of some
half-fledged pupil of yours.

I have asked an instructed and clever Frenchman now here (one of the
editors of the National) about the authenticity of those revolutionary
portraits;9 to which I also am no stranger. He tells me that the
genuineness of many of them is very doubtful, and without any hint from
me he at once instanced Danton; some of whose relations he knows, and
has seen an authentic portrait. Danton he says was ugly, but not
ignoble, either in mind or feature, and the portrait in the Collection
wrongs him grievously.

As you conjectured, I have lost sight of poor Glen: only because I am
Edition: current; Page: [147] utterly ignorant of his place of abode: at
his old lodgings they believe him to be still in Scotland, with his
brother and such other relatives as he may have. I therefore know not
what to do with your letter: poor fellow, it would have gladdened him to
the very bottom of his soul to have received it, or but to have known
that you had written to him: you probably have better means of
discovering his whereabout in Scotland than I have.—Of our common
friends or acquaintances I have little to tell. Austin is lecturing to
fit audience though few, & will, I think, very probably go to live
either at Berlin or at Bonn. He is still subject to his fits of illness,
but they are I think less frequent. Mrs Austin is very much as usual:
Falk is not yet through the press. The Bullers are all in London. I fear
they have lost money by failures in India, not enough to impoverish
them, but any loss falls heavily on people who live up to their income.

Yours ever faithfully,

J. S. Mill

I have heard nothing of Detrosier10 for a long time: I believe he has
returned to Manchester with the intention of setting up a school, or
else of continuing to go about lecturing on physical subjects as he did
formerly with some success.11

Make my best remembrances to Mrs Carlyle—I sometimes hear of her through
Mrs. Austin. I do not say, “write soon” but I know you will.12

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

30th March 1833

India House

William Tait

Tait, William

71.


TO WILLIAM TAIT1

India House

30th March 1833

My dear Sir

I will immediately write to Mr Nichol2 myself. The appointment of the
Professor3 is still, I understand, quite undetermined—Mr Nichol’s letter
to you went to France, with the recommendation of my father and Mr
Senior.4 I think he should decidedly make himself known in any way to
Talleyrand,5 whose opinion would have very great weight.

Edition: current; Page: [148]
With respect to the article on Junius Redivivus,6 I myself have not made
up my mind on the question whether the situation of the working classes
is on the whole better or worse than it was: I worded the article so as
if possible not to commit the Magazine to a decided opinion, but I
thought the testimony of a writer who evidently knows much of the
working people, an article of evidence very fit to be received, though
not sufficient to decide the question. Could not you let the article
stand as it is, and express your dissent from the opinion of J.R. in an
editorial note? If not, I should like to see the article again before it
is printed; not from any fear that you should “spoil” the article, but
because when anything is to be left out, a writer almost always thinks
it necessary that something else should be put in.

As to the matter of fact in dispute I feel convinced from the great
diversity of opinion among equally good observers, & from the result of
the enquiries of the Poor Law Commission, that the truth varies very
much in different parts of the kingdom & among different classes of
workmen.

Are there any other parts of the article which you object to?

I am so little master of my own time, and so little capable moreover of
writing with spirit on any subject in which I do not happen to be
feeling an interest at the moment, that I do not ven[ture]7 to promise
to write at any given time on a given subject. As for Currency, I think
it is blowing over—with regard to France I am so thoroughly sick of the
wretched aspect of affairs there that I have written little about them
in the Examiner for a long time.

Believe me
 Most truly yours

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

11th & 12th April 1833

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

72.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

11th & 12th April 1833

My dear Carlyle

I write to you again a letter which I could wish were better worth
having—really an apology for a letter: Your last, which you called so,
deserved a better name. I would write, if it were only to thank you for
having a better opinion of me than I have of myself. It is useless
discussing which Edition: current; Page: [149] is right; time will
disclose that; though I do not think that my nature is one of the many
things into which you see “some ten years farther” than I do. At all
events I will not if I can help it give way to gloom and morbid
despondency, of which I have had a large share in my short life, and to
which I have been indebted for all the most valuable of such insight as
I have into the most important matters, neither will this return of it
be without similar fruits, as I hope and almost believe; nevertheless I
will and must, though it leaves me little enough of energy, master it,
or it will surely master me. Whenever it has come to me it has always
lasted many months, and has gone off in most cases very gradually.

I have allowed myself to be paralysed more than I should, during the
last month or two by these gloomy feelings, though I have had intervals
of comparative brightness but they were short. I have therefore a poor
account to render of work done. Tait has not yet published that paper on
Junius Redivivus, but in the meantime I have written another on the same
subject for Fox, (a much better one as I think), which has appeared in
the April number,2 and should have been sent if I had got it in time for
Fraser’s parcel: you shall have it by the first opportunity. With this
exception I have written little, and read less: but this shall have an
end.

You will have received long before this time by Fraser, two tracts of
mine, of very different kinds, a political or rather ethico-political
one on Church & Corporation Property,3 and the one I told you of, long
ago, in Fox’s periodical, on Poetry and Art.4 That last you promised me
a careful examination and criticism of: I need it much; for I have a
growing feeling that I have not got quite into the heart of that
mystery, and I want you to shew me how. If you do not teach me you will
do what is better, put me in the way of finding out. But I begin to see
a not very far distant boundary to all I am qualified to accomplish in
this particular line of speculation. I have sent you fewer books than I
thought I should have had to send: three volumes of Levasseur, the
fourth I have read but Fraser has not yet got it: I shall put it into
some future parcel. Of the proportion in which this book is the work of
Levasseur himself, and the proportion in which it is got up by Achille
Roche5 the editor, one of the clever young political journalists of the
day, I know no more than the book itself indicates, which does not seem
to aim at concealing anything. The Soirées de Neuilly6 I have lent to
somebody and omitted to take the precaution of making a memorandum, so I
have not been able to get it for this parcel. I have sent two volumes of
Memoirs on the Prisons which Edition: current; Page: [150] I have not
read; & another volume in which the only thing of value is the Vieux
Cordelier by Camille Desmoulins. The account of Robespierre & the others
by Villatte7 is, I believe, worthy of no regard: he was one of the
instruments of their tyranny, wrote this book after their fall in hopes
of getting himself off, and I believe was guillotined after all. I have
also sent the Trial of the St Simonians, a letter from d’Eichthal, & one
from Duveyrier. I have lately heard again, both from, and of, the
latter. He is now writing, in the Revue des deux Mondes, which he says
is the first in France in the department of literature and art, & to
which a number of their most celebrated writers, so far as any of their
writers can be called celebrated, contribute. He writes to me “je me
lance décidément dans le drame et le théâtre. Je fais une grande pièce,
mais comme cela ne fait pas vivre pour le moment je cherche à gagner mon
pain courrant par quelques articles de journaux. J’ai quelqu’espoir
d’avoir à la revue des deux mondes où j’ai beaucoup d’amis, la fonction
de rediger la chronique de quinzaine politique et théâtrale. En
attendant je n’entends plus parler de d’Eichthal, qui est toujours en
Italie.” What I have heard of Duveyrier is, that being condemned to a
year’s imprisonment along with Enfantin & Chevalier, he applied through
his relations for a pardon from the government, & obtained it, I suppose
by declaring his intention of quitting the Father of Humanity. This I
heard from a friend of his.—Such part of the St Simonians as remain
faithful, or at least a large body of them headed by Barrault,8 have as
I find from the French newspapers, set out for the East (Constantinople
I was told was their first destination) pour chercher la femme libre.
This seems greater madness than I had imputed to them. It is among the
inmates of a harem that they expect to find a woman capable of laying
down or as they say revealing the new moral law which is to regulate the
relations between the sexes! it will be lucky for them if the search is
attended with no disagreeable personal consequences to them except only
that of not finding. These St Simonians have done so much good, that one
regrets they were not capable of doing more. One of the seceding members
writes of them in the Revue Encyclopédique that the St Simonian society
is the only spiritual fruit of the Revolution of 1830: it is literally
so: the excessive avidity & barrenness of the French mind has never been
so strikingly displayed: there are such numbers of talkers & writers so
full of noise and fury, keeping it up for years and years, and not one
new thought, new to them I mean, has been struck out by all the
collision since I first began attending to these matters, except only
those which the St Simonians have set afloat among them. It is no wonder
that minds so little productive Edition: current; Page: [151] as the
French should run wild with an interesting truth when they have had it
impressed upon them. St Simon really for a Frenchman was a great man.
Enfantin likewise pourrait bien être aussi une espèce de grand homme as
Voltaire said: the others were probably mere redactors and amplifiers of
their thoughts, a talent as common in France, as the power of original
thinking seems to be rare.—If you can get hold of it at Edinburgh, read
a novel called Arthur Coningsby,9 by John Sterling: he is one of the men
who would most interest you among those here; and his book will interest
you; I should much like to know what it looks like when seen from your
point of view.

Though I am sick of politics myself, I do not despair of improvement
that way; you hear the cackle of the noisy geese who surround the
building, I see a little of what is going on inside. I can perfectly
sympathize in Bonaparte’s contempt of the government of bavards: talking
is one thing and doing another: but while every corner of the land has
sent forth its noisy blockhead to talk, over head I am near enough to
see the real men of work, and of head for work, who are quietly getting
the working part of the machine into their hands, and will be masters of
it as far as anybody can be with that meddling and ignorant assembly
lawfully empowered to be their masters. After that let even one man
come, who with honesty, & intellect to appreciate these working men, has
the power of leading a mob,—no rare combination formerly, though a very
rare one now; and there will be as good a government as there can be
until there shall be a better people. It is a real satisfaction to me to
know, & in some cases to have even been able somewhat to help on,
several men who are now gaining by dint of real honesty & capacity a
considerable and increasing influence though not an externally visible
one, over the underworkings of our government. Some of them are as I am
convinced, among the very fittest persons in the country to have that
influence, fit or not as they may be in a greater or less degree for
still higher purposes. A chacun selon sa capacité is far enough from
being realised, to be sure, but the real deviation great as it is, falls
far short of the apparent. It is much more in their apparent than in
their real power that such men as Brougham and Althorp10 are exalted
above their proper station.

Fonblanque you see goes on hammering at the politics of the day, for
better for worse: I have seen less than usual of him lately. The public
mind is coming round to him: the popularity of the Reform Ministry will
soon be at as low an ebb as that of the poor Patriot King. How long is
this dreary work to last, before a man appears? Mrs. Austin is at
present laid up with Edition: current; Page: [152] the prevalent
influenza, a sort of cold accompanied with fever: she and her husband
seem to have almost resolved to emigrate into Germany this autumn. The
Bullers are here: Charles has gone the Western Circuit this spring, and
got some briefs: I have increasing hopes of his steadiness and power of
work. I have little to tell of any one else whom you know here. Is De
Quincey still in Edinburgh? do you ever see him? and what do you think
of him?11 Your criticism on Miss Martineau is, I think, just: she
reduces the laissez faire system to absurdity as far as the principle
goes, by merely carrying it out to all its consequences. In the meantime
that principle like other negative ones has work to do yet, work,
namely, of a destroying kind, & I am glad to think it has strength left
to finish that, after which it must soon expire: peace be with its ashes
when it does expire, for I doubt much if it will reach the resurrection.
I wish you could see something I have written lately about Bentham &
Benthamism12—but you can’t.

My best thanks to Mrs Carlyle for the few words of kindness she added to
your last letter—I keep so little note of time that I know not whether I
have redeemed my promise of writing after a less interval than usual—but
you will write soon.—

Yours ever faithfully

J. S. Mill

I should have availed myself of the opportunity you afforded me to make
acquaintance with Leigh Hunt, did I not find it absolutely necessary, if
I mean either to work or to enjoy society, to restrict rather than to
extend the number of my acquaintance. He is worth knowing, and a time
may come for that among other things.—Have you seen Archibald Alison’s
History of the French Revolution?13 If you have, just tell me whether it
is worth reading, or reviewing—I suppose it is wrong, when one has taken
the trouble to accumulate knowledge on a subject, not to work it up if
one can into some shape useful to others—and if I am to write about the
F.R. it may as well be while my recollections of the original
authorities are fresh.14

J.S.M.

Edition: current; Page: [153]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

18th May 1833

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

73.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

18th May 1833

My dear Carlyle

By this time you are again in your wilds,2 and have had time to feel
yourselves at home and settled there, and you are expecting a letter
from me—and I have two to acknowledge and if so might be to repay. I
have many things to say, too; at least they seem many before I begin to
say them; they will seem few before I have done.—First, then, I have
read your paper on Diderot.3 Of the man, and of his works and of his
cotemporaries, so far as I think at all, I think very much as you do:
yet I have found more to differ from in that article of yours than in
anything of your writing I commonly do. The subject seems to have
carried you, and me as your reader, over a range of topics on which
there has always been a considerable extent of undiscussed and unsifted
divergence of opinion (pardon this galimatias of mixed metaphors)
between us two; on some of which too I sometimes think that the distance
has rather widened than narrowed of late. That may be my loss, and my
fault; at all events it seems to me that there has been on my part
something like a want of courage in avoiding, or touching only
perfunctorily, with you, points on which I thought it likely that we
should differ. That was a kind of reaction from the dogmatic
disputatiousness of my former narrow and mechanical state. I have not
any great notion of the advantage of what the “free discussion” men,
call the “collision of opinions,” it being my creed that Truth is sown
and germinates in the mind itself, and is not to be struck out suddenly
like fire from a flint by knocking another hard body against it: so I
accustomed myself to learn by inducing others to deliver their thoughts,
and to teach by scattering my own, and I eschewed occasions of
controversy (except occasionally with some of my old Utilitarian
associates). I still think I was right in the main, but I have carried
both my doctrine and my practice much too far: and this I know by one of
its consequences which I suppose would be an agreeable one to most men,
viz. that most of those whom I at all esteem and respect, though they
may know that I do not agree with them wholly, yet, I am afraid, think,
each in their several ways, that I am considerably nearer to agreeing
with them than I actually am. In short, I know that I Edition: current;
Page: [154] have been wrong, by finding myself seated in the Gig4 much
more firmly than I have any business as an honest man to be. So you see,
I am only about to have in all its fullness, that sincerity of speech
for which you give me credit. I only had it thus far hitherto, that all
I have ever spoken, by word of mouth or in writing, I have firmly
believed, and have spoken it solely because it was my belief. Yet even
that, in these days, was much, but not enough, seeing that it depends
upon my own will to make it more.—The result of all which is that with
you as well as with several others very unlike you, there will probably
be a more frequent and free communication of dissent than has hitherto
been, even though the consequence should be to be lowered in your
opinion; that indeed if it were to be the result would be conclusive
proof that I have been acting wrong hitherto, because it would shew that
for being thought so highly of I had been partly indebted to not being
thoroughly known—which I am sure is the case oftener than I like to
think of.

You see there will be so much the more to talk over when we meet: and
that will be this summer, unless, which is always possible, I should not
be in a state of mind in which meeting with any one is profitable or
delightful to me. I believe I am the least helpable of mortals—I have
always found that when I am in any difficulty or perplexity of a
spiritual kind I must struggle out of it by myself. I believe, if I
could, whenever anything is spiritually wrong with me I should shut
myself up from the human race, and not see face of man until I had got
firm footing again on some solid basis of conviction, and could turn
what comes into me from others into wholesome nutriment. I am often in a
state almost of scepticism, and have no theory of Human Life at all, or
seem to have conflicting theories, or a theory which does not amount to
a Belief. This is only a recent state, and as I well know, a passing
one, and my convictions will be firmer and the result of a larger
experience when I emerge from this state, than before: but I have never
found any advantage in communion with others while my own mind was
unsettled at its foundations, and if I am not much mended when my
vacation-time comes round, I will rather postpone a meeting with you
until I am.

I have neither written nor read much since I last wrote to you, except
one or two trifling things in the Examiner: including however one of a
somewhat more weighty kind (though not much) which you will see in a
week or two probably in that paper, under my old signature A.B.5 I think
I shall write more now, because I begin to see some things a little
clearer, though many things which I once thought I understood—I now
believe cannot be known with true Insight but by means of faculties
which cannot Edition: current; Page: [155] be acquired and which to me
have not been given, save in most scanty measure. Alison’s book which I
asked you about, I have procured and read: the man is quite
inconceivably stupid and twaddling, I think beyond anybody who has
attempted to write elaborately on the subject. He has no research; the
references with which he loads his margin are chiefly to compilations. I
could write something about him or rather about his subject; but I could
employ myself better unless there were some widely-circulated periodical
that would publish it:6 the Edinburgh Review perhaps would, were it not
that I should wish to shew up Macaulay’s ignorance of the subject and
assumption of knowledge, as shewn in that very review.7

The long-missing parcel of books has at length turned up, and I have
received intimation that the second is at Longman’s. I did not mean you
to return those Repositories, but they are not, to you, worth my sending
back again. Keep all I send you henceforth. On learning that my parcel
was not in time for Fraser’s monthly packet, (which I thought I had
taken care that it should be) I sent two more numbers of the Repository
to be added to it, in one of which is the article I told you of,
concerning Junius Redivivus. The passage you saw quoted about Books and
Men, was from that; so there is not evidence therein of “another
mystic”; so much the worse.8 I was much interested by learning that your
recent thoughts have been so nearly of the same kind; tell me what you
have thought since, especially since you have thought of the question
practically, as altering your own future choice of a mode of activity.
The difficulty of comparing two magnitudes and distinguishing which is
greatest, is as well all know, vastly enhanced when the magnitudes
themselves are of almost infinitesimal smallness, and that unhappily
seems to be the case at present with the portion of good, that one can
see clearly a prospect of achieving in any course that one can chuse.
Yet it seems to me that if one had a proper stage and proper tools, more
is to be accomplished just now by the doer of the deed than by the sayer
of the word—words are so little listened to now but when they are the
prelude or the accompaniment to some deed; my word again is partly
intelligible to many more persons than yours is, because mine is
presented in the logical and mechanical form which partakes most of this
age and country, yours in the artistical and poetical (at least in one
sense of those words though not the sense I have been recently giving
them) which finds least entrance into any minds now, except when it
comes before them as mere dilettantism and pretends not to make any
serious call upon them Edition: current; Page: [156] to change their
lives. But then, what career is open to the doer, if either in your
position or in mine? write to me what has been passing in you on this
matter, whether of a general kind or as affecting yourself individually.

I am sure I have twenty other things to say, but cannot think of them at
this instant; I shall write again the sooner. Let me ask you this one
question; Have you seen the book published by the Poor Law
Commissioners?9 If you have not, let me send it to you—often you have
complained how little of the state of a people is to be learnt from
books; much is to be learned of it from that book, both as to their
physical and their spiritual state. The result is altogether appalling
to the dilettanti, and the gigmen, and the ignorant and timid in high
stations; to me it has been, & will be I think to you, rather consoling,
because we knew the thing to be unspeakably bad, but this I think shews
that it may be considerably mended with a considerably less amount of
intellect, courage, and virtue in the higher classes, than had hitherto
appeared to me to be necessary. Any way the book cannot fail to interest
you, because any authentic information as to any human thing is
interesting to you. I regard this enquiry with satisfaction under
another aspect too; that it has been more honestly and more ably
performed than anything which has been done under the authority of Govt.
since I remember: and has, in consequence, been the means of getting
some of the best men I know, for such purposes, put into other work of
the same kind, and decidedly embarked in the same career. You will find
among them my friend John Wilson whom you have seen; he is now Secretary
to the Factory Commission. Chadwick also, the ablest of them all, may be
said to be at the head of that Commission.

I know not of any news to tell. I have seen little of Fonblanque lately.
The Austins are still bent upon going to live in Germany after the
conclusion of his present course of Lectures. At the Literary Union I
can learn no more of Glen than I knew before. Kindest remembrances to
Mrs. Carlyle.10

Charles Buller is well, and in spirits, and increasingly disposed to
work; he will not be lost, it were pity he should: his career will be
politics I think, not the best career, far from that, but he will I now
think, demean himself therein like a true man: his superiority to all
those people is even now, little as he has yet done, beginning to be
felt, and he is gaining influence which will enable him to utter such
truth as is in him with some certainty of being listened to—he is
pure-minded and not a self-seeker, I am sure of that.11

Edition: current; Page: [157]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

[18] May 1833

India House

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

74.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

India House

[18] May 1833

Dear Mr Fox

If there are any rumours that I was writing anything for the M.R. of
this month, I am sorry I cannot confirm them. I have abundance of vague
intentions of writing for you, but I have been very idle of late, and in
fact never have been in a state more unfit for work; from various
causes, the chief of which is, I think, a growing want of interest in
all the subjects which I understand, and a growing sense of incapacity
ever to have real knowledge of or insight into the subjects in which
alone I shall ever again feel a strong interest. I have written nothing
lately but a short article on that “Pauline”,2 which will not, I
believe, be too long for the Examiner, and if so, will probably appear
there.3 That I have written chiefly because you wished it.4 I fear there
would scarcely be time to write anything which you would care for, now,
this month, but if there is any subject within my range, on which you
wish to have two or three pages only, tell me so and I will try what I
can do.

I feel so unequal to any of the higher moral and aesthetic subjects,
that because I would rather write something than nothing, I have had
thoughts of offering you a few pages on a stupid book lately published
by a man named Alison,5 and pretending to be a history of the French
Revolution. I am sick of that subject, but I could write something on it
which perhaps would be of more use to the M.R. than something better
would be—your having got over the “Unitarian storm”6 with so little
damage to the vessel is a real victory.

Edition: current; Page: [158]
I knew not that you were to be in K.T.7 on Wednesday, and I seldom go
there without some special reasons on that day of the week, for as it
cannot be right in present circumstances to be there every evening, none
costs so little to give up as that in which there is a much shorter time
and only in the presence of others. Had I known of your going I would
have gone—as it is, I must take my compensation at Clapton—as I will
very soon.

I did know the neighbourhood of Limpsfield—part of it at least—in my
childhood, and have walked to it and about it since, but am not familiar
with it. I do not know the particular walk you allude to, though your
description enables me to conceive it almost as if I knew it. I mean to
renew my acquaintance with Limpsfield, and cultivate it, and perfect
it—that seems to me the only place on earth where it is possible to be
happy—although it is you who have been there, and not I.—should I say
although? and not rather because?

Does the Political Cyclopœdia8 plan go on thrivingly? where in heaven
and earth are you to find writers? It is very easy to find people who
can write ill, but very difficult to collect together even one or two
who can write well, especially when the purpose is didactic, not
controversial.

Ever yours

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday May 20, 1833

India House

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

75.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

India House

Monday
 [
May 20, 1833

]

Dear Mr Fox

I am obliged to write in great haste, so I will only say this that I
will write something on Alison2 but that will be too late for this
number—and that I will be with you at Clapton as soon as I am allowed by
being off duty at Edition: current; Page: [159] Kensington where my
father whose sight is disabled for the present by inflammation, has need
of me to read to him. He may have recovered by Wednesday, but at any
rate I cannot dine with you for I shall not get away from this place
early enough for that. Au reste I will come to you in a day or two
whether he has recovered or not.

Yours ever

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wednesday June, 1833

I.H. [India House]

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

76.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

I.H. [India House]

Wednesday
 [
June, 1833

]

My dear Mr Fox

It is really not my fault that the French Revolution2 is not yet
completed; you shall have it, I think I may say, in two days at most. It
will be a poor thing though—

As for me, I am going to K.T. [Kent Terrace] today, despite its being
Wednesday. However meet we must, and soon too.

W.A.3 is wrong, as Fonblanque was. I thought so from the first, & as
soon as I found others thought differently, I made the matter sure by
enquiry at the Colonial Office, from the highest authority (nearly)
namely the head of the West Indies Department there.4 He tells me (as I
expected) that the slave is to pay nothing directly or indirectly
towards his ransom. He is to be free ¼th now, & entirely in twelve
years; & is not to be required to work for his master (or to work at
all) during the ¼th nor is his master to be required to give him
employment nor to pay him any rate of wages. So all commentary on the
manifold absurdities & impossibilities of that part of the plan is
useless now when it is abandoned.

I wrote a notice of “Pauline” for the Examiner which could not be
inserted, & I am to alter & enlarge it for Tait.5

Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [160]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 4, 1833

India House

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

77.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

India House

July 4, 1833

My dear Mr Fox

I am afraid I shall altogether forfeit all character with you for
knowing my own mind or for telling it, by so constantly talking about
going to see you, and never doing it. So I will not talk about it any
more, but will do it all the sooner; & in the mean time I write to say
how happy I shall be to bear my testimony to the Cause,2 by maintaining
it in the M.R. in the manner you propose, against the threatened attack.
Of all propositions which could have been made to me for writing
anything either in the M.R. or elsewhere, that is what I should like
best—because it is the subject I am most interested in, and to be
treated in the manner in which I think myself most equal to treating it.
I have always done more justice to a subject when I have treated it
controversially than when I have attempted a systematic exposition. I
should not do for the pulpit, for I am always cold when I “have all the
palaver to myself”: and besides I always find most to say when I do not
feel under an obligation to say all that can be said.

Pray let me know when I am to begin, that is, let me have the paper I am
to reply to, as early as may be.

Yours ever faithfully

J. S. Mill

I think I have found out Pel Verjuice,3 but I do not want to be told who
he is—I like the new number of the M.R. very much, except the article on
the education of women4—

Edition: current; Page: [161]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

5th July 1833

London

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

78.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

[
London

,]
5th July 1833

.

My dear Carlyle

I wrote a short letter to you intending to send it by your brother2 when
he went to Craigenputtoch; but he did not find time to call on me again
and I having very foolishly mislaid his address, did not find out his
place of abode till some hours after he had left town. As the letter was
very short and had little in it, I cancelled it and determined to write
a longer and better; which however I have not set about till now. In the
meantime I have received your letter, which was welcome on many
accounts: on none more than because it recognises in express words, what
has always been tacitly recognised but seldom spoken or written about by
either of us, the negative part of the relation between us—the fact that
we still differ in many of our opinions, perhaps as you say (though of
this I am not sure) throughout the range of a “half-universe.” I
certainly shall not hesitate to shew you “the length and breadth of my
dissent.” But the truth is, I had persuaded myself for a long time that
the difference was next to nothing; was such as counted for little in my
estimation at least, being rather in some few of our speculative
premises than in any of our practical conclusions. When I came to review
my opinions and ask myself after a considerable period of fresh thought
and fresh experience, the deliberate question, which at some periods
assumes a more serious and solemn aspect than at others, what I
believed? what were my convictions? I found that they were, and for the
present could not but be, more materially divergent from yours than I
had for a time believed. As soon as I felt quite sure of this, I told
you so; and though I wrote as if in a sceptical and unsettled state of
mind, the very fact that I wrote at all about it proved that I had come
into a more settled state. I think that I have obtained something like a
firm footing, and additional rather than new light; I can hardly say
that I have changed any of my opinions, but I seem to myself to know
more, from increased observation of other people, and increased
experience of my own feelings. All which is thus acquired must be clear
gain; it is increased knowledge of the only valuable kind, knowledge of
Realities; and it must be for want of intellect or for want of will if
with additional ground to build upon, I cannot raise my edifice of
Thought to a greater height and so look round and see more of Truth than
I could see before. But of all these things we shall both write Edition:
current; Page: [162] and speak hereafter. Concerning my journey to
Craigenputtoch all I can at present say is that if I go not thither I
shall go nowhere else. However it will not, at all events be in August,
for in that month my father will be absent, and it is inconvenient for
both of us to be away from the India House at the same time. It cannot
be till he return.—I had the pleasure of an hour’s conversation with Dr.
Carlyle on his passing through London, and was glad to learn that he is
to be an inmate of Craigenputtoch all this summer and autumn.—My
occupations for some time back have been rather internal than external;
I have not been working much, but much has been working in me. I have
written little, partly because I was better employed in obtaining
whereof to write, than in writing, partly also because of press of
business at the India House, and of certain temporary domestic
occupations in my father’s house. I have completed scarcely anything but
a poor, flimsy, short paper on that book of Alison’s, which I undertook
in an evil hour, when the subject was as remote as possible from those
which were occupying my thoughts and feelings at the time; and which I
accordingly performed exceedingly ill, and was obliged to cancel the
part which had cost me most labour. What is left, (it is not worth your
perusal) will appear in the Monthly Repository: short as the whole is,
it has been divided into two parts, of which one has appeared: it had
been better to reserve the whole for another number. I shall in future
never write on any subject which my mind is not full of when I begin to
write; unless the occasion is such that it is better the thing were ill
done than not at all, that being the alternative.—What you say of that
paper of mine on Poetry and Art3 is exactly what I think respecting it
myself. I do not think it contains anything erroneous, but I feel that
it is far from going to the bottom of the subject, or even very deep
into it; I think I see somewhat further into it now, and shall perhaps
understand it in time. I think I mentioned to you that I have carried
the investigation (rightly or wrongly as it may be) one step farther in
a paper (being a review of a new poem) which I wrote for the Examiner:
it proved too long for Fonblanque, and it is to appear in Tait,4 after
such additions and alterations as I see it absolutely requires, and
which I have not yet found time to give it. You say, you wish that you
could help me in this matter; you can, and do, help me in all such
matters, not by logical definition, which as I think I have said or
written before, I agree with you in thinking not to be your peculiar
walk of usefulness; but in suggesting deep and pregnant thoughts which
might never have occurred to me, but which I am quite able when I have
them to subject to all needful logical manipulation. This brings to my
mind that I have never explained what I meant when writing once before
in this strain I called you a Poet Edition: current; Page: [163] and
Artist. I conceive that most of the highest truths, are, to persons
endowed by nature in certain ways which I think I could state,
intuitive; that is, they need neither explanation nor proof, but if not
known before, are assented to as soon as stated. Now it appears to me
that the poet or artist is conversant chiefly with such truths and that
his office in respect to truth is to declare them, and to make them
impressive. This, however, supposes that the reader, hearer, or
spectator is a person of the kind to whom those truths are intuitive.
Such will of course receive them at once, and will lay them to heart in
proportion to the impressiveness with which the artist delivers and
embodies them. But the other and more numerous kind of people will
consider them as nothing but dreaming or madness: and the more so,
certainly, the more powerful the artist, as an artist: because the means
which are good for rendering the truth impressive to those who know it,
are not the same and are often absolutely incompatible with those which
render it intelligible to those who know it not. Now this last I think
is the proper office of the logician or I might say the metaphysician,
in truth he must be both. The same person may be poet and logician, but
he cannot be both in the same composition: and as heroes have been
frustrated of glory “carent quia vate sacro,” so I think the vates
himself has often been misunderstood and successfully cried down for
want of a Logician in Ordinary, to supply a logical commentary on his
intuitive truths. The artist’s is the highest part, for by him alone is
real knowledge of such truths conveyed: but it is possible to convince
him who never could know the intuitive truths, that they are not
inconsistent with anything he does know; that they are even very
probable, and that he may have faith in them when higher natures than
his own affirm that they are truths. He may then build on them and act
on them, or at least act nothing contradictory to them. Now this humbler
part is, I think, that which is most suitable to my faculties, as a man
of speculation. I am not in the least a poet, in any sense; but I can do
homage to poetry. I can to a very considerable extent feel it and
understand it, and can make others who are my inferiors understand it in
proportion to the measure of their capacity. I believe that such a
person is more wanted than even the poet himself; that there are more
persons living who approximate to the latter character than to the
former. I do not think myself at all fit for the one; I do for the
other; your walk I conceive to be the higher. Now one thing not useless
to do would be to exemplify this difference by enlarging in my logical
fashion upon the difference itself: to make those who are not poets,
understand that poetry is higher than Logic, and that the union of the
two is Philosophy—I shall write out my thoughts more at length
somewhere, and somewhen, probably soon. Yours faithfully,

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [164]
I am so far from seeing any intolerance in your dislike of Speculation,
unless it be either of the highest kind, or interesting for the sake of
its interesting author, that I am exactly in the same case. I shall
attend to this in making up my parcels for you hereafter. I have Madame
Roland’s memoirs and will send them with the Poor-Law book and what else
of interesting I can get together.—What I said about “infinitesimal
smallness” did not refer to the work itself but to the effect—no doubt
in another sense, all who do all they can, do equally, and that
infinitely. But when we are to chuse what we shall do, we must compare
the results, and the difficulty is how to compare things infinitely
small.5 Tell me what you think about this, for it will perhaps lead to
the root of some of the chief differences of opinion between us—6

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

10th July, 1833

India House

John Pringle Nichol

Pringle Nichol, John

79.


TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1

India House

,

10th July, 1833

.

My dear Sir,

Every letter I write to you begins with apologies for not writing
sooner, and certainly not before they are due; though if “good
intentions” might suffice (which they never can), I have been intending
to write any time for the last four or five weeks. The first thing I
have to say is that I fear there is no chance of the French
Professorship.2 Bowring has returned, I have seen him, and he says that
the choice of a professor has been retarded by the impossibility of an
agreement between the body who chuse and the ministry who confirm. “De
Broglie and Guizot,” he says in a note to me, “won’t appoint Comte”3 (he
married one of Say’s daughters, you may know him as the author of the
Censeur Européen and a work on Legislation), “and the professors and
members of the Institute won’t appoint anybody else, and the matter
rests there. Rossi”4 (the friend of Dumont,5 professor of droit public
or something of the kind at Geneva) “has been sent for to Paris and is
arrived; but it is doubtful whether he will be put forward by the
Ministry. Comte seems determined not to give way.” I do Edition:
current; Page: [165] not think Comte the fit man—the most that can be
said is that he will not do harm or discredit the science; but he is not
profound in it. He is an excellent man, however, and the new Academy of
Moral and Political Science in the Institute have recently shown some
spirit by choosing him their perpetual secretary, contrary to the wishes
of the Government, who oppose him because he is against them in
politics. Their first idea of appointing an English economist was much
better, but, perhaps, they would have found it difficult where the
candidate had not established a high European reputation, to make out
such a case as would justify in the eyes of Frenchmen the preference of
a foreigner, however highly qualified, over “native talent,” for it is
not with us in political economy as it has long been with Italy in
music—there is not a prejudice in our favour—therefore there must be a
natural prejudice against us.

What you say in your last on the extreme desirableness of banding
together the English Gironde is perfectly just and has been often
thought of by almost all the leading philosophic reformers here, never
more than lately; but it never was brought to any practical result nor,
I fear, will it until the crisis becomes considerably more imminent than
at present. The lamentable truth is that our Gironde, like the other
Gironde, are a rope of sand; what our friend Tait (or rather the author
of his first article for May)6 said of them is not much, if at all,
exaggerated. There are no leaders, and without leaders there can never
be organization. There is no man or men of commanding talents among the
Radicals in public life, or those whose position in respect of pecuniary
independence enables them to put themselves forward personally. If there
were but two or three men with your energy, what you propose might be
done, and much else.

About a twelvemonth ago steps were actually taken for the formation of a
Society for the Diffusion of Moral and Political Knowledge.7 Hume had
consented to be chairman, Warburton8 vice-chairman, Grote treasurer, J.
Romilly secretary, and there was a very creditable list of names for the
Committee; they were to cause works to be written, and they were also to
sanction others which were not written for them. No arrangements had
been made, however, for the commencement of any work but one, which was
only to be sanctioned, a Political Penny Magazine, of which Roebuck was
to be the editor, and the appearance of which was to depend Edition:
current; Page: [166] on alterations in the law, or on the chances of
being able to evade it. The Ministry made private intimations to the
parties concerned in this Penny Magazine Scheme, that the taxes on
knowledge were to be taken off; fully believing this, they suspended
their proceedings until that event. The Ministry broke faith with them,
and in the meantime Roebuck got into Parliament, everybody’s mind became
otherwise occupied, and nothing was done.

I have little hope of any of the present race of parliamentary radicals.
Some of them are full of crotchets, others fastidious and overloaded
with petty scrupulosity; none have energy, except Roebuck and Buller;
Roebuck has no judgment, Buller no patient persevering industry. Those
two, however, will improve, and we shall hear more of them every year;
all the others will remain, I think, very much the same men they are
now. There is really more to be hoped from new converts like Clay9 and
Gisborne,10 who are in the habit of uttering their sentiments boldly,
than from the men who were Radicals in Tory times, and got the habit of
prudence and temporizing which they cannot break themselves of even now.

What are we driving to? I do not expect a Revolution, because I think
any unanimous demand of the people of this country will always be
yielded to, as it was last year; but it is difficult to conjecture what
acts of injustice they might, under circumstances of excitement, be
provoked to demand. I expect a series of such Parliaments as this, with
a step gained at every election. The cause of the evil is one which I
foresaw and predicted long before—the anomaly of a democratic
constitution in a plutocratically constituted society. Till changes take
place which can only be remotely promoted by any Reform Bill, the people
will continue from necessity to select their representatives from the
same class as before, avoiding only those who are committed to
principles which the people abhor. The consequence is they must take the
feebles. All the marked and energetic men in the higher classes, a few
excepted, were committed against Reform; that was the natural
consequence of their education and the circumstances of those times. The
people, therefore, threw them aside, and selected men from the second or
third rank, who were not committed because it had never been thought
worth while to ask their opinion, such men as would say they were for
the Reform Bill, and the Whig Ministers. But further than this, they
were not at all better than their class in opinions or feelings, and
inferior to their predecessors in talent and judgment. They have acted
as such men were sure to do: what will happen? There will be a fresh
purgation; these being now disgraced will be thrown aside, and there
will be a third levy from the self-same class, consisting of the same
sort of men Edition: current; Page: [167] or still feebler ones, but who
will say they are for the particular measure then most called for at the
particular time by the people, and most recently resisted by the present
house. That particular measure will then be carried, and all other
things will go as badly as they do now. The same next time, and so on
till the real waking minds of the country renounce money-getting, and
till they are paid for devoting their time to legislation.

Have you considered the effect of the proposed Commutation of Tithe? The
compulsory part of it is I perceive to be postponed till another year.
As it will stop the increase of tithe at least in corn—as no new land,
or new improvements will pay any tithe—it strikes me that the commuted
tithe will continue wholly, or partially, a tax on the consumer, until
the least productive land or capital shall, by the extension of
cultivation and population, yield a rent equal to the commuted tithe,
and after that it will become wholly a rent-charge. Do you think I am
right? You continue I see to write with great spirit and excellent
effect in Tait. I am much gratified by your favourable opinion of my
tract on endowments.11 You have, I dare say, recognized me in The
Examiner on the Bank Question;12 the article was superficial, and could
not consistently with its purpose be otherwise. Nobody, except you and
me, seems to write on that side of the question. My father quite agrees
with us. Pray do not imitate my neglect in not writing soon, and believe
me,

Yours very faithfully,

J. S. Mill.

You promised me a letter on the Property Tax—I never was more in need of
it.13

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

12 July 1833

John Sterling

Sterling, John

80.


TO JOHN STERLING1

12 July 1833

My dear Sterling

I have been very long in writing to you and have only time to write a
few words now—Taylor’s answer to your question2 is briefly this—“I have
not heard of any plans of the Govt for the education of the negroes, nor
do Edition: current; Page: [168] I expect to hear of any. Certainly if
there were to be any Commission of enquiry on the subject, Sterling
could not employ his time more serviceably to the ends which he has at
heart than by getting himself placed upon it—nor would the Govt be
likely to meet with any person half so well qualified to conduct such an
enquiry.” So much for these statesmen of ours—they always remind me of
what Southey said to me at Keswick—pointing in a little Bible-book for
children in size and shape an inch cube, to a wood-cut of Samson with a
gate on his back about twenty times his own size, he said “that is like
Lord John Russell3 carrying away the British constitution” & sure enough
that is about the proportion between the men & the work they have in
hand.

I suppose you have by this time returned from your journey up the Rhine.
I shall be much interested by the impression German literature and
philosophy make upon you on a nearer acquaintance. That question between
Schelling’s view and Schleiermacher’s is the one great question on the
subject of religion. My own views as far as I have any fixed ones are
much nearer to Schleiermacher’s than to Schelling’s and Coleridge’s.4
With them I do not at all see as my mind is at present constituted any
chance of my ultimately agreeing. I think I am even further from them
than I was. I suspect that your mind and mine have passed that point in
their respective orbits where they approximate most—and that our
premisses are now more nearly the same than our conclusions are likely
to be. I think I am becoming more a Movement-man than I was, instead of
less—I do not mean merely in politics, but in all things—& that you are
becoming more and more inclined to look backward for good. However I am
talking without book, for who in these times knows what he shall think
rightest & best six months hence? Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [169]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July, 1833

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

81.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

[Late
July, 1833

]

My dear Carlyle

This note will be given to you by Mr. R. W. Emerson2 of Boston (United
States) who having been long a reader of your writings, is desirous to
take the first opportunity of making your acquaintance. Mr. Emerson met
with our friend Gustave d’Eichthal at Rome, and was by him referred to
me as one who could give him the introduction to you which he wished
for—I have great pleasure in doing so—Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2nd August 1833

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

82.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

,
2nd August 1833

.

My dear Carlyle

This letter will be as you desire, extremely biographical: I was
conscious myself of a deficiency in that department, in my last: which
however was wholly autobiographic; for what is my life made up of, in
the main, but my thoughts and feelings? I have no actions to relate
except occasionally the promulgation of some thoughts and feelings. But
I am now to speak of others rather than of myself. And first, of those
in whom you are most interested. You have probably heard that the
Austins do not quit England. The Chancellor is to appoint or has
actually appointed a Commission to digest the Criminal Law and Austin is
to be one of the members. This is work for him of the kind which he most
likes, and for which he is best fitted: it is also a provision for him:
he is to have £500 a year while it lasts, and it will doubtless lead to
other employment in the same line. All his good fortune comes to him at
the same time: the four Inns of Court, chiefly at the instigation of
Bickersteth2 (the most valuable man in the profession of the law—do you
know about him?), have resolved to found Edition: current; Page: [170]
two Lectureships, one of English Law, the other of Civil Law and
Jurisprudence: this last it is not impossible that Austin may be
appointed to: it is compatible with his other employment and will add
£450 to his income. So he is likely to be placed in the best
circumstances possible for him, whether we consider his usefulness or
his own happiness. There are no fears now but for his health: I have
always thought that anxiety was the chief cause of his frequent
illnesses; they have been, however of late, considerably more frequent
than formerly though less severe—he is ill now; as soon as he is fit to
travel they are going out of town, probably to some place on the north
coast of Devonshire, where they will remain till October, when he
returns to commence his new duties. Mrs. Austin is now overloaded with
proposals for translating; her fame as a translator has been, very
deservedly, raised much higher by this “Falk.”3 As she will not now be
at all dependent on the profits (McCulloch4 would take me to task—I
should say wages) of her literary undertakings, she will now be at
liberty to consult only her own judgment of what will do most good: she
will persevere, I have no doubt, and be useful.—You ask me about Grote:
I happen to be able to tell you more about him than almost any one,
having been intimate with him almost from my boyhood, though less so
than formerly in proportion as I have diverged from his opinions: he is
a Utilitarian; in one sense I am so too, but he is so in rather a narrow
sense; has therefore a belief, a firm one, in him most deep and
conscientious, for which chiefly he lives and for which he would die. He
is a highly instructed man; an excellent scholar; has made great
progress in writing a History of Greece,5 some of the manuscript of
which I have seen; it will be a work of great, though not of consummate
merit: he was one of the first of his rank and station to proclaim
strong Benthamic-Radical opinions; he published a pamphlet6 of merit, in
defence thereof against the Edinburgh Review, as long ago as 1820, when
not so old as I am now, and another7 two years ago just before the
Reform Bill. He is a man of good, but not first-rate intellect: hard and
mechanical; not at all quick; with less subtlety than any able and
instructed man I ever knew: with much logical and but little aesthetic
culture; narrow therefore; even narrower than most other Utilitarians of
reading and education: more a disciple of my father than of any one
else: industrious, brave, not very active or spirited; universally
beloved for his extreme goodness, his simplicity, uprightness, and
gentleness; Edition: current; Page: [171] resembling Ricardo in that
particular, though a far inferior man to him in powers of intellect. He
is by far the most considered of the radicals in the H. of C. [House of
Commons] is more nearly their leader than any one else, & would be so
altogether but that he has not the kind of talents which fit a man for a
parliamentary leader; he has not sufficient readiness, decision, &
presence of mind. After all I have said of him you will be surprised to
learn that he reads German. He will be a man of considerable weight in
politics soon. As I am on politics, I will ask you if you have seen,
except in the abridgment which the Examiner will give,8 Roebuck’s speech
on proposing a resolution for the establishment of a national education
of the whole people: I should like you to see it, for it is a better
exhibition of him than I think you have seen: it has raised him
considerably, I think, in most people’s estimation, which is seldom
matter of praise but is really so in this instance. It was beginning to
be supposed that he could do nothing: he has shewn now that he can; and
we must add him to Grote and Buller to make up the only three among the
radical members who have not disappointed the expectations of their
friends. Of these three, and of all the rest, Buller is as you once said
the only one who possesses any the smallest genius. But several of them
may be and will be valuable as ‘honest Artisans.’—I can tell you
something of Detrosier.9 He is again in London, and has some prospect of
picking up a living as a lecturer on experimental physics: he is, it
seems, accustomed to the craft, and qualified for it; he has made the
attempt even here with success, and the only doubt about his having
several profitable engagements arises from the freshness of his fame as
Secretary to the Political Union. Assuredly Radicalism is not yet the
road to wealth and honours, though its turn I think is coming. In the
meantime Detrosier, poor fellow, with a foolish wife and two or three
children, has some difficulty in making the two ends meet; however he
has friends here, who will not let him be in want.—I had a short note
from Gustave d’Eichthal the other day, dated from Rome, merely to
introduce an American named Emerson, who had sought an introduction to
me as a means of obtaining one to you: this I of course gave him;10 he
is going into Scotland and may possibly seek you out: he appears to be a
reader and professes to be an admirer of your writings; therefore you
might possibly do him some good: but from one or two conversations I
have had with him, I do not think him a very hopeful subject. Of
Fonblanque I have not seen very much lately; except (as you have)
through the Examiner: in which I myself have written very little of
late: almost the only paper I Edition: current; Page: [172] have sent to
him for some time you will see in the next or the next but one:11 I will
let you find it out if you can; there is not much in it; it is all
political. I have indeed written less of late than for a long time
before; no longer for the reason I formerly mentioned, but literally
from the pressure of comparatively trivial occupations, yet which in the
particular circumstances were not such. The little remainder of my
little paper on Alison’s book12 has just appeared: the two numbers of
the M.R. containing it, shall reach you somehow soon. I have sent you no
books this month, because I really could not get together enough to make
it worth while: I had only the Poor Laws book. I have a promise of a
copy of the Factory Commissioners Report:13 when it comes, shall I send
it? Madame Roland I had lent, and it did not return to me till a day or
two too late. I have now a copy (borrowed) of one of Babbage’s two
books:14 you once expressed a wish to see them: have you still that
wish? or has it been satisfied! Now I have also (if you would care to
see it) a book of Bulwer’s, entitled “England & the English.” I have not
yet looked into it: but a Frenchman who is now in London said of it to
Mrs. Austin, that though he had been here only a month that book did not
tell him any one thing that was new to him: it must therefore be a very
poor book. I told you in one of my letters15 that I had been writing
something about Bentham & his philosophy; it was for Bulwer, at his
request, for the purposes of this book: contrary to my expectation at
that time, he has printed part of this paper ipsissimis verbis as an
appendix to his book: so you will see it; but I do not acknowledge it,
nor mean to do so. I furnished him also at his request with a few yet
rougher notes concerning my father, which he has not dealt so fairly by,
but has cut and mangled and coxcombified the whole thing till its mother
would not know it: there are a few sentences of mine in it, something
like what they were when I wrote them; for the sake of artistic
congruity I wish there were not. This I still less own, because it is
not mine, in any sense. About my going to Craigenputtoch there will be
some uncertainty till the very time, because the only contingency which
would prevent it may happen at any time, and will remain possible to the
very last. You will not hear positively that I am coming till the post
immediately preceding my arrival—yes you will though, for I shall travel
rather slowly. I am sorry that your brother’s speedy return to Italy
will prevent me from meeting him at Craigenputtoch: but I shall at all
events see him on his passage through Edition: current; Page: [173]
London?—I have read the first part of your Cagliostro;16 not yet the
second: I know not why you should call it “half mad”; it is merely like
much of your writing, half ironical, half earnest; it may be of use to
some people: If human beings would but do thoroughly all they do, I
believe with you that Good would be much more forwarded than Evil:
halfness is the great enemy of spiritual worth: whatever shames any
human being out of that, is of unspeakable value. I have left little
room for any of the many things I could willingly say on your last
letter; neither is the letter before me, which however frequently
happens to be the case when I am answering your letters. Do not mistake
what I meant when I talked of logic; I did not mean it in the sense in
which your answers to Sir William Hamilton17 (who I suppose is the
“schoolman” you allude to) would apply to it. Of logic, as the theory of
the processes of intellect, I think not wholly as you, yet nearly: he
who has legs can walk without knowledge of anatomy, yet you will allow
that such knowledge may be made substantially available for the cure of
lameness. By logic however I meant the antithesis of Poetry or Art: in
which distinction I am learning to perceive a twofold contrast: the
literal as opposed to the symbolical, and reasoning as opposed to
intuition. Not the theory of reasoning but the practice. In reasoning I
include all processes of thought which are processes at all, that is,
which proceed by a series of steps or links. What I would say is that my
vocation is, I think, chiefly for this last; a more extended & higher
one than for any branch of mere “Philosophy of Mind” though far inferior
to that of the artist.—We shall talk doubtless of these things, and also
of many others, not excepting the one you mention, Paris—My notion of it
is chiefly taken from its recent literature, which is exactly what
Goethe called it, the literature of Despair—die Litteratur der
Verzweiflung. You will not wonder at that—nor do I.

Buller who is about to write to you will put this letter under his
cover—Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

Thanks to Mrs. Carlyle for her two lines, and best remembrances to her
and to Dr. Carlyle.

Edition: current; Page: [174]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

6th August 1833

India House

William Tait

Tait, William

83.


TO WILLIAM TAIT1

India House

6th August
1833

My dear Sir

You must have been a good deal surprised at hearing nothing from me
respecting the literary article which was to be transferred from the
Examiner to your Magazine.2 The fact is that for some weeks past the
pressure of other occupations had left me no time to take the article in
hand and fit it for your use: and now at length when I had begun to
rewrite it for you, I find that the work it is a review of (a poem named
Pauline) has been disposed of in your last number by a passing notice,3
in terms of contempt which though I think the poem was overpraised in
the Monthly Repository, I cannot consider it to deserve. So I hope you
will receive this as my apology for not fulfilling my engagement.

Believe me
 Most truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

5th September 1833

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

84.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

,
5th September 1833

.

My dear Carlyle

You have probably heard from Dr Carlyle before this reaches you, that I
shall not, after all, see you this autumn. There were about twenty
chances to one that I should, but it is the twenty-first which has taken
effect in Reality. I was mistaken, too, when I said that if I went not
to Craigenputtoch I should go nowhere: I am going to Paris: the same
cause which I then thought, if it operated at all, would operate to keep
me here, now sends me there.2 It is a journey entirely of duty; nothing
else, you will do me the justice to believe, would have kept me from
Craigenputtoch after Edition: current; Page: [175] what I have said &
written so often: it is duty, and duty connected with a person to whom
of all persons alive I am under the greatest obligations. If I had not
so short a vacation the two journeys would not be incompatible, but alas
for him who must abide eleven months of the year at a desk in Leadenhall
Street! All the compensation I can make to you will be to write often
and fully, and tell you all I see and hear at Paris that will interest
you. You said something in one of your letters about a projected
residence of some time at Paris for yourself—it would not, I think, be
pleasant to you, but extremely melancholy; everywhere however there is
food enough for that—and I do believe that for observation of realities,
at least human spiritual realities, there is no place in the world like
Paris in the present age, for the reason you mentioned, that
individualities of character are there unchained, not being kept down
and fashioned to a model by a common overruling Belief—but again,
nowhere in Europe, if I am not greatly mistaken, are there so few
individualities of character as at Paris. I suspect Prussia is the only
country pleasant to live in for one who loves mankind—but for that very
reason not the fit place for one who is capable of being their spiritual
benefactor in any however small a degree unless he was born there.

Dr Carlyle has been so good as to take charge of some books for you:
viz. two Reports of the Factory Commission, full of the biography of
history; the works of Madame Roland, the noblest character by far of the
French Revolution, perhaps of France itself; though far from the most
brilliant; & the two numbers of the Repository which contain my flimsy
paper on Alison. That last was hardly worth sending; keep it however. I
meant you to keep Junius Redivivus; I have other copies: it is not,
however, worth sending back, to you. That and all the other books, came
safe. What did you think of the Vieux Cordelier?3 Villate’s book,4 which
pretends to let one into the secrets of the Terreur I believe to be a
mere tissue of lies and exaggerations: he was a juré of the
revolutionary tribunal, deeply implicated in all the horrors of the
time, and anxious by making great disclosures to save his own neck from
the reaction, to which unless my memory fail me he nevertheless fell a
sacrifice.—The Poor-Laws book, Dr Carlyle tells me you have: indeed I
thought you would, for it has been very widely circulated: write me word
what you think of it. Write to me also about your brother: he stays here
so short a time that I shall not know him, only lay the foundation for
future knowledge; but I have already seen enough to respect and like him
and to hope for his future friendship.—I forgot to ask whether you have
seen that “Arthur Coningsby”—it is scarcely worth sending,—though
decidedly worth reading: perhaps it may go with other books:—also
Bulwer’s book.

Edition: current; Page: [176]
I have read the latter half of Cagliostro with very great pleasure;
greater than the first half: and I look forward to the appearance of
Teufelsdreck5 with great satisfaction: by the impression it makes upon
me now, as compared with that which it made on the first reading, I
shall have a kind of measure of the space which I have franchi (as the
French say) in the interval; whether forwards, backwards, or to one
side. I have certainly changed much since you knew me; in some things I
have become, I think, more like yourself, in others more unlike; I am
partly reconciled to not seeing you this year by the thought that next
year I shall probably be firmer on my legs, spiritually speaking, and
shall have a clearer and more fixed insight into what I am to be and to
do, than I have at present, and that the relation between us will then
be (much more than now) what you once called it, “a relation between two
Somethings” and not between a Something & a Nothing.

—About that Cagliostro and that Teufelsdreck, by the way, it has
frequently occurred to me of late to ask of myself and also of you,
whether that mode of writing between sarcasm or irony and earnest, be
really deserving of so much honour as you give to it by making use of it
so frequently. I do not say that it is not good: all modes of writing,
in the hands of a sincere man, are good, provided they are intelligible.
But are there many things, worth saying, and capable of being said in
that manner which cannot be as well or better said in a more direct way?
The same doubt has occasionally occurred to me respecting much of your
phraseology, which fails to bring home your meaning to the comprehension
of most readers so well as would perhaps be done by commoner and more
familiar phrases: however this last I say with the most perfect
submission, because I am sure that every one speaks and writes best in
his own mother tongue, the language in which he thinks.—I have just
received a copy of some Evidence taken by the Poor Law Commissioners on
the subject of Education, affording some striking instances of the good
effect produced upon the very rabble of London by even such imperfect
schooling as they now sometimes receive: shall I send it in my next
parcel?

I am now reading, very sedulously, Voltaire’s Correspondence: I have
never read it before. It throws much light upon the spiritual character
of that time, and especially of its literary men. How strangely
Voltaire’s own character has been mistaken; and how little does he seem
to have been conscious of what he was about, to have had even any
settled purpose in it. He certainly had no intention of being the
Patriarch of any sect of Destructives, & if the priests would have let
him alone, he would have let them Edition: current; Page: [177] alone.
In the greater part of his lifetime he seems to have been timid
excessively, and would have abstained from almost anything in order to
remain quiet at Paris. But after he had found the quiet he sought, at a
distance, it was the revival of persecution as evinced by the
suppression of the Encyclopédie, the condemnation of Helvetius’s book,
the speech of Le Franc de Pompignan at the Academy denouncing Voltaire
himself personally, the success of Palissot’s comedy of Les Philosophes,
the abuse of the Philosophes by Fréron & others, &c., &c.6 it was these
things which erected Voltaire after the age of sixty-five into the
leader of a crusade against Christianity; & it was then, too, that he
seems to have found out that wit and ridicule were capable of being
powerful weapons in his hands. He always seems to have despised the
French, & thought them incapable of philosophy, or even of science; and
he continually lamented that they insisted upon taking to speculation,
which they were unfit for, and neglected the beaux-arts (what
beaux-arts!) which had been the glory of the siècle de Louis 14.

I have no more room—mit Glück und Heil

J. S. Mill.

I shall remain here till the middle of October probably, so that your
letters will reach me as usual. I cannot get a frank this time; all
Parliament is out of town. My kindest remembrances to Mrs. Carlyle.7

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday Sept. 7, 1833

India House

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

85.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

India House

Saturday [Sept. 7, 1833]

My dear Mr Fox

I am ashamed to say I can give no hope that Blakey2 will be ready on
Monday—though I think part of him will be. But I have nearly made up my
mind to transfer to you the paper on Poetry3 which I thought of putting
Edition: current; Page: [178] at the head of a review of Tennyson
somewhere. I think I could make a better review of Tennyson, and with
the same ideas too, in another way.

If you like the idea, and if you see her4 before Monday, will you
mention it to her—you know it is hers—if she approves, it shall be
yours. I shall see her on Monday myself, and then I will speak of the
matter to her. [Ye]s—she is like hers[elf]—if she is ever ou[t]5 of
spirits it is always something amiss in me that is the cause—it is so
now—it is because she sees that what ought to be so much easier to me
than to her, is in reality more difficult—costs a harder struggle—to
part company with the opinion of the world, and with my former modes of
doing good in it; however, thank heaven, she does not doubt that I can
do it—

Yes—I shall see you often, I hope, at Clapton when she is gone—6

yours ever

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24 September 1833

India House

William Tait

Tait, William

86.


TO WILLIAM TAIT1

India House

24 September 1833

My dear Sir

You have not heard from me as a contributor to your Magazine for some
time past. I am now about to make up for my neglect by making a proposal
to you which if accepted would furnish you with a “stock in hand” but
which it is very probable may not suit you.

I have had by me for some time, five Political Economy essays,2 ready
for publication; four of them on particular points, containing views
which I am desirous to submit to the judgment of the scientific students
of the science,—in continuation and completion of Ricardo’s doctrines.
The fifth is a dissertation on the science itself,3 and on the proper
mode of studying Edition: current; Page: [179] it. The last may be
considered as comparatively popular; the other four are, as from their
nature and object they cannot but be, somewhat abstract; not more so
however than De Quincey’s “Templar’s Dialogues” in the London Magazine.4
There is no use in publishing these tracts as a separate voume, for few
would read them and nobody would buy them. They must therefore remain in
my desk unless they will suit you. In length they would average I think
about the dimensions of an article on such subjects in the Edinburgh
Review. They would not be attractive to the bulk of Magazine-readers,
and the only chance of their suiting you lies in the extremely
miscellaneous character of such a Magazine as yours, which should and
does contain matter for almost all classes of readers. The high
character which your work is establishing for itself in Political
Economy would also make any elaborate paper on that subject less out of
place in your pages than in those of any other periodical.

If you do not think the proposition quite inadmissible, be so good as to
write to me, and I will send you one or two of them for your
inspection—I should also be much obliged to our friend Mr Nichol if he
would favour me with his remarks on them before anything is determined
upon.

If you should finally resolve to publish them in the Magazine, I shall
further request of you to have 100 copies of each, struck off for me &
at my expense, to give away to the few persons who can be expected to
take any considerable interest in such speculations.

I have not seen much in the Magazine lately which I could ascribe to Mr
Nichol—nor have I heard from him—I hope he is not ill?

The French Professorship I fear is out of the question—the choice lies
between Comte & Rossi.5

Most truly yours

J. S. Mill

I have not given up the idea of those “Essays on the Ambiguities of the
Moral Sciences”6 but for the present I see no chance of my having time
for it—7

J.S.M.

Edition: current; Page: [180]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

5th October 1833

Mickleham, near Dorking, Surrey

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

87.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

Mickleham, near Dorking, Surrey

,

5th October 1833

(don’t direct hither, though.)

My dear Carlyle

Two of your letters, both well deserving a better answer than this will
be, have been waiting a long time for it: such as it is you shall have
it now: You ask me to write with abandonment—it is pleasant in many ways
to be asked that, and by you—doubt not but that I shall do so, more and
more—I have not, and have never had, any voluntary or rather intentional
reserve with any one whom I value, certainly not with you—but that is
not enough—I am sensible in myself of a want of spontaneousness, a
self-consciousness even in the act of confiding, which is perhaps
natural enough in a born metaphysician as I am in the very worst sense,
but which I dislike extremely both in myself and wherever else I see it,
and which I believe I am getting rid of. There will I think be perfect
spontaneous confidence, the abandonment you speak of, in the fullest
sense, between us two, some time; I think as soon as we are completely
intimate; I was going to say completely know each other, but that is an
impossibility, as you well know. In the meantime it is very grateful to
me to find that everything which brings me nearer to you, brings you
also nearer to me, and that every approach to a closer intimacy is
responded to as soon as made. Our friendship is a strong healthy young
plant, which being in a good soil may be left to itself to grow. So no
more of that at present—Now I will say that I am going to Paris probably
at the end of this week. If I could have another letter from you before
I go, well: if not, write when you are moved thereto, and a friend at
the India House will forward your letter to Paris, for I do not wish to
be five weeks without it. What you wish to be ascertained for you at
Paris, shall be so; I shall be able to obtain the fullest and exactest
information. Touching French dictionaries I am fully as ignorant as
yourself: I learnt the language in the country itself, and acquired the
colloquial part of it in greater perfection than most English do, so had
never occasion for the sort of dictionary you want: I believe there is
none good, none but such as you probably have; but I will inquire about
that, too. Before I go I will send a parcel to Fraser’s for you,
containing Bulwer, Coningsby, and more French Memoirs if I can find any
more worth sending. I am afraid you have already had the best of them.
Edition: current; Page: [181] With them shall go the October number of
the Monthly Repository: containing two articles of mine: one, a review
of a foolish book by a man named Blakey, of Morpeth, called a History of
Moral Science;2 for writing which he is utterly unfit, being a man who
as you would say, has no eyes, only a pair of glasses and I will add,
almost opake ones. The other article3 is the little paper I told you I
was writing in further prosecution of, or rather improvement on, the
thoughts I published before on Poetry and Art. You will not find much in
the first to please you; perhaps rather more in the second, but I fear
you will think both of them too much infected by mechanical theories of
the mind: yet you will probably in this as in many other cases be glad
to see that out of my mechanical premisses I elicit dynamical
conclusions—and I have a paragraph at the end of the article on Blakey’s
book by way of manifesto, to tell people that I don’t care one straw
about premisses except for the sake of conclusions. I have been very
busy and active in writing lately; even on politics; did you detect me
in those long-winded answers (in the Examiner) to the ministerial
pamphlet?4 but I tell it not to the profane. Your approval of the Alison
paper was very gratifying; I also am conscious that I write with a
greater appearance of sureness and strong belief than I did for a year
or two before, in that period of recovery after the petrification of a
narrow philosophy, in which one feels quite sure of scarcely anything
respecting Truth, except that she is many-sided. Did you ever read
Schleiermacher’s paper on Socrates? I have been reading it in a number
of Connop Thirlwall’s “Philological Museum,”5 a Cambridge classical
periodical of merit: Schleiermacher’s theory of Socrates is that besides
knowing “that he knew nothing,” he however knew also what knowledge was,
and how it was to be come at: that was exactly my case and was the faith
I also professed and taught for some years unconscious all the while
that I had nothing else to teach: I have now got at some few things
more: all of which, as they become clearer to myself, will be shewn to
you either in what I publish, or in letters, or personal communication.
You suggest to me, what I have many times thought of, the advisableness
of my writing something more elaborate than I have yet written on the
French Revolution: it is highly probable I shall do it sometime if you
do not; but besides the difficulty of Edition: current; Page: [182]
doing it tolerably, there is a far greater difficulty of doing it so as
to be read in England, until the time comes when one can speak of
Christianity as it may be spoken of in France; as by far the greatest
and best thing which has existed on this globe, but which is gone, never
to return, only what was best in it to reappear in another and still
higher form, some time (heaven knows when). One could not, now, say this
openly in England, and be read—at least by the many; yet it is perhaps
worth trying. Without saying out one’s whole belief on that point, it is
impossible to write about the French Revolution in any way professing to
tell the whole truth. A propos I have been reading the New Testament;
properly I can never be said to have read it before. I am the fitter to
read it now; perhaps there is nobody within the four seas so utterly
unprejudiced on the subject. I have never believed Christianity as a
religion, consequently have no habitual associations of reverence, nor
on the other hand any of contempt like so many who have become sceptics
after having been taught to believe; nor have I, like so many, been
bored or disgusted with it in my youth. As far as I know your
impressions about Christ, mine from this reading are exactly the same.
How strikingly just for instance is your contrast in your last letter,
between the Christ of the Gospels, & the namby-pamby Christ of the poor
modern Christians.6 Many things have struck me in reading this book. One
is that nearly all the good of the four Gospels is in St Matthew alone;
& we could almost spare the other three. Mark and Luke however do no
harm; but John has I think been the cause of almost all bad theology:
the Christ of that Gospel also strikes me as quite unlike the Christ of
the other three; a sort of Edward Irving, one might say. How clearly one
can trace in all of them the gradual rise of his conviction that he was
the Messiah: and how much loftier & more self-devoted a tone his whole
language & conduct assumed as soon as he felt convinced of that. Reading
his history has done me along with much other good, this in particular,
that it has completed my hatred of the Gig: I can hardly feel easy now
under the thought that I have one foot in it still: I shall probably
dismount altogether from it in time.—It was more than I hoped for that
your brother should form any favourable judgment of me from the very
little he can have seen, and that not of the best kind. I am persuaded
that I owe his good opinion chiefly to your testimony. He appeared to me
very like you: though I cannot doubt but that there are differences
enough: it was the likeness too of a scholar to his master.

Edition: current; Page: [183]
Of your friends or acquaintance here I have little to relate: most of
them are away from London & have not written to me. Only Rowland
Detrosier is doing exceedingly well as a lecturer on physics—picking up
also some money by writing—and he will do something and be of use: a man
of clearer or quicker understanding I never saw: only he has had no
help, and no materials for his understanding to work on: the most
abstract truths when they are presented to him he seizes almost at a
glance, & possesses himself of their spirit, not their letter merely. He
will thrive best under my teaching just now; he is not yet ripe for
yours. He is eager, ardent, and indefatigably laborious; and to the
extent of his faculties, most serious in his purpose of knowing and
teaching the Truth.—If I had known you as well when you were in London
as I do now, how many more persons should I have brought to see you! I
now know that any human being is interesting to you, all who have
self-subsistence eminently so: now even of those I could have made you
acquainted with not a few. Since you were so much pleased with Emerson7
I feel encouraged to try you with almost any person whatever who has any
sort of good in him: I should have thought he was about the last person
who would have interested you so much as he seems to have done. But you,
yourself, are doubtless in many things, changed, and as you have several
times intimated, changing: I greatly desire to know in what, and how
much; should be still more gratified if I could in any way aid you,
paying back thereby some small part of the good, of that and so many
other kinds, which I have received from you. I have done little for you
yet; perhaps am incapable of doing much: but it was part of my former
character, the character I am throwing off, that I seldom wished or
ventured to argue with my teachers: I do not mean mere logic-fence, but
that I was content to receive without giving, & rather avoided occasions
for expressing difference of opinion. In that however as in much else “I
will mend” as you said of something far less important—The Austins are
at Boulogne—but I have not heard from them. Falk I am sorry to hear
sells but indifferently. I find both from enquiry and observation that
the puffing system has worn itself out, even more rapidly than seemed
likely: & a united chorus of praise from all the press will scarcely now
sell fifty copies of any work: Effingham Wilson8 the bookseller is so
sensible of this that he has resolved to cease advertising the praises
of periodicals and to sell his wares by samples, advertising passages of
the works themselves. Thus does all lying contain the seeds of its own
destruction: when all human speech has ceased to Edition: current; Page:
[184] be believed, it seems as if men must recommence speaking the
truth: yet who knows? for how many centuries has the whole East
persevered in lying, although the fact that “all men are liars” there
forms part of all men’s knowledge of the world. Bulwer’s book9 is
considerably better than I expected; the “tenuity” does not amount to
more than semitransparency. There was one thing in what you said of
Madame Roland which I did not quite like—it was, that she was almost
rather a man than a woman: I believe that I quite agree in all that you
really meant, but is there really any distinction between the highest
masculine & the highest feminine character? I do not mean the mechanical
acquirements; those, of course, will very commonly be different. But the
women, of all I have known, who possessed the highest measure of what
are considered feminine qualities, have combined with them more of the
highest masculine qualities than I have ever seen in any but one or two
men, & those one or two men were also in many respects almost women. I
suspect it is the second-rate people of the two sexes that are
unlike—the first-rate are alike in both—except—no, I do not think I can
except anything—but then, in this respect, my position has been and is,
what you say every human being’s is in many respects “a peculiar one.”—

I shall write from Paris—probably more than once.

Yours faithfully,

J. S. Mill

Make my kindest respects to Mrs Carlyle and crave her forgiveness
(though as it was a matter of moral necessity, not choice, that is
hardly the right word) for the postponement of my visit.10

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday Oct. 10, 1833

I.H.

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

88.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

I.H.

Friday
 [
Oct. 10, 1833

]

Dear Mr Fox

I go off this evening & therefore shall not see you which I am sorry
for.

Thanks for your kind offer of doing anything for me during my
absence2—The only thing which occurs to me, that you could do, would be
to Edition: current; Page: [185] send us a copy of the Repository for
next month. You might send it to Dussard, whose address is 9 Great
Castle Street Cavendish Square[;] he has opportunities for Paris once or
twice a week.

I send “Pauline”3 having done all I could—which was, to annotate
copiously in the margin, and sum up on the flyleaf—on the whole the
observations are not flattering to the author—perhaps too strong in the
expression to be shewn to him.4

I also send three numbers of the Plato5 for your inspection and
judgment. They cannot in any case be used until I return for it is
necessary they should be carefully looked over, some passages altered,
and some preliminary matter written—Let us hope that the arrival of
Elliott’s drama6 will relieve you from any difficulty in filling the
present number—if not, you must write it all yourself—I do not think the
remainder of those scraps will help you much. A propos I had them
actually in my pocket at Clapton but neglected to give them to you—I am
sorry your brother7 has had the trouble of calling for them.

You shall hear from me very soon—as I hope I shall from you

Farewell—

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 5 or 6, 1833

Paris

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

89.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

[
Paris

,
Nov. 5 or 6, 1833

]

I could have filled a long letter to you with the occurrences and
feelings and thoughts of any one day since I have been here—this
fortnight seems an age in mere duration, and is an age in what it has
done for us two.2 Edition: current; Page: [186] It has brought years of
experience to us—good and happy experience most of it. We never could
have been so near, so perfectly intimate, in any former circumstances—we
never could have been together as we have been in innumerable smaller
relations and concerns—we never should have spoken of all things, and in
all frames of mind, with so much freedom and unreserve. I am astonished
when I think how much has been restrained, how much untold, unshewn,
uncommunicated till now—how much which by the new fact of its being
spoken, has disappeared—so many real unlikenesses, so many more false
impressions of unlikeness, most of which have only been revealed to me
since they have ceased to exist or these which still exist have ceased
to be felt painfully. Not a day has passed without removing some real &
serious obstacle to happiness. I never thought so humbly of myself
compared with her, never thought or felt myself so little worthy of her,
never more keenly regretted that I am not, in some things, very
different, for her sake—yet it is much to know as I do now; that almost
all which has ever caused her any misgivings with regard to our fitness
for each other was mistaken in point of fact—that the mistakes no longer
exist—& that she is now (as she is) quite convinced that we are
perfectly suited to pass our lives together—better suited indeed for
that perfect than for this imperfect companionship. There will never
again I believe be any obstacle to our being together entirely, from the
slightest doubt that the experiment would succeed with respect to
ourselves—not, as she used to say, for a short time, but for our natural
lives. And yet—all the other obstacles or rather the one obstacle being
as great as ever—our futurity is still perfectly uncertain. She has
decided nothing except what has always been decided—not to renounce the
liberty of sight—and it does not seem likely that anything will be
decided until the end of the six months, if even then finally. For me, I
am certain that whatever she decides will be wisest and rightest, even
if she decide what was so repugnant to me at first—to remain here
alone—it is repugnant to me still—but I can now see that perhaps it will
be best—the future will decide that.

When will you write again—she shewed me your letter—it is beautiful in
you to write so to any one, but who could write otherwise to her?

I am happy, but not so happy as when the future appeared surer.

I had written thus far before receiving your letter, and I am glad of
it. I have now taken a larger sheet and copied the above into it.

Your letter does indeed shew that you do not at all “understand her
state” and never have understood it—this I have only lately begun to
suspect, & never was quite sure of it till now—and I see that under the
presumption that you were more aware than I perceive you are of the real
state of her feelings, I myself have said & written things which have
confirmed you in the wrong impression.

Edition: current; Page: [187]
You seem to think that she was decided, and is now undecided—that the
state of feeling which led to the separation has been as you say
“interrupted” and is to be “recommenced.” Now this is an incorrect and
so far a lower idea of her than the true one—she never had decided upon
anything except not to give up either the feeling, or the power of
communication with me—unless she did so, it was Mr. Taylor’s wish, and
seemed to be necessary to his comfort that she should live apart from
him. When the separation had actually taken place, the result did as you
say seem certain—not because we had willed to make it so, but because it
seemed the necessary consequence of the new circumstances if the
feelings of all continued the same. This was the sole cause & I think
cause enough for the hopefulness and happiness which I felt almost all
that month and which must have made a false impression on you. I never
felt sure of what was to be after the six months, but I felt an immense
increase of the chances in my favour. When I came here, I expected to
find her no more decided than she had always been about what would be
best for all, but not to find her as for the first time I did, doubtful
of what would be best for our own happiness—under the influence of that
fact and of the painful feelings it excited, I wrote to you. That doubt,
thank heaven, lasted but a short time—if I had delayed my letter two
days longer I should never have sent it.

If Mr. Taylor feels as you believe he does, he has been very far from
telling her “all he feels”; for his last letter to her, which came by
the same post as this of yours (the first she ever shewed to me) is in
quite another tone. He is most entirely mistaken in all the facts. Her
affection for him, which originated in gratitude for his affection &
kindness, instead of being weakened by this stronger feeling, has been
greatly strengthened, by so many new proofs of his affection for her, &
by the unexpected & (his nature considered) really admirable generosity
& nobleness which he has shewn under so severe a trial. Instead of
reviving in absence, her affection for him has been steady throughout;
it is of quite another character from this feeling, & therefore does not
in the least conflict with it naturally, & now when circumstances have
thrown the two into opposition she can no more overcome, or wish to
overcome the one, than the other. The difference is, that the one, being
only affection, not passion, would be satisfied with knowing him to be
happy though away from her—but if the choice were absolutely between
giving up the stronger feeling, & making him (what he says he should be)
durably wretched, I am quite convinced that either would be [more?]3
than she could bear. I know it is the common notion of passionate love
that it sweeps away all other affections—but surely the justification of
passion, & one of its greatest beauties & glories, is that in an
otherwise fine character it weakens no feeling which deserves to
subsist, Edition: current; Page: [188] but would naturally strengthen
them all. Because her letters to Mr. Taylor express the strong affection
she has always felt, and he is no longer seeing, every day, proofs of
her far stronger feeling for another, he thinks the affection has come
back—he might have seen it quite as plainly before, only he refused to
believe it. I have seen it, and felt its immense power over her, in
moments of intense excitement with which I am sure he would believe it
to be utterly incompatible.

Her affection for him, which has always been the principal, is now the
sole obstacle to our being together—for the present there seems
absolutely no prospect of that obstacle’s being got over. She believes—&
she knows him better than any of us can—that it would be the breaking-up
of his whole future life—that she is determined never to be the cause
of, & I am as determined never to urge her to it, as convinced that if I
did I should fail. Nothing could justify it but “the most distinct
perception” that it is not only “necessary to the happiness of both”,
but the only means of saving both or either from insupportable
unhappiness. That can never be unless the alternative were entire giving
up. I believe he is quite right in his impression that the worst for him
which is to be expected at the end of the six months is her remaining
permanently here. She will if it is in human power to do so, make him
understand the exact state of her feelings, and will as at present
minded, give him the choice of every possible arrangement except entire
giving-up, with a strong wish that her remaining here may be his choice;
with a full understanding however that the agreement whatever it be, is
to be no longer binding than while it is found endurable. This seems but
a poor result to come of so much suffering & so much effort, but for us
even so the gain is great.

She has seen and approved all that precedes, therefore it is as much her
letter as mine. So now you know the whole state of the case.

She is on the whole far happier than I have ever known her, and quite
well physically though far from strong—I have many anxious thoughts of
how she is to bear the being again alone with so little of hope to
sustain her. I am so convinced of all I have written above, that if the
final decision were already made (whatever it might be) I am certain
that the fact of Mr. Taylor’s being to be here so soon after I am gone
would be a real & great good to her—but now, I am afraid unless she sees
her way clearly to some tolerably satisfactory arrangement in the first
few days of his visit she will only be made more unhappy by being made
to feel still more keenly the impossibility of avoiding great
unhappiness to him.

You know, perhaps, that her brother4 has been here—nothing could have
been better or sweeter than all he said & did—he was even friendly.

Can I do anything for you here—see any one, or bring over anything for
you—I shall leave Paris probably Friday week.

Edition: current; Page: [189]
It is idle, almost, to say any thanks for all you are saying and doing
for our good & for such part of the interest you feel in it, as regards
me personally—I may be able some time or other to make some return to
you for it all, more than by invoking as I do, all the blessings earth
is heir to upon you and yours.

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 22, 1833

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

90.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

[
Nov. 22, 1833

]

In our conversation the other evening the more important matters of
which we were thinking and talking made me forget to say that if you
will send to me those Plato papers,2 I will try to make them fit for the
M.R.

You are I suppose provided for the next number—otherwise in a day or two
I could finish one of those things.

I have the strongest wish, and some hope, that there will some day
arrive a sketch of Paris, in the manner of some of your local
sketches—if there does, it will be the most beautiful thing ever
written—she has spoken quite enough to me at different times, to shew
what it would be.

Have you seen Mr. Taylor? he has received a letter by this time, part of
which she has sent to me, and which if he was still in the state in
which you last saw him, will certainly put him completely out of it. Ed.
Hardy3 while he confirms all you told me of the impression her precious
letter made upon him when it came, bringing back his old hopes and
theories, affirms positively that all this had quite gone off before he
received any other letter, & that his acquiescence in her return to him
is not given under the influence of those hopes and theories but of a
real intention of being with her as a friend and companion. His conduct
& feelings now, will shew whether this is correct. I shall be anxious to
know your impression when you shall have seen him in his present state.

It seems he had written to her again since I left Paris—she writes “I
had yesterday one of those letters from Mr. Taylor which make us admire
& love him. He says that this plan & my letters have given him
delight—that he has been selfish—but in future will think more for
others & less for himself—but still he talks of this plan being good for
all, by which he means me, as he says he is sure it will ‘prevent after
misery’ & again he wishes for complete confidence. I have written
exactly what I think without reserve.”

I have not time to write another word.

J.S.M.

Edition: current; Page: [190]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

25th November 1833

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

91.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

25th November 1833

My dear Carlyle

As might have been anticipated I found no time while at Paris to write
to you, and though I have now been in London a week, I have not been
able till now to collect my thoughts for the sort of letter which my
conscience tells me I ought to write. Let me dispose of business matters
first. I have made the various inquiries you wanted made. First about
the mode of living at Paris. M. Comte,2 whom you may have heard of as a
writer, & who is now Secretaire Perpetuel to the new Academy of Moral
and Political Science, a man who has tried both countries & who lived in
a very simple stile in both, who has lived in both as a man ever in
narrow circumstances—married and having two or three children—he is my
first witness, & he says that Paris & London are much on a par: that you
may live luxuriously in Paris for less money than in London, but that
for any stile of living not luxuriously, the expense is nearly the same
in both cities, with perhaps a slight advantage in favour of Paris.
Tanneguy Duchâtel,3 who is an economist & statistician & I should think
accurate in his facts, says that un député may if he chuse live at Paris
during a six months session of the chamber for 300 francs (£12) a month
if alone, for at most 500 francs (£20) if he have a wife and no
children. The chief article of necessary consumption which is dearer at
Paris than en province or in England, seems to be dress: that, if you
stay only six months or so you can carry out a supply of for the whole
time I suppose. You can have in the best quarters of Paris, lodgings
which I think would perfectly suit you for 200 francs a month. This
would include accommodation for a maid servant. Your food would be
decidedly cheaper than in London. As to other matters, there is the most
ample & ready access to many excellent libraries; some difficulty, but
not I believe impossibility, in having permission to take books home
with you. All persons of all sorts are accessible with the greatest ease
to any one who had such introductions as you would have. A little way
out of Paris the expenses are decidedly less, viz. houserent less, food
of all sorts cheaper by the cost of conveyance and the very high octroi.
In executing your smaller commissions at Paris I have had great
assistance from Adolphe d’Eichthal who is much pleased Edition: current;
Page: [191] at the prospect of your going there. The books which I
ordered were not ready when I left Paris & I do not even know what the
bookseller whom Adolphe employed had & had not been able to get. I fear
there is no Dictionnaire Neologique but that appended to the Dict. de
l’Academie. The Hénault4 I expect to receive immediately, together with
a map of the province “Ile de France” & I have hopes of several tracts
on the collier affair.5 Adolphe has sent your questions to several
people whom he thought likely to be able to give you information, of
whom one only has yet given him any answers; a certain Baron Darnay,6
who was then (viz. during the procès) a conseiller au parlement: his
responses, which do not give much information, I inclose. Apropos I find
that the parcel I destined for you did not go, last month; the cause
being that Fraser promised to send for it, and faithlessly neglected to
do so. I have ordered no very great number of books, & of those I doubt
whether many would interest you much: the works of Ballanche,7 a sort of
palingenesic philosopher now in some repute; Beranger’s8 poems; the
Proverbes of Leclerc;9 no memoirs except those of the Abbé Morellet10
which I had read before, & know to contain several revolutionary scenes
which would interest you. But it seems to me that the writing, buying,
and reading of books has come to an end in France as well as here; in
France it may perhaps revive sooner than here, having been extremely
rife only five years ago & perhaps only temporarily interrupted by the
débordement de la politique et des petits écrits. Here it has perished
by a gradual decay, and the causes of its melancholy fate are I fear
permanent.

But now to attempt to tell you anything about France and Paris! I
cannot; one or two personal portraits I think I could give you, & that
is the sum of all my personal knowledge—I can only say, go and look;
look & you will certainly see: there is abundance to be seen, known, &
judged of in six months or a year, little or nothing in one month,
especially when the object of one’s visit is not exclusively to see.
Except of some few individuals, I have brought back no impressions but
very general ones, & of these scarcely one of which I am quite certain,
except this one that there is an infinity of things to see, & that it
requires a less piercing eyesight Edition: current; Page: [192] to see
them, than here, because the natural signs and expressions of feeling &
character are in a much less degree repressed by the ponderous dull
atmosphere of custom & respectability which weighs upon them here. It
really does seem to me that people care infinitely less in Paris about
keeping in the gig: or what comes to the same thing when we are speaking
of a people, the gig is lower, far nearer to the ground, does not so
easily break down with you, & it is easy stepping in as well as out. It
does appear to me that it needs little or no courage at Paris, to make
the openest profession of any kind of opinions or feelings whatever. It
is the very place which a speculative man should desire for promulgating
his opinions, for you startle nobody, you are sure of an audience; sure
of being supported, & what is perhaps still better, sure of being
attacked. How different here. Littérateurs and artists there are I fancy
next to none—those who pass for such I had not time to go amongst, but
you easily might. I could, had I stayed longer. I suspect we have been
too much impressed, you and I and others, by the Literature of
Despair.11 I was in hopes that despair was the necessary consequence of
having no Belief, in a nation at least, though not always in an
individual: but I fear that is only in the nobler spirits, or at least
the young persons of strong feelings and artistical capabilities. In
France I see every reason to believe that the mass of the well-to-do
classes can make themselves comfortable without either God or Devil,
either literal or constructive, and are well satisfied to eat their
pudding in quiet—those I mean who have enough pudding to eat, which is
an infinitely larger proportion than in this country. Most of the
educated people have enough to make them comfortable, and there is very
little of the artificial demand for more money which the striving &
straining for respectability occasions here; respectability there does
not depend upon money. All agree that any man who can dress decently may
dine with or go to the soirées of anybody, & mix on terms of perfect
equality with all whom he meets. Then the peasantry commonly have their
bit of land, & consider themselves also as lords of the soil: except,
therefore, the ambitious spirits & the working population of Paris and
the great towns, people seem to be tolerably content with their lot. The
government has for the last year or two made great efforts to fix the
attention of the people on les intérêts matériels, on schemes of
commercial improvement, railroads & the like; & they are half mad, many
of them, about railroads, in mere unreasoning imitation of England &
England’s “prosperity.” The trades of Paris, like the manufacturers of
Lyons have formed unions & are all striking for wages, i.e. the skilled
labourers, those who are highly paid already: & impartial people, such
as Adolphe d’Eichthal, say that their object is not so much, more money,
as to elevate their rank in society, since at present the gentlemen will
not keep Edition: current; Page: [193] company with them & they will not
keep company with the common labourers. The revolutionary part of the
republicans have opened a connexion with these Trade Societies, and
attempt to turn them to purposes of revolution, with what success I know
not: they themselves say “the greatest,” the other republicans say “not
so great,” the non-republicans say “none at all,” from all which I infer
that nothing can be known about it. If I had stayed I should have
managed to attend some of the meetings of these workmen: though it seems
they are jealous of the presence of gentlemen, even
gentlemen-republicans. On the whole, politics are for the present very
much out of vogue: nor do I know what is in vogue, except railroads: not
the theatres, for people are ceasing to go there: not literature, for
nothing is written or read except the usual succession of novels which
went on even during the Reign of Terror. The newspapers, even, are
little read compared with two years ago; & even la propagande
républicaine has taken refuge in little penny papers which are hawked
every Sunday in the streets & on the boulevards. One must be at Paris to
know how profoundly irreligious the French are: the higher kind of books
and newspapers have got beyond the irreligious state and are mostly
prophesying a religion or regretting the impossibility of one—or have at
least learnt to recognise a historical value in the religions of the
Past or at most think it an old joke, too stale to be revived now: but
the little feuilles which one buys as one goes into a theatre, are the
representatives of the Voltairian philosophy at present: the summits of
the national intellect have emerged above it, and it has descended to
envelop & overshroud the lower regions. Our friends the St. Simonians
now St. Simonians no longer, have done much good, & are still doing
some. The Père,12 as you may have seen in the newspapers, having been
let out of prison before his sentence was expired, has gone, with
Fournel & some others of the set who were engineers, to persuade the
Pacha of Egypt to let them cut a canal across the Isthmus of
Suez—whereby the deux mondes, the Orient & the Occident, are still to be
réunis by means of them. What has become of those who went to
Constantinople in search of la femme libre I do not know. One or two,
especially Jules Lechevalier & Abel Transon, have become disciples of
Fourier, a sort of Robert Owen who is to accomplish all things by means
of cooperation & of rendering labour agreeable, & under whose system man
is to acquire absolute power over the laws of physical nature; among
other happy results, the sea is to be changed into lemonade. Some have
become Catholics; but among these are none of the considerable men of
the set. The great majority have retained of St Simonianism about as
much as is good and true, dropping the rest. The Bazard portion have
mostly become republicans, the Enfantin portion, who were rich, strong
partisans of les moyens pacifiques, have become Edition: current; Page:
[194] juste milieu men in politics, endeavouring to work out improvement
with the existing machinery. The government, acting I suppose on the
judicious maxim that a Utopian désenchanté is very manageable, has
restored to most of them who were engineers miners or the like, their
rank in the service. Michel Chevalier was scarcely out of prison when
they selected him to be sent to the United States to study their canals
& railways. Flachat is now one of the three editors of the
Constitutionnel, where he writes good articles on free trade & such like
matters: he seems a sensible man, without much enthusiasm left in him;
he stuck to them to the last, & had by his own account a fièvre
cérébrale from the suffering & anxiety it caused him; after which he was
very near becoming a Christian: now he seems to be left with a vague
presentiment that there will be a religion some time or other. Leroux,13
& Reynaud,14 whom you remember as the protester against Enfantin, (both
of whom I saw) go on prophesying a religion in the Revue Encyclopédique;
their notions are somewhat singular, Reynaud’s especially who thinks
that the future religion will not be revealed, nor brought to light at
once, but will be evolved gradually by le progrès de la raison publique,
like a science. They have all sorts of vagaries too about the “Orient” &
are grubbing into Sanscrit and Chinese literature in hopes of finding
something which may help towards raising up this religion which is to be
built up, brick after brick. I recollect in a number of the Revue
Encyclopédique one of them says in express terms that since we know
hardly anything of the East except the Bible, & since that is so good,
doubtless if we knew more we should find something still better.—Among
the individuals of another kind whom I saw & formed an acquaintance
with, two made a particular impression upon me; two perfectly
self-subsistent men in the best sense, or I am greatly mistaken in them;
& in that, honorably distinguished from Frenchmen in general. Both these
are republican leaders; leaders however of two very different sorts of
republicans; or rather, not leaders, but men who follow no other
person’s lead, and whom every one is glad to follow. These are,
Carrel,15 the editor of the National, & Cavaignac,16 whose speech when
on trial for a conspiracy two years ago I translated & inserted in the
Examiner,17 where you may have seen it.18 I knew Carrel as the most
powerful journalist in France, sole Edition: current; Page: [195]
manager of a paper which while it keeps aloof from all coterie influence
& from the actively revolutionary part of the republican body, has for
some time been avowedly republican; & I knew that he was considered a
vigorous, energetic man of action, who would always have courage &
conduct in an emergency. Knowing thus much of him, I was ushered into
the National office where I found six or seven of the innumerable
rédacteurs who belong to a French paper, all dark-haired men with
formidable moustaches (which many of the republicans have taken to
wearing) & looking fiercely republican. Carrel was not there, & after
waiting some time I was introduced to a slight elegant young man with
extremely polished manners, no moustaches at all, and apparently fitter
for a drawingroom than a camp; this was the commander-in-chief of those
formidable looking champions. But it was impossible to be five minutes
in his company without perceiving that he was accustomed to ascendancy,
& so accustomed as not to feel it; instead of that eagerness &
impetuosity which one finds in most Frenchmen, his manner is extremely
deliberate; without any affectation he speaks in a sort of measured
cadence, & in a manner of which your words “quiet emphasis” are more
characteristic than of any man I know: there is the same quiet emphasis
in his writings: a man singularly free, if we may trust appearances,
from self-consciousness; simple, graceful, almost infantinely playful as
they all say when he is among his intimates, & indeed I could see that
myself; & combining perfect self-reliance with the most unaffected
modesty; in opinions, & political position, the Fonblanque of France;
like Fonblanque, too, standing quite alone (je n’aime pas, said he to me
one day, à marcher en troupeau) occupying a midway position, facing one
way towards the supporters of monarchy & an aristocratic limitation of
the suffrage, with whom he will have no compromise, on the other towards
the extreme republicans who have anti-property doctrines, and instead of
his United-States republic, want a republic de la façon de la
Convention, with something like a dictatorship in their own hands: he
calls himself a Conservative Republican (l’opinion républicaine
conservatrice); not but that he sees plainly that the present
constitution of property admits of many improvements but he thinks they
can only take place gradually or at least that philosophy has not yet
matured them: & he would rather hold back than accelerate the revolution
which he thinks inevitable, in order to leave time for ripening those
great questions, chiefly affecting the constitution of property & the
condition of the working classes, which would press for a solution if a
revolution were to take place. As for himself he says that he is not un
homme spécial, that his métier de journaliste engrosses him too much to
enable him to study, and that he is profoundly ignorant of much upon
Edition: current; Page: [196] which he would have to decide if he were
in power; & could do nothing but bring together a body generally
representative of the people, & assist in carrying into execution the
dictates of their united wisdom. This is modest enough in the man who
would certainly be President of the Republic if there were a republic
within five years & the extreme party did not get the upper hand. He
seems to know well what he does know: I have met with no such views of
the French Revolution in any book, as those I have heard from him.—A
very different man from Carrel is Cavaignac; he is president of the
Société des Droits de l’Homme, who are the active stirring revolutionary
party, who look up to Robespierre, and aim at l’égalité absolue: he is
for taking the first opportunity for overthrowing the government by
force, & thinks the opportunity must come in six months, or a year at
farthest: a man whose name is energy; who cannot ask you the commonest
question but in so decided a manner that he makes you start: a man who
impresses you with a sense of irresistible power & indomitable will; you
might fancy him an incarnation of Satan, if he were your enemy or the
enemy of your party, & if you had not associated with him & seen how
full of sweetness and amiableness & gentleness he is: intense in
everything, he is the intensest of atheists, & says, “je n’aime pas ceux
qui croient en Dieu” because “it is generally a reason for doing nothing
for Man”: but his notion of Duty is that of a Stoic; he conceives it as
something quite infinite, & having nothing whatever to do with
Happiness, something immeasurably above it: a kind of half Manichean in
his views of the universe: according to him man’s Life consists of one
perennial & intense struggle against the principle of Evil, which but
for that struggle would wholly overwhelm him: generation after
generation carries on this battle, with little success as yet: he
believes in perfectibility, & progressiveness, but thinks that hitherto
progress has consisted only in removing some of the impediments to good,
not in realising the good itself; that nevertheless the only
satisfaction which man can realise for himself is in battling with this
evil principle & overpowering it; that after evils have accumulated for
centuries, there sometimes comes one great clearing-off on one day of
reckoning called a revolution; that it is only on such rare occasions,
very rarely indeed on any others, that good men get into power, & then
they ought to seize the opportunity for doing all they can; that any
government which is boldly attacked, by ever so small a minority, may be
overthrown, & that is his hope with regard to the present government.
His notion of égalité absolue is rather speculative than practical: he
says he does not know whether it should be by an equal division of the
means of production (land and capital) or by an equal division of the
produce: when I stated to him the difficulties of both he felt &
acknowledged them; all he had to propose were but a variety of measures
Edition: current; Page: [197] tending towards an equalisation of
property: & he seems to have a strange reliance on events, thinking that
when the end is clearly conceived, the circumstances of the case would
when power is in the right hands, suggest the most appropriate means.
Cavaignac is the son of a Conventionalist and regicide. He is a much
more accomplished man than most of the political men I saw there; has a
wider range of ideas, converses on Art, & most subjects of general
interest: always throwing all he has to say into a few brief energetic
sentences, as if it was contrary to his nature to expend one superfluous
word. Just as I was coming away he gave me the first two numbers of a
periodical work19 which a set of republicans have just set up. All of it
seems to be rubbish except the introductory discourse, which is by
Cavaignac, and which is an exposition of his philosophy, his idea of
“the significance of man’s life”: it contains all that I have just
written to you & much of the same sort, but my impressions were not
derived from it, but from his conversation; and the essay appeared to me
a complete résumé of the man: such as it is, it made no sensation
whatever; it flew over the heads of Carrel & the rest, they all voted it
vague, abstract, metaphysical, & the like: you will be struck with it; I
send it in Fraser’s parcel. I am to correspond with Cavaignac and Carrel
& various others and shall know much more of them I hope: with Carrel I
am to establish an exchange of articles; Carrel is to send some to the
Examiner and I am to send some to the National, with liberty to publish
them here. I could tell you much more of these men & other men, but this
is enough for one letter—let me hear your remarks & questions, and they
will remind me of a hundred things which I have omitted. I have other
things to write, too, not about Paris: but they must wait. On the whole,
I think you will go to Paris next summer, and I probably shall pay my
visit to you there instead of Craigenputtoch. You will find several
persons there eager to be friendly, among others, Cousin.20 His name
reminds me of a hundred things to tell you in my next.—Let me hear from
you soon. My best remembrances to Mrs Carlyle.—Vale mei memor.

J. S. Mill

Read Buller on Mirabeau in the Cochrane Review21—did you detect me in
the Exr reviewing Miss Martineau, & Col. Napier?22

Edition: current; Page: [198]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

26th November, 1833

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

92.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

26th November, 1833

Roebuck, Strutt,2 Buller, and other radical members of Parliament have a
scheme to start a radical review as their organ,3 with individual
signatures like J.R., in which we should all of us write—the thing looks
possible, and everybody seems so eager about it that I really think it
will come to pass.

If so, it will train up both readers and writers for The Monthly
Repository, The Examiner, Tait, and all. Strength is multiplied by
division when it is growing strength. [. . .]

The Examiner has hoisted a flag of distress. Fonblanque cannot go on,
and the paper may stop any week. He can retrench so as to cover the
weekly loss if he had £1000 in hand. This he proposes raising by
inducing 100 persons to pay £10 each, for which they are to receive his
paper for ten years, and for which (without counting on any increase of
sale) he can carry it on on the chance of reduction of the stamp duties
within that time. What think you of the scheme? And if you think well of
it, would you—not subscribe yourself—but mention the proposition to any
persons you know who would?

A much better plan selon moi would be that someone who has £1000 should
put it down himself to become the proprietor, keeping Fonblanque as
editor only, and the other persons interested remaining creditors of the
paper. If I were not in the India House and were going to remain in
England I would do so immediately, that is, I would propose it to
Fonblanque, who I think must consent—and I would have him as political
editor and take the literary and art department myself. But that it
seems cannot be—and I fear nobody else will—though it would at worst be
only an advance without interest, at best an extremely profitable
investment.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

30 Novembre 1833

India House

Victor Cousin

Cousin, Victor

93.


TO VICTOR COUSIN1

India House

,
30 Novembre 1833

Mon cher Monsieur,

Parmi les documents que vous avez désiré avoir au sujet de ce qui ce
fait ici sur l’éducation considérée comme affaire d’Etat, je n’ai pu
encore me procurer que le discours de mon ami Roebuck,2 qui m’a chargé
de Edition: current; Page: [199] vous en faire hommage en son nom. Vous
verrez qu’il donne à l’élection populaire le choix des instituteurs
primaires. Vous mettrez peut-être cela sur le compte du radicalisme;
mais radicalisme ou non, je crois que, dans notre pays, où la
centralisation n’est nullement dans les mœurs, c’est la le seul moyen de
faire accepter par la nation l’éducation forcée.

Quant au commencement d’exécution que reçoit aujourd’hui ce principe
introduit, pour ainsi dire, par supercherie, dans nos lois, mon ami
Chadwick, qui en est l’auteur principal, m’a promis des renseignements
que j’aurai l’honneur de vous faire parvenir par la première occasion.
C’est alors que je prendrai la liberté de vous écrire plus au long.

Je n’ai pas encore vu Madame Austin, à qui cependant j’ai envoyé depuis
longtemps les petits ouvrages que vous m’avez confiés pour elle. Un
léger mal aux yeux qui m’a forcé de rester chez moi le soir, ne
m’empêchera sans doute pas beaucoup plus longtemps d’aller la voir. Je
ne sais pas si elle vous a écrit. Son adresse est, 5 Orme Square,
Bayswater.

Agréez, mon cher Monsieur, l’hommage de mon profond respect.

J. S. Mill

Si vous vouliez me donner des nouvelles de votre santé, vous me feriez
un très grand plaisir.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

22d December 1833

Kensington

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

94.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

Kensington

22d December 1833

.

My dear Carlyle

Your letter had been hoped for and expected & in one sense waited for, a
considerable time—for I had various matters of interest to write to you
about, but as I hoped for a letter so soon I delayed writing till I
could make my letter answer yours.

One of those matters is, the affair of the Examiner, of which you have
heard somewhat from Hayward.2 It is in difficulties, and those of so
serious a kind, that if something had not been done or attempted
immediately to save it, there was danger of its stopping altogether. The
cause is melancholy enough, being less the circumstances of the paper,
though it is not prosperous, than those of Fonblanque himself, who, like
his father before him, has wanted firmness to restrain his expenses
within his means. Since he Edition: current; Page: [200] enlarged the
paper in January 1831, it has yielded him little; it allows him
nominally £500 a year; reckoning that in addition to its other expenses
it has during these three years lost on the average £6 a week; which
coming out of his £500 reduced it to below £200. He, meantime, has been
living at a rate most needlessly expensive, and is at last so completely
drained, & his credit I should think so completely exhausted, that he
can go on no longer. Strange that a man who writes so feelingly and
powerfully on this same weakness should so act—but not at all strange,
only melancholy, that one who so acts, possessing intellect, should so
write. If his difficulties do not ruin the paper, it is in no danger;
for means of retrenchment present themselves to the extent of £8 or £9 a
week, by discharging Chadwick,3 whose work Fonblanque takes upon himself
in addition to his own; and by cheaper arrangements for printing and
paper; which however depend upon first paying off an arrear to his
printer & stationer. £1000 would do all this, & start him fair with £500
a year & an improving property; for advertisements, the great source of
profit to a paper, have as you must have observed with pleasure,
multiplied exceedingly in the Exr since the reduction of the duty. The
£1000 it were to be wished that some one person of the right disposition
should have advanced, becoming thereby proprietor, in the place of F.
whose personal circumstances would then have ceased to compromise the
paper, & who would of course have been retained as editor. This I would
myself have proposed to do, were not my position with regard to the
India House, which hampers my freedom of action in a thousand ways but
which shall not hamper it always, in this case an insuperable obstacle.
What has been attempted is, to raise the money in subscriptions of £10
each from 100 persons, each of whom is to receive the paper gratis for
ten years. Sixty promises have been obtained, the remaining forty are
still to seek: as many as twenty more are I think as good as certain—but
less than the whole hundred will not do, for the debts on the paper
amount to £780 & money to the extent of the remainder will then be
wanted to start it fair, or perhaps (for I know not) to keep poor
Fonblanque out of the King’s Bench. I am doing all I can to interest
people in the matter—& should have written to you among the first, had I
not known that you could do little (if anything) in the way either of
subscribing or procuring subscriptions. I think we shall succeed, but it
will require a vigorous effort.—The sale of the Examiner does not much
exceed 3000 copies. This is as you say a scandalous symptom, yet there
are many causes that contribute to it besides the scandalous ones that
first suggest themselves. Of course it can only expect buyers (readers
are quite another matter) from radicals: now of these the more vulgar
sort find as much radicalism in other papers, of a more direct and
palpable kind, with greater breadth, as the painters say: for
Fonblanque’s genius, fine as it is, goes all Edition: current; Page:
[201] into the details—not into the general mode of treating a subject:
he does not go straight to the main point, despising all little side
views, dwell upon that & make that tell—like the Times, which with
materials of no intrinsic value whatever writes powerfully for popular
effect, as Fonblanque might do with his powers, though scarcely with his
turn of mind. Then F.’s allusions, expressions, stile, all the garb of
his thoughts is intelligible, or at least impressive, only to persons of
literary, one might say almost classical education, & most of them are
not radicals.—Not to mention that such as do not take a daily paper,
require in a weekly one a better abstract of news—that I hope will now
in some degree be mended. Then the more moderate radicals are revolted
by the tone of hatred in which the paper is written. This feeling
extends to many who would have no objection to, but would applaud, the
utterance of the bitterest truths, but do not like a perpetual carping
at little things, honestly indeed, yet often unfairly & making no
personal allowances, sometimes misstating altogether the kind of blame
which is deserved, & meting it out in unequal measures to different
people, so as to give an appearance of spleen & personal antipathy to
individuals—especially to some of the Ministers, & among them, most
perhaps to some of those who deserve it rather less than the others. In
all this there is much truth; on the other hand much also is to be said
for Fonblanque, but on the whole not enough to acquit him entirely. So
he has really no partisans at all, & loses by almost all his
excellencies and by his faults too. At the very time when he was
offending the moderate radicals by the nature of his attacks on the
ministry, he was losing at the rate of 100 subscribers every week for
some time by resisting the anti-police furor. Still, the position of the
paper will be a good one if this money can be raised, & raised I hope it
will be.

I have another piece of news to tell you: the principal radicals in
parliament & many of those out of it have a scheme for starting a new
quarterly review, & are exerting themselves so much for it that they
will probably succeed in setting it going.4 The first promoters of it
were Roebuck, Buller, & I; & we shall probably be the surest & most
regular contributors, though there will be abundance of others—All the
educated radicals to whom the thing has been mentioned enter into it
with a degree of warmth unusual with them & offer both pecuniary &
literary assistance. There is but one exception—& that one I lament to
say is Grote—who has gradually sunk into a state always too congenial to
him, of thinking that no good is to be done & who therefore will
certainly never do any—at most no harm, & scarcely that, for it is harm
to discourage others. A bookseller is willing to take the risk for two
years provided editorship & writers are found for that period—in order
to do so, the rich radicals, Edition: current; Page: [202] Strutt,
Warburton, Sir. W. Molesworth,5 the Marshalls6 of Leeds, & others, are
going to raise money of the necessary amount among themselves & their
friends, in shares of £25 or £50 the same person being allowed to take
any number. The plan (Roebuck’s & mine, to which all have at once
assented) is, to drop altogether every kind of lying; the lie of
pretending that all the articles are reviews, when more than half of
them are not; and the lie of pretending that all the articles proceed
from a corps, who jointly entertain all the opinions expressed. There is
to be no we; but each writer is to have a signature, which he may avow
or not as he pleases, but which (unless there be special reasons to
constitute an exception) is to be the same for all his articles, thus
making him individually responsible & allowing his opinions to derive
what light they can from one another. The editor answers only for
adequate literary merit, & a general tendency not in contradiction to
the objects of the publication. They would I believe make me editor if I
would take it—but I cannot; hampered again! but this time it is of
little consequence, for I hope they will have Mr. Fox, who will be quite
as fit: if they will not have him, there are other candidates not unfit
though not so fit. If this scheme goes on, I hope you will write for the
review or at least in it. As an organ of utterance it will be at least
more congenial to you than Fraser’s Magazine. It is true the prejudices
of our Utilitarians are at least as strong against some of your writings
as those of any other persons whatever, & though the individual
signature would smooth many difficulties, even that would hardly, with
them, have covered your “Characteristics” or “Teufelsdröckh” (were you
afraid of the word Dreck?) but such an article as that on Johnson they
would have delighted in; that on Ebenezer Elliott & various others of
yours would have suited them perfectly. In fact, I hardly know one of
your opinions, as often as you do not feel yourself called upon to make
a direct attack upon themselves, which they would have any difficulty in
getting on with: and I expect no difficulty in getting a passport for
any of mine, which except in mere metaphysics, are quite as unlike
theirs as yours are: what revolts them is the combination of opinions
new & often strange to them, with a manner (to them) equally new & still
more strange, & which prevents them not only from understanding your
meaning but from desiring to understand it. I have never found one of
them who, after taking the trouble to read enough of your writings to
understand any thing of your drift, did not recognise in them much more
of what he deemed good than of what he deemed bad; it is true I have
found few who would take that trouble, & some of those few Edition:
current; Page: [203] would not have done so if they had not had faith
(derived from my testimony) that it was worth while. I tell you this, to
let you know how the land lies. There is nothing in what I have said
that needs be any obstacle to your writing for this review—it simply
shews under what conditions either of subject or else of manner your
writings will be acceptable to it. To me your manner being the natural
clothing or rather skin of your thoughts, is (whenever I understand
those) all that it should be: so however is Plato’s: whom however I
would not counsel to preach at St Paul’s in good Attic Greek: of course
I am exaggerating, for the purpose of illustration. Here is a letter
neither menschlich nor geistlich but wholly dinglich: you will be I
think not more than a week without another letter; there is so much of
the two former kinds to be said. I have not answered your letter, as you
see. As for your letters, they are never, I think, more menschlich than
when they are geistlich, nor more geistlich than when menschlich. Yours
affectionately

J. S. Mill

I long to see your Collier7 book, yet could wish for the sake of it that
you had received long since what you will receive soon, unless the
diligence to which Adolphe d’Eichthal has entrusted it, prove
unfaithful. This is, (if I rightly recollect, for I have not his letter
by me) a collection, in two volumes 8vo, of all the pièces du procès; a
book without which, he says, everybody says there is no getting any
conception of what it was. This book is to come, along with the
Hénault,8 & shall go by Fraser’s next, if it come in time. I know not
why my parcel had not yet reached you. Do you still desire Babbage’s
book on Manufactures?9 I have at length borrowed it, & can lend. The
Roland is mine, and I do not want it: your books have never returned
after, generally much before they were needed. Beaumarchais’10 works
since you have not read them will be of the greatest value & interest to
you—they throw light on a great deal, had immense effect at the time, &
are works of real genius. I have them not; but will endeavour to borrow
them—it is quite a new idea to me that you have need of them.—Fraser’s
address is or was lately, 22 Wilton Crescent. I see little of him. my
kind regards to Mrs Carlyle.11

Of the St Simonians next time; vide also a forthcoming Examiner.12

Roebuck, & much else, postponed.13

Edition: current; Page: [204]


1834

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

12th January 1834

Kensington

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

95.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

Kensington

12th January 1834

.

My dear Carlyle

Your little note dated the 24th was evidently written before you
received my letter written I forget when, but which I fear lost the
first week’s post. I am therefore still expecting an answer to that
letter, but shall not wait for it, mindful that I still owe you an
answer to your last long letter,2—and a fuller answer too than can be
given in any moderate space. I feel that letter a kind of call upon me
to a more complete unfolding to you of my opinions and ways of thinking
than I have ever yet made; which however cannot be all accomplished at
once, but must be gradual. In the very fact that there has not been that
full explanation, and that I feel moved to it now, you may see that
there has taken place a great change in my character and one of which
you will wholly approve—a change, not from any kind of insincerity, but
to a far higher kind of sincerity than belonged to me before. This
change has been progressive, and had barely begun to take place when you
were in London two years ago. I was then, and had been for some years,
in an intermediate state—a state of reaction from logical-utilitarian
narrowness of the very narrowest kind, out of which after much
unhappiness and inward struggling I had emerged, and had taken temporary
refuge in its extreme opposite. My first state had been one of intense
philosophic intolerance; not arising from the scornfulness of the heart
but from the onesidedness of the understanding: seeing nothing myself
but the distorted image, thrown back from many most oblique and twisted
reflectors, of one side only of the truth. I felt towards all who saw
any other side, not indeed a feeling of disdain, for that never was in
my character but the very utmost excess of intellectual vilipending. At
that time I was thought to outrer the doctrines of utilitarianism, even
by those who Edition: current; Page: [205] now consider me a lost sheep
who has strayed from the flock and been laid hold of by the wolves. That
was not wonderful; because even in the narrowest of my then associates,
they being older men, their ratiocinative and nicely concatenated dreams
were at some point or other, & in some degree or other, corrected and
limited by their experience of actual realities, while I, a school-boy
fresh from the logic-school, had never conversed with a reality; never
seen one; knew not what manner of thing it was; had only spun, first
other people’s & then my own deductions from assumed premisses. Now when
I had got out of this state, and saw that my premisses were mere
generalizations of one of the innumerable aspects of Reality, & that far
from being the most important one; and when I had tried to go all round
every object which I surveyed, and to place myself at all points of
view, so to have the best chance of seeing all sides; I think it is
scarcely surprising that for a time I became catholic and tolerant in an
extreme degree, & thought one-sidedness almost the one great evil in
human affairs, seeing it was the evil which had been the bane of my own
teachers, & was also that of those who were warring against my teachers.
I never indeed was tolerant of aught but earnest Belief; but I saw, or
seemed to see, so much of good & of truth in the positive part of the
most opposite opinions & practices, could they but be divested of their
exclusive pretensions, that I scarcely felt myself called upon to deny
anything but Denial itself. I never made strongly prominent my
differences with any sincere, truth-loving person; but held communion
with him through our points of agreement, endeavoured in the first place
to appropriate to myself whatever was positive in him, & if he gave me
any encouragement, brought before him also whatever of positive might be
in me, which he till then had not. A character most unlike yours; of a
quite lower kind, & which if I had not outgrown, & speedily too, there
could have been little worth in me.—Do you remember a paper I wrote in
an early number of Tait,3 reviewing a book by a Mr. Lewis (a man of
considerable worth, of whom I shall have something more to say yet).
That paper paints exactly the state of my mind & feelings at that time.
It was the truest paper I had ever written, for it was the most
completely an outgrowth of my own mind & character: not that what is
there taught, was the best I even then had to teach; nor perhaps did I
even think it so; but it contained what was uppermost in me at that
time; and differed from most else that I knew in having emanated from
me, not, with more or less perfect assimilation, merely worked itself
into me.—Now from this my intellectual history, in relating which I have
faith that I have not presumed too much upon your interest in me, you
will easily see why it is that we two have so rarely canvassed together,
or even mentioned to each other our differences. I never or rarely felt
myself called upon to come into Edition: current; Page: [206] collision
with any one, except those to whom I felt myself altogether superior, &
with whom if I had any intellectual communion it was not for the sake of
learning but of teaching. I have not, till lately, and very gradually,
found out that this is not honest; that although I have not positively,
I have negatively, done much to give to you and to others, a false
opinion of me: though the deliberation with which you form your
opinions, always waiting for sufficient grounds, has I think protected
you from forming an actually false opinion of me, & I have only to
accuse myself of not having afforded you sufficient means of forming the
true. Whether if you knew me thoroughly I should stand higher, or lower,
either in your esteem or in your affection, I know not; in some things
you seem to think me further from you than I am, in others perhaps I am
further from you than you know. On the whole I think if all were told I
should stand lower; but there cannot fail, any way, to be much which we
shall mutually not only respect but greatly prize in each other; and
after all, this, as you & I both know, is altogether of secondary
importance; the first being, that we, and all persons and all things,
should be seen truly—and as they are.

Our differences are indeed of the first importance, and to you must
appear of infinite importance; though for reasons which you will feel
the force of, they do not, in my feeling, throw me to so great a
distance from you as they perhaps will in yours. The first and principal
of these differences is, that I have only, what appears to you much the
same thing as, or even worse than, no God at all; namely, a merely
probable God. By probable I do not mean as you sometimes do, in the
sense of the Jesuits, “that which has weighty authorities in its
favour”. I mean that the existence of a Creator is not to me a matter of
faith, or of intuition; & as a proposition to be proved by evidence, it
is but a hypothesis, the proofs of which as you I know agree with me, do
not amount to absolute certainty. As this is my condition in spite of
the strongest wish to believe, I fear it is hopeless; the unspeakable
good it would be to me to have a faith like yours, I mean as firm as
yours, on that, to you, fundamental point, I am as strongly conscious of
when life is a happiness to me, as when it is, what it has been for long
periods now past by, a burthen. But I know that neither you nor any one
else can be of any use to me in this, & I content myself with doing no
ill, by never propagating my uncertainties. The reason why I think I
shall never alter on this matter is, that none of the ordinary
difficulties as they are called, as the origin of evil, & such like, are
any serious obstacles to me; it is not that the logical understanding,
invading the province of another faculty, will not let that other higher
faculty do its office; there is wanting something positive in me, which
exists in others; whether that something be, as sceptics say, an
acquired association, or as you say, a Edition: current; Page: [207]
natural faculty. So you see I am nearly as proper an object of your pity
as Cavaignac; nevertheless I do not feel myself so, having, as I have,
other supports, which the want of that one cannot take away. With
respect to the immortality of the soul I see no reason to believe that
it perishes; nor sufficient ground for complete assurance that it
survives; but if it does, there is every reason to think that it
continues in another state such as it has made itself here, & no further
affected by the change than it would be by any equally great event
during its sojourn on earth, were such possible. Consequently in all we
do here we are working for our “hereafter” as well as our “now.”—Now,
were you aware that I was in such a state of uncertainty on these main
points? I am almost sure that you were not much mistaken in the matter,
but yet were not quite certain that you knew.

Another of our differences is, that I am still, & am likely to remain, a
utilitarian; though not one of “the people called utilitarians”; indeed,
having scarcely one of my secondary premisses in common with them; nor a
utilitarian at all, unless in quite another sense from what perhaps any
one except myself understands by the word. It would take a whole letter
to make it quite clear to you what I mean; & I feel perfectly that I
have stated the difference between us in a manner & in terms which give
no just idea of what it really is, & that every explanation I shall
hereafter make will show that difference to be less than the words I
have used seem to import. One of the explanations I have to give, I
partly indicate by saying, as I do most fully, that I entirely recognise
with you the “infinite nature of Duty”.4 Yet by this too, if
unexplained, I should convey an idea of as much greater an agreement
with you than the truth warrants, as I do in the other case of a less
agreement. This also must wait till another time for a fuller
developement. You will see, partly, with what an immense number &
variety of explanations my utilitarianism must be taken, & that those
explanations affect its essence, not merely its accidental forms, when I
tell you that on the very point on which you express your belief so
kindly & with so much ménagement and appeal to my future self, & promise
not to be angry if I differ from you “even with vehemence”, I agree &
have long agreed with you, even in the most decided and vehement manner.
I have never, at least since I had any convictions of my own, belonged
to the benevolentiary, soup-kitchen school. Though I hold the good of
the species (or rather of its several units) to be the ultimate end,
(which is the alpha & omega of my utilitarianism) I believe with the
fullest Belief that this end can in no other way be forwarded but by the
means you speak of, namely by each taking for his exclusive aim the
development of what is best in Edition: current; Page: [208] himself.5 I
qualify or explain this doctrine no otherwise than as you yourself do,
since you hold that every human creature has an appointed task to
perform which task he is to know & find out for himself; this can only
be by discovering in what manner such faculties as he possesses or can
acquire may produce most good in the world: meaning by the world a
larger or a smaller part of it as may happen. Thus you think it a part
of your duty, of your work, to address yourself, through the press, to
the “species” at large. Further than that I do not go; perhaps even less
far. And when once I have written down my Belief & sent it forth in such
manner as happens or seems to be the most effectual within my reach, I
harass myself as little as you do with any thought about the
consequences; being like yourself perfectly satisfied that what I have
done, if done in the spirit of my own creed, will “prove in reality all
& the utmost that I was capable of doing” for mankind.

And now do not “take it ill” if I say how much it surprised me that you
should think it necessary to say you would not “take it ill” if I
differed from you. I never for an instant suspected that you would take
ill any difference of opinion while you continue fully assured that the
dissentient is sincere, earnest, & truth-loving: and you never allow me
to be under a moment’s fear that you are unassured of that in my case.
Grieved you might be at what you might deem my errors, but that feeling
you could not mean to disavow; nor would it be any pleasure to me, but
the contrary, if you could.—In your recent letters you have several
times expressed surprise at opinions & feelings of mine which you did
not expect, & which you have said proved to you how little you yet know
me; & which in truth did shew, how small a part of my character I had
yet shewn to you; so much smaller a part than I was aware of: truly I
begin to think that instead of being as I once thought I was, the most
self-conscious person living, I am much less self-conscious now,
(whatever I was once) than almost anybody. But what most shews how
little I had afforded you an insight into, is that the fact of my having
recently read the New Testament, & what I wrote to you of the
impressions it had made upon me,6 should have formed as it seems to have
done, an era in your opinion & feeling concerning me. In my own history
it is no era; it has made no new impression, only strengthened the best
of the old: I have for years had the very same idea of Christ, & the
same unbounded reverence for him as now; it was because of this
reverence that I sought a more perfect acquaintance with the Edition:
current; Page: [209] records of his life, that indeed gave new life to
the reverence, which in any case was becoming or was closely allied with
all that was becoming a living principle in my character.

Here is a very long letter; yet how little it says of all that is to be
said! However you see that you are likely to know much more of me
hereafter than you have known hitherto. I must expend this remaining
space on matters of fact. The two volumes on the collier, together with
Henault7, came from Adolphe d’Eichthal & went off immediately, I hope in
time to go by Fraser’s last parcel. I wonder at your not having received
the other books. The Examiner subscribers amount now to 80 of the
required 100, & others are known to be coming.—The review proceeds
hopefully, but assurance is needed of a greater number of acceptable
writers. The paper on the Repository was mine, also that in last
Examiner on the new number,8 & I have recommenced my French articles.
The paper on Miss Martineau9 was really a paper on Impressment.
D’Eichthal says you will find much on the collier in the history by the
Abbé Montgaillard,10 and in the Mémoires secrets de Bachaumont:11 this
last person wrote down the doings & talkings of every successive day.
The 2 vols I have sent, contain the mémoires of the different parties in
the cause. How find you the Goesman Memoires?12 Make my kind
remembrances to Mrs Carlyle and believe me Faithfully yours

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

17th January, [1834]

Kensington

John Pringle Nichol

Pringle Nichol, John

96.


TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1

Kensington

,

17th January, [1834]

2

My dear Sir,

Your letter gave me the pleasure your letters always do, and that is a
constantly increasing pleasure, for every fresh communication discloses
new points of agreement and sympathy. Whoever else may have difficulty
Edition: current; Page: [210] in co-operating, we two shall find it
easy; for wherever we turn our minds separately to the same subject, we
seem always to arrive at the same, or at the lowest, perfectly
harmonious conclusions. . . . About the Review—though I felt almost sure
that you would approve of it, and enter into it with the warmth which I
wish were as characteristic of all our friends as of you, it is no less
a satisfaction to me to find that I was not mistaken. The project
advances, and if we had a sufficient list of good writers on whom we
could rely so as to be independent of chance contributions, we could
start almost immediately; but, unhappily, “the harvest is great, and the
labourers are few”—there are scarcely any first-rate minds forming—indè
origo mali—we want such an organ quite as much to train up public
instructors, to erect a Normal School of Literature as for any temporary
or party purposes. Though I do not say so to any one whose zeal I am
afraid of damping, I do not think we shall be ready before the 1st of
January next year. We can do little till Parliament meets, and our
friends come to town; and our arrangements will not be made in time to
publish the first number before the end of the session, which is so bad
a time for a new literary undertaking that it will be better to
postpone, and employ the delay in accumulating a stock of good articles
to start with. Meantime, we shall increase our corps, and shall
ascertain the result of several experiments, especially Tait’s reduction
of price (Roebuck, who has just come from Bath, says the reduction will
tenfold the sale in that city, but then Tait’s magazine means Roebuck’s
magazine, at Bath, where his popularity is boundless. I say boundless,
because he is able to get over everything though constantly meeting with
rubs. Two public meetings have been necessary to obliterate the
impression produced by his having, in Tait, termed Watts’ hymns a
“wretched farrago”).3 About an editor—the fittest who has presented
himself, and also the least objected to hitherto, is Mr. Fox, whom you
know probably most as a writer in The Westminster Review, and leader of
the Political Union in London. His principles, opinions, talents, and
attainments, render him, I think, eminently fit; the objection is his
being a Unitarian minister, and that objection is only as to the
appearance, not the fact, as you well know if you ever read The Monthly
Repository, of which he is editor and proprietor, and has divested it of
its sectarian character so completely as to have lost the support of
almost all the Unitarians. His religion, of the most unobtrusive kind,
is what the religion of all denominations would be, if we were in a
healthy state—a religion of spirit, not of dogma, and catholic in the
best sense. For writers, those we most rely on for regular support are
my father, who, if he continues to be satisfied with the conduct of the
Review, will, I have no Edition: current; Page: [211] doubt, write
frequently; Roebuck, Buller, and myself (the originators of the scheme),
Fonblanque, John Wilson, secretary to the Factory Commission, a most
valuable man; Fox himself, to whom we have now the pleasure of adding
you. Strutt and Hawkins4 will write occasionally. Many others, some of
them most valuable, have promised assistance, but we cannot count upon
them to the same extent. With some of the very best it is on the cards
whether they will be able to give us much of their time or none; for
instance, Chadwick, the poor Law Commissioner, one of the most
remarkable men of our time in the practical art of Government, Dr.
Southwood Smith,5 and a variety of others. Can you help us to swell the
list? Since I have mentioned The Monthly Repository, I will exhort you
if it falls in your way to read it, and I should be happy, if it does
not, to send you a number now and then as I am anxious both for Mr.
Fox’s sake and for its merit, to spread it abroad in every way—it has an
uphill fight for success, having lost almost all its old circulation and
gained an entirely new one—and it has little or no bibliopolic support.
It is highly gratifying to me to find my views on the definition and
method of Political Economy6 coinciding with those of so competent a
judge as yourself—it is by the approbation of such persons as you (and
how few they are) that the fate of such speculations must be decided—but
I hope for more from you than simple approbation, you who will enter
perfectly into the spirit of all I have written so far as it is true,
will also be able to add much to it and to suggest all manner of further
developments, clearer explanations and apter illustrations, and I most
earnestly beg you to do so—as I am ambitious that the essay, even if for
that end it should remain unpublished for twenty years, should become
classical and of authority; and as I am persuaded that the foundation of
the truth is here, I do not despair by the help of the very few whose
help is worth having in such a case, of gradually perfecting the
execution until it may deserve more than an ephemeral existence. I was
prepared for our agreeing in the main, as I think we always shall on
questions of philosophic method, because we always have hitherto, and
because we have both of us laid the foundation in the study of physics.
Though my acquaintance with either mathematical or experimental science
is not profound as yours is, but extremely superficial, it is sufficient
to have enabled me to lay hold of the methods and appropriate to myself
fully as much as any metaphysician has ever done, the logic of physical
science—yet I feel great imperfections still in that department, and
look forward to soliciting much of your aid not only for little things
like this but for a much more elaborate work on Logic which Edition:
current; Page: [212] I have made some progress in. I am extremely glad
that you are writing for the F.Q.7 an article which I have long wished
written, and look forward to its perusal with great expectation both of
pleasure and of valuable suggestions for the guidance of my own mind. It
is a great honour to my MS. that you should wish to quote anything from
it in your article; I most readily delegate to you absolute powers over
it for that purpose; only the very flattering expressions which you are
kind enough to apply to it in your letter induce me to request that if
you mention my name (which I leave to your option) the quotation may be
left to speak for itself. The passport of your recommendation is given
by the fact of its insertion, and the public have seen so much of
coteries of men puffing one another into a fictitious reputation that
one is anxious to avoid any such appearance—but you do not need that I
should say to you these things—though if I were writing of you perhaps I
should. My habit and inclination is to simplicity in all things, and I
can as little conceive that a man of any dignity of character can feel
hurt by praise as by blame—but one is obliged to defer to appearances
and avoid vulgarising oneself by being confounded with the herd of those
who quack for a reputation. Tait has shown his usual want of delicacy
(he has the least nicety of perception of all men I know) in laying
praise with a trowel on his own contributors as he does—if I had not
been past blushing I should have blushed the other day both for him and
those of us whom he bedaubed in a recent number.8

Yours ever,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13th February 1834

India House

William Tait

Tait, William

97.


TO WILLIAM TAIT1

India House

13th February
1834

My dear Sir

A few weeks ago I cashed the accompanying draft for our friend Roebuck
and I now send it, but am in no hurry for payment.

The first number of your new series is I think better than any of the
old—and I like the getting up & the outward & inward appearance of the
new much more than of the old.

Edition: current; Page: [213]
Is the “English Opium-Eater” the author of the clever gossiping paper on
Hannah More?2 and is it permitted to ask who he is? & also who is the
writer on “the Decline & Fall of the Empire of Fashion”?3

The paper I like least is that on the “Streets of London.”4

I shall expect with some anxiety the result of the experiment of
lowering the price. Roebuck says that it will increase tenfold the sale
at Bath—but Bath is not a fair specimen, for Tait to the Bath people
means Roebuck, & all his party who can afford it are sure to buy it—

Ever yours

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday Feb. 14, 1834

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

98.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

Friday [Feb. 14?, 1834]

I send the first of the notes2—I have two short ones besides, which I do
not send yet, because something may occur in the remaining days of the
month to change them.

You will tell me when I must close the series & send them to press?

On looking again at those two articles in the last M. R. I wonder how I
could ever have said what I did say to their disadvantage—but I suppose
first impressions, in a question of manner, are most likely to be right.

Thibaudeau3 is so dilatory that I fear I shall scarcely have my French
paper for this month.

I like the Coriolanus4 better on a second reference to it.

I hope we shall meet oftener—we four or rather five5—as we did on
Tuesday—I do not see half enough of you—and I do not, half enough,
Edition: current; Page: [214] see anybody along with her6—that I think
is chiefly what is wanting now—that, and other things like it—

J. S. M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday Feb. 22, 1834

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

99.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

Saturday [Feb. 22, 1834]

On second thoughts I do not find so much to say as I expected about
tithes—a few lines will do their business.2 If it would not be
troublesome & expensive to add & subtract when the article is in type,
we might see how much it prints to, & then judge. I go on at all events,
writing the notes, so if it be found worth while to introduce a half
sheet in the manner you mention, there is sure to be matter enough to
fill it up.

On the subject of attendance3 I agree with you, & will subjoin the
sentence you suggest—respecting libel4 I adhere to the full extent of my
opinion, and should be glad if you differ from me to make the M.R. the
scene of an amicable controversy on the subject. I think “tolerance,
freedom, and sincerity” would not be generated; to suppose they would,
is to suppose that the revelations in question would ultimately lead to
this, that true statements would be believed & false ones disbelieved:
now my whole argument rests upon this as its foundation that truth, in
any rational sense of the term, cannot in such cases be got at by the
public; that true charges cannot be distinguished from false ones by
such a tribunal. I should expect one of two results; that the lives of
all but the independent in fortune & brave in heart, would be thoroughly
artificialized, by becoming one continued struggle to save appearances &
escape misinterpretation, or else that freedom would work itself out by
what seems to have taken place in America, calumny & scandal carried to
such a length that nobody believes anything which appears in print, & as
none can escape such imputations, nobody regards them.

J.S.M.

Edition: current; Page: [215]
[Postscript probably intended for Eliza Flower]

The three beautiful children5 shall have justice done them on the
appearance of the third6—The birth of the eldest was announced,7 and a
good word spoken for the expected family—

February8 is a beauty—but March9 is grand—

I wish I could give him10 half of my health and take half of some of his
other endowments.

J.S.M.

Now I hope you will get this in time—

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 24, 1834

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

100.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

[
Feb. 24, 1834

]

Let it be so by all means. You will have received today from her,2 the
note on Tithe.3 As the subject will have got on into another stage by
next month, this might if there be room & if it is worth while, be added
at the end of the No. as a separate short article.

I know all about the Saturday scheme, & in any way if it takes effect I
hope to have a share in it. How could it give pain, or anything but
extreme pleasure to me? but all the pros and cons have been discussed
yestereven and she will have told you all that we think about it.

On the truth question she completely agrees with me.4

Health and peace and blessing and love to both—and continue to give some
love to me as I do to you—

J.S.M.

It was sweet of you to write those last words.5

Edition: current; Page: [216]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2d March 1834

Kensington

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

101.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

Kensington

2d March 1834

My dear Carlyle

This is going to be a strange miscellaneous kind of a letter. I have a
long arrear of little things to bring up, and for the present few great
ones to say—and am in a mood in which it is impossible for me to say
them if I had, for nothing but the most dogged determination not to lose
another post could induce me to overcome the extreme aversion which I
feel to writing a letter this morning. I must take your two letters as
an index of the subjects to be written about. First, to answer your
questions as to the projected Periodical. On a rough classification of
periodicals into Tory, Whig, & Radical, there are as you truly say,
various radical reviews & magazines already; even radical-utilitarian
ones; but the radical-utilitarians who promote this new project, do not
recognise in any of the existing works what they want; they wish to
throw the combined strength of the most thoughtful & fertile-minded of
the radicals into one publication, of a more weighty & elaborate
character than any magazine can be; allowing itself to treat subjects at
greater length than the Repository, or Tait; excluding all things which
compromise the radical cause by platitude, or mediocrity, or ignorance,
or subservience to any popular delusion; & on the whole representing as
favourably as the materials admit, the radical intellect, which
certainly is not, & never has been, fairly represented. Tait and the
Westminster give an altogether exaggerated notion of its poverty and
bareness. The “philosophical radicals” are narrow enough, it is true,
though few of them are so narrow as Col. Thompson, the presiding spirit
of the Westminster Review. But many of them are far from being empty;
and they are generally much offended by the emptiness of the radical
publications. I have no doubt that this review if it be started, will be
one with which it will be pleasant to be associated; one will have not
only more freedom, but far better companionship than in any publication
which has yet existed. I have no doubt of its being established, except
that which arises from my abundant experience of the incapacity of the
radicals to cooperate. Those of them who have money, & station, are
mostly impracticably fastidious; men of small objections; men to whom
small difficulties appear great ones. They mostly surprised me by taking
up this Edition: current; Page: [217] scheme with warmth.—Your papers on
Knox, & on Authors,2 would both, I think, be extremely suitable to such
a work: suitable both in respect to the subjects, & to the light in
which you are likely to place them—You have time before you however, for
as it will not be possible to start the work until the dead time of the
year, we think it better to wait for the beginning of the next. Before
the time therefore when it will be necessary to set about one or other
of your articles, you will have heard more; I hope, seen: for if you
come to London you can judge for yourself.

I greatly commend your project of establishing yourself here; which I
have long thought would, as far as all circumstances are concerned of
which I could judge, be the best thing you could do. I have thought so,
this much more than ever, lately, in proportion as I have seen that you
are capable of deriving much pleasure & support from communion with
persons who are even a little superior to the herd in any of the
elements of spiritual worth. I can now promise you, what I had not
ventured to promise a year ago, that you will find many more persons
than you expect who will be more or less in sympathy with you, &
interesting to you. Any way, you will find many more here than anywhere
else. Meantime you may reckon upon my doing all I can to smooth the way
to your coming, & when you are come, to your finding all that you do or
may seek.

The parcel of books came through Tait, a considerable time before they
were announced; & came safe, but, by what misadventure I know not,
saturated with whiskey: from the odour of which it will require
considerable airing to free them, so thoroughly are they impregnated.
You have not told me whether you will have Babbage. I have not much else
to send you, except Repositories. I would send Montgaillard &
Bachaumont3 if I had them or knew how to obtain them but by ordering
them from a bookseller. Of the former I once read the first two volumes,
& found much in them which at that time interested me; you will find the
title in the review I wrote for the W.R. of Scott’s Napoleon4 if you
still have the copy I gave you (if you have not I will send you
another). Of Bachaumont, a work in innumerable volumes, I know nothing
but what I may have read of it in the spurious Memoirs of Louis 18th,5
which they say were almost wholly Edition: current; Page: [218] made up
from it, & which were certainly most amusing & most like an authentic
picture of what one may suppose to have been going on then. By the way,
have you ever read the Memoirs of St Simon?6 (the Duc de St Simon in the
time of Louis 14th.) From what I read of it formerly (an abridged or
rather mutilated edition) & from all I have heard of it since the
complete edition appeared, I should think that no more complete setting
before one’s eyes of a set of human creatures, had ever been achieved:
the creatures themselves it is true were as little worth it, as any who
have really existed can well be. Adolphe has repeated his recommendation
of Montgaillard & Bachaumont, which therefore I suppose would be of real
& great use to you.

What of work I have been doing lately has been chiefly for the day,
until something of a more durable kind ripen itself within me. You will
have recognised in the Examiner the resumption of my papers on French
politics.7 Besides these I have written in the last Repository & mean to
continue during the session “notes on the newspapers”8 so as to present
for once at least a picture of our “statesmen” & of their doings, taken
from the point of view of a radical to whom yet radicalism in itself is
but a small thing. This was worth doing I think, & I have not been
capable of doing much else lately. The Repository is also publishing
some notes of mine upon Plato,9 mostly written long ago, which I thought
might be of some interest & perhaps use, chiefly because they do not
speculate and talk about Plato, but shew to the reader Plato himself.
Copies of these I will speedily send to you through Simpkin &
Marshall.—I am not at all “amazed” at your reading Homer, & should like
very much to hear all you will have to say about him.—I entirely agree
in what you say about Beaumarchais; of Morellet10 I have no very
accurate recollection.

I have scarcely heard at all from any of my acquaintances
(correspondents I cannot call them) at Paris; except a note from Cousin
asking me to do some things for him, & the least, or shortest word of
salutation from Cavaignac. His preface to “Paris Revolutionnaire”11
impressed me, much as it did you. It was to me, also, a résumé and
piecing together of many scattered and fragmentitious notions gathered
from his conversation. I have no doubt of the perfect sincerity of the
paper; that is, of its containing the genuine views of life and human
nature, which have possessed themselves of his convictions, & by which
he steers his own course. He is Edition: current; Page: [219] accused
however, of being much influenced by vanity, & the love of popularity: I
should have thought, without ground, had not the most keen-sighted &
penetrating discerner of character I ever knew, drawn from opportunities
of observation at least equal to mine, that very inference.—I am not
much surprised at not hearing from Carrel, as he is in such a state of
persecution & harassing from the French government. This you will have
learnt from the Examiner.

Fonblanque’s business goes well. Thanks for your mention of it to Tait;
who has subscribed, & promised to speak to others. There is no necessity
however for any further exertions, as the money is now all obtained or
as good as obtained.

I would say something in acknowledgment of your so kind answer to my
letter of “revelations” but I really cannot, just now, say anything of
what I would say. I would rather ask of you, to speak more & more freely
to me on those subjects & unfold to me more & more your whole mind in
regard to them. I will also ask one or two questions more: Is not the
distinction between Mysticism, the mysticism which is of Truth, & mere
dreaming, or the substitution of imaginations for realities, exactly
this, that mysticism may be “translated into logic?” I mean in the only
sense in which I ever endeavour so to translate it. You will understand
what I mean. Logic proves nothing, yet points out clearly whether and
how all things are proved. This being my creed, of course none of my
mysticism, if mysticism it be, rests on logic as its basis; yet I
require to see how it looks in the logical dialect before I feel sure of
it. And if I have any vocation I think it is exactly this, to translate
the mysticism of others into the language of Argument. Have not all
things two aspects, an Artistic and a Scientific; to the former of which
the language of mysticism is the most appropriate, to the latter that of
Logic? The mechanical people, whether theorists or men of the world,
find the former unintelligible, & despise it. Through the latter one has
a chance of forcing them to respect even what they cannot understand—and
that once done, they may be made to believe what to many of them must
always be in the utmost extent of the term “things unseen.” This is the
service I should not despair of assisting to render, & I think it is
even more needed now than works of art, because it is their most useful
precursor, & one might, almost say, in these days their necessary
condition.

Expand to me also more & more the meaning of “Humility” and “Entsagen.”

I had almost forgotten to mention the cost of those books. The Mémoires
Adolphe was obliged to pay 24 francs for; if they be not worth that to
you, they will (when you have done with them) to me, who am a sort of
collector of books on French history. The Hénault cost (I think) 12
francs. Edition: current; Page: [220] There were I believe no others.
Adolphe said he knew of no Dictionnaire Néologique, and we tried
together to get a map of the “Ile de France” but could not find one. A
map of the department of Seine et Oise might be got of course, & I
expected that Adolphe would have sent it if he still found it impossible
to procure the other. It can be got immediately if it would still be of
use.

I am thinking of ordering from Paris a series which is in the course of
publication & which from notices in the National I see to be very
interesting, “Histoire parlementaire de la revolution française”12 being
by far the completest collection ever made of original documents;
including debates in the Clubs, & so forth. There are likewise memoirs
concerning & papers of Mirabeau,13 published by a relation of his &
undoubtedly authentic, but I fear having but little in them. These I
shall attempt to borrow & look through before I buy them.

Thiers completely verifies the impression his history makes. Even among
French ministers he stands out, conspicuously unprincipled.

Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

15th April, 1834

India House

John Pringle Nichol

Pringle Nichol, John

102.


TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1

India House

,

15th April, 1834

.

My dear Sir,

The inclosed statement is all that I have been able to think of that can
at all promote your purpose. It is taken from the annual statistical
volume now published by the Board of Trade, and prepared by Mr. Porter,2
of that department; a most valuable collection, which you ought to have,
as it will not only save you hundreds of troublesome references, but
also afford much information, the very existence of which you would not
otherwise know of. This account, like many others in the volume, was
prepared from returns furnished by the Inspector General of Exports and
Imports Edition: current; Page: [221] expressly for that work. The table
of protections annexed to Sir Henry Parnell’s book3 is classified by
himself; at least, he gives a separate list of those which he considers
to be inoperative; and I, judging only by conjecture, am unable to
correct it in any point. But for your purpose, which does not require
minute accuracy, the enclosed paper may perhaps afford sufficient
materials. I suppose you have Sir Henry’s book.

I had been a letter in your debt for a most unreasonable time before I
received your last, and I know not how to excuse myself for being so,
for such a letter as yours was most assuredly deserved better treatment.
Every letter I receive from you discovers, I will not say more and more
points of agreement between us, for that would be little, but more and
more traces of a general conformity in our views and in our methods; and
this strikes me more whenever we travel on new ground. For instance, I
was wondering whether you were a reader of Coleridge, and should
certainly have asked you the question very soon, when you unexpectedly
wrote to me about him exactly what I think of him myself—except, by the
way, when you say, “as a politician he seems unprincipled.” I think he
is not unprincipled but principled—his views on politics are, I have
reason to believe, systematic. Did you ever read his little work on
Church and State?4 If not, read it; if you have, tell me whether you
agree with it in the main (I mean the Church part of it) as I do. Few
persons have exercised more influence over my thoughts and character
than Coleridge has; not much by personal knowledge of him, though I have
seen and conversed with him several times, but by his works, and by the
fact that several persons with whom I have been very intimate were
completely trained in his school. Through them, too, I have had
opportunities of reading various unpublished manuscripts of his; and, on
the whole, I can trace through what I know of his works, pieced together
by what I have otherwise learned of his opinions, a most distinct thread
of connection. I consider him the most systematic thinker of our time,
without excepting even Bentham, whose edifice is as well bound together,
but is constructed on so much simpler a plan, and covers so much less
ground. On the whole, there is more food for thought—and the best kind
of thought—in Coleridge than in all other contemporary writers; and it
is in many respects a great good that almost all the most accomplished
and zealous of the rising defenders of the Church of England are pupils
of his. They are mischievous only in this, that they will be effectual
in keeping up, for a time, what they will not be effectual in shaping to
their ideal of what it ought to be.

Edition: current; Page: [222]
I am expecting with great anticipations of pleasure, your paper5 in the
Foreign Quarterly—on a subject I have long wished to see treated as you
will treat it—and also your tract on the Corn Law6 controversy. You
should have a Bread-eaters’ Union to counteract the Bread-taxers’ Union.
That Fife Herald7 interested me exceedingly; one so seldom has the
pleasure of seeing a fallacy torn up by the roots, instead of being
merely lopped, or at most levelled with the ground. What an immense
superiority the scientific study of any detached point, by which I mean
the habit of viewing it in its relations to all the rest of the field of
which it forms a part, gives one over the mere dealers in εἰκότα και
σημει̑α !8 I was forcibly struck with this when, soon after reading your
Fife Herald, I read Lord Milton’s address to the landowners on the corn
laws9—well meant, but as feeble and shallow as may be expected from
those who, as Plato says, “study pottery in the pot itself;”10 or, as
Bacon says, “Naturam rei in ipsâ re perscrutantur.”11 It is a primitive
fallacy to imagine that assurance of truth can be had by looking at the
subject-matter in the concrete, without that process of analysis which
men term abstraction. But that is the wise, practical way; and, for want
of disciplined minds, you cannot make people understand that no
conclusion obtained in that way ever rises above a more or less strong
presumption, requiring to be philosophically verified—brought to the
test of analytic investigation.

As for those Essays,12 not only I do not want them but I beg you to keep
them by you a while longer, and to annotate them copiously—they have
much need of it. By-the-bye, I believe almost all that I have written in
the fourth essay13 concerning Interest is erroneous but it may lead you
to think on the subject, if you have not already.

The Review scheme has been slumbering temporarily for want of assurance
of a sufficient number of writers. O for ten men with your ardour
Edition: current; Page: [223] of character, and rectitude of intellect!
I am not meaning it as praise, but as the expression of a lamentable
fact that I know not any three except you, me, and Mr. Fox, who I feel
sure will always be moving and could always move together—and I could
name perhaps fifty who have every requisite except some one. There is
always some fatal want. Now, by way of a beginning, will you say how
much you think you could undertake to write regularly? I mean on the
average, not to tie you to a particular time. We want sixteen sheets a
quarter or thereabouts—if you will undertake for one sheet in every
number, I will do the same, and I will see what others will do—but our
poor Radicals! what a miserable figure they make in Parliament!

Yours ever faithfully,

J. S. Mill.

The “Philosophy of Taxation” is an excellent subject, and you will do it
ample justice.

I have not yet sent the St. Simonians,14 but I will send them almost
immediately, and some numbers of the Monthly Repository with them.

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

28th April 1834

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

103.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

28th April 1834

.

My dear Carlyle

I received, a week ago, your little note2—it had not escaped me that for
an unusual length of time I had not heard from you—but I had ascribed it
to the very cause you mention3—which is also the cause of my not having
written for so long a period. The same reason will make this letter an
empty one; nor should I write it did I not know that the most
intrinsically worthless communication between us two is valuable to
both. All that either cares about is so much better spoken than written
of. You will find me too “altered & altering”; perhaps more so than you
expect; more, Edition: current; Page: [224] too, than will probably be
quite intelligible to you, without my opening up to you many incidents
in my spiritual history, which, on a principle which I have heard you
also profess, I like not to speak fully and freely of, until I myself
have a sufficiently clear perception of the meaning and bearing of them.
But I too have what for a considerable time was quite suspended in me,
the “feeling of growth.” I feel myself much more knowing, more seeing,
having a far greater experience, of realities, not abstractions, than
ever before; nor do I doubt that this superior knowledge and insight
will one day make itself available in the form of greater power, for
accomplishing whatever work I may be called to, shall I say also for
chusing the work which I may most worthily perform? Every increase of
insight carries with it the uncomfortable feeling of being separated
more & more widely from almost all other human beings; this one would
the less care for, did it not also damp all those feelings which prompt
one to exertion through the hope of success, I mean any other success
than is constituted by the struggle itself. One feels more & more that
one is drifting so far out of the course of other men’s navigation as to
be altogether below their horizon; not only they will not go with us,
but they cannot see whither we are steering, & they believe if they ever
catch a glimpse of us, that we are letting ourselves go blindly whither
we may. However this must be, & may be, borne with, when one’s own path
is clear—and mine is always becoming clearer.—On every account which I
can judge of, I am convinced that you do wisely in coming to London.
Nowhere else, at least nowhere in this country are there so many
realities to be known & communed with; whereof not a few in the shape of
true-hearted men and women, who to the extent of their intellect or
experience, believe aright & act according to their belief. There are
very few of them in whom there is not wanting something of the very
first importance, but still there is in many enough & more than enough
of good to give you a stronger interest in them than merely that which
you have in all Actualities. Some of these I shall have opportunities of
making known to you, & you to them, to the mutual advantage and pleasure
of both.—I should send to you various books, if you were not so soon to
be here; among others several numbers of the Repository, with writings
of mine in them: but a much more remarkable production than anything of
mine is a novel which has lately appeared, entituled “Eustace Conway”
written by a far superior man,4 evidently, to the author of “Arthur
Coningsby” but the tone of thinking is much the same. You will read it
with great interest I am sure, though you will probably differ from many
of the author’s opinions as widely as I do—but you will perhaps agree in
a greater number of them. I thought I had told you that the author of
Arthur Coningsby is John Sterling, who at that Edition: current; Page:
[225] time was in the ferment & effervescence of the process of forming
his opinions & his character—now he has become as you say “compacted and
adjusted” & like all Coleridge’s disciples has become a sort of
conservative & churchman—he is going into orders—but will not keep upon
terms with any lie notwithstanding—he is able, which it is happy for him
that he is, still to believe Christianity without doing violence to his
understanding, and that therefore not being, to his mind, false in the
smallest particle, he can & does denounce all which he recognises as
false, in the speculation or practice of those among whom he is about to
find himself.5 I believe there are not a few such persons, & that many
of the most earnest and most genially-natured of the youth of the
English Universities are gone or going into the clerical profession with
similar views. If the Church conformed to their ideal of what it should
be, I could say to them, Ite fausto pede; but they will not regenerate
it from within so soon as it will be pulled down from without.—I long to
hear all you could say about Homer—I hope you will, some time, write &
publish it. Mr Austin is better: Buller, poor fellow, is but
indifferently in health. Have you yet seen Mrs Austin’s Cousin?6 Her
preface is the truest & best piece of printed writing I have read for
many months. Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 17, 1834

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

104.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

[
June 17, 1834

]

I have some news for you. Molesworth, without any suggestion or
solicitation, has spontaneously offered to establish, at his own
expense, the review2 we were talking of—making but one condition viz.
that substantially it shall be under my direction—he knows that I cannot
on account of my position in the India House, be myself the editor, or
be ostensibly connected with the review in any way, except as an
occasional writer—but he will appoint his editor under the complete
understanding that he is to be guided altogether by me.

Edition: current; Page: [226]
This is a much more feasible scheme than the former one3—because there
will be but one person to satisfy, and he a man of decided movement
principles, docile, and who will certainly be pleased with the thing if
it is such as will please us. At the same time we must not allow him to
throw away his money—we must see our way clearly to being able to carry
it on before we announce it—a failure would be disastrous to the cause.

I am anxious to talk over the matter with you and let us lay our heads
together to see what can be done—a great part of the chance of success
will depend upon the degree in which you can cooperate.

We can speak of it as Molesworth’s review—none out of our own circle
should be told that I have more to do with it that any of the rest of
us.

Do think about it—& if you do not come to me in a day or two, we will
come to you.

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 26, 1834

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

105.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

[
June 26, 1834

]

I have sent to P.R.2 I think about as much matter as we agreed upon. I
have no subjects remaining, except the Beer Bill,3 on which I shall send
(today) a single paragraph; the debate on education & crime; & the
admission of Dissenters to the Universities:4 on these last subjects I
shall write something & send it, but if necessary it can stand over to
next month, with an announcement to that effect.

I should like to have a proof—

The following are the titles:

Abolition of Patronage in the Church of Scotland

Mr Rawlinson & the man of no religion

Business of the House of Commons

The Tom-foolery at Oxford

Parliamentary Monstrosities

The Ministry.

Edition: current; Page: [227]
William Adams will like my notes this time—at least the first five.
There is much of “the devil” in them.

How are you? do, one of you, write & let me know.

Our affairs have been gradually getting into a more & more
unsatisfactory state—and are now in a state which, a very short time
ago, would have made me quite miserab[le]5 but now I am altogether in a
higher state than I was & better able to conquer evil & to bear it. I
will tell you all about it some day—perhaps the first time we meet—but
by that time perhaps the atmosphere will be clearer—adieu—

I have not spoken much to you about our affairs lately, as I did while
she6 was away; partly because I did not so much need to give confidence
& ask support when she was with me, partly because I know you disapprove
& cannot enter with the present relation between her & me & him.7 but a
time perhaps is coming when I shall need your kindness more than ever—if
so, I know I shall always have it—8

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Summer, 1834

Harriet Taylor

Taylor, Harriet

106.


TO HARRIET TAYLOR1

[
Summer, 1834

?]

I have been made most uncomfortable all day by your dear letter sweet &
loving as it was dearest one—because of your having had that pain—&
because of my having given you pain. You cannot imagine dearest how very
much it grieves me now when even a small thing goes wrong now that thank
heaven it does not often happen so, & therefore always happens
unexpectedly. As for my saying “do not let us talk of that now” I have
not the remotest recollection of my having said so, or what it was that
I did not want to talk about—but I am sure that it was something which I
considered to be settled & done with long ago, & therefore not worth
talking any more about, a reason which you yourself so continually
express for not explaining to me or telling me about impressions of
yours, uncertainty about the nature of which is tormenting me—& I have
latterly learnt sufficient selfsacrifice, sometimes to yield to that
feeling, & leave off asking you questions which you tell me it is
unpleasant to you to answer. But whatever it was that we were talking
about on the common I am sure if I had thought that anything remained to
be said about it, much more if I had thought that such a matter as
whether we can or cannot be in complete sympathy, had Edition: current;
Page: [228] depended on what remained unsaid, I should have been a great
deal more anxious to have everything said, than you would have been to
say it. O my own love, if you were beginning to say something which you
had been thinking of for days or weeks, why did you not tell me so? why
did you not make me feel that you were saying what was important to you,
& what had not been said or had not been exhausted before? I am writing
you know in complete ignorance about what it was—but I am sure I have
tormented you enough & long enough by refusing to acquiesce in your
seemingly determined resolution that there should be radical differences
of some sort in some of our feelings, and now having found, & convinced
you, that there are none that need make us unhappy, I have learnt from
you to be able to bear that there should be some—consisting chiefly in
the want of some feelings in me which you have. But I thought we
perfectly knew & understood what those were, & that neither of us saw
any good in discussing them further—& when I ask you questions which you
do not like to answer, it is only to know what is paining you at the
time—not meaning to discuss feelings any more if it is feelings and not
facts that are annoying you.

I know darling it is very doubtful if you will get this before I see
you—but I cannot help writing it & perhaps I shall feel easier
afterwards. at present I feel utterly unnerved & quite unfit for
thinking or writing or any business—but I shall get better, & don’t let
it make you uncomfortable mine own—o you dear one.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday July 14, 1834

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

107.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

Monday
 [
July 14, 1834

]

We had a great deal more discussion after we left you, and we all
(three) most decidedly think that since the crisis in the congregation2
appears to have been brought on principally by the belief3 that a fact,
which would be of the greatest importance in their eyes, though of none
at all in yours, Edition: current; Page: [229] is true—it would be very
foolish that you should not have the full advantage of its not being
true. Even supposing that your separation from the chapel were
inevitable in every case, the effect on your future prospects will
entirely depend upon that fact being denied or not—& whether you feel it
consistent, or not, with your personal dignity to deny it, we are quite
convinced that we, and all your friends, ought. While that fact is
denied and deniable, all who are otherwise favourably disposed to you
will not be afraid to stand by you, & there will be at least a strong
diversion in your favour against the tide which will set in against you.
But if it were made impossible for any one to defend you except those
who were willing to encounter the odium of justifying all which is now
alleged against you, I am afraid you will be worse situated than if no
defence were made at all, since people will make it a matter of
conscience to discountenance what they consider the open profession &
vindication of immorality.

This being the case, I should not, if I were in your situation, think
myself bound to court attention to the fact that expediency only & not
principle was the cause of your not having gone to the full length of
what they assert. If they put that very question to you, no doubt you
ought to say so—but I think not otherwise. It seems to me quite enough
if you appeal to those articles in the Reposy4 as containing your
principles on the subject. You might say that you have acted no
otherwise than in consistency with those principles; and if they ask you
whether the particular fact is true, you might deny altogether their
concern with it or right to enquire into it, but nevertheless profess
your willingness voluntarily to give the information sought, by denying
the assertion. We all think it of great importance that every public
mention of the charge should be accompanied by mention of your denying
it—& also that the effect of this denial should not, unless it be
absolutely necessary to your integrity, be injured by the public
profession of the extent to which your principles go in that one matter.
She5 went to Walworth yesterday to endeavour to induce Mr Hardy6 to move
in the matter—I know not yet with what success. But it is of importance
that the steps they take should be in a better spirit & taste than if
the affair is left to its original promoters it probably would happen.

all quite well
 let me hear from you

J.S.M.

Edition: current; Page: [230]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

August 20, 1834

London

Adolphe Narcisse Thibaudeau

Narcisse Thibaudeau, Adolphe

108.


TO [ADOLPHE NARCISSE THIBAUDEAU]1

London

August 20, 1834

.

I have great pleasure in introducing to you Mr Thomas Holcroft, whose
father is doubtless known to you by his dramatic writings, if not by his
other works, and whose mother was the daughter of Mercier,2 your
father’s3 colleague in the Convention.

Mr Holcroft is desirous of learning & observing as much as can be
learned in a few weeks about French affairs, especially politics, and
with your knowledge both of France & England he will learn more from you
in two or three conversations than from any one else in as many months.

I am anxious to hear from you about the Globe. Did you receive my
letter, and will the proposal suit you?

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

30th August, 1834

India House

John Pringle Nichol

Pringle Nichol, John

109.


TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1

India House

,

30th August, 1834

.

My dear Sir,

I need not say with how much pleasure I have read your letter, and how
gladly I close with your proposal about a series of Political Economy
papers for the Review.2 I anticipate that you will have a far less
formidable idea of the said Review by the time a number or two have
appeared; I should think better of our times than I do if I thought it
were possible to bring together a corps of writers who would contribute
only articles of “a very exalted cast.” If there are one or two such
articles in every number my utmost hopes will be satisfied. However,
there is no immediate necessity for an article on the state of the
science generally, and we need not, therefore, discuss the sufficiency
of the modest reason you give for not writing one. The article you offer
for the first number is one I have long been desirous to see written,
especially since (which is only lately) I became acquainted Edition:
current; Page: [231] with Chalmers’s book,3 which I have just finished a
very careful perusal of. I have derived many new ideas from it, and it
has even suggested an entirely new view of the order in which the truths
of the science ought to be arranged. What he understands, he explains
very clearly and forcibly. It is unfortunate that he is so profoundly
ignorant of some branches of the subject.

About publishing my concluding essay4 in the Review; I think with you,
but am afraid it would take up too much room. The essay on gluts5 must
be entirely remodelled; there is much new speculation to be added to it.
I think I shall, some time or other, write a Treatise on the whole
Science. I am fearful that the Essay on Wages and Profits,6 which you
say you do not quite understand, is little better than elaborate
trifling, and that the doctrine that profits depend on wages, though
scientifically correct, does not present the more important aspect of
the law of profits, perhaps not the ultimate law at all, and is,
therefore, of little use in philosophy. The whole of the speculation on
productive and unproductive7 I must revise, or rather reconsider ab
initio. I am impatient for your remarks on the commercial essay.8 There
is no hurry about the MSS. nor about the St. Simonian books.

Those scraps on Poetry in the Repository9 I believe to be true as far as
they go, but that is not far. There is much more ready to be written in
the Review on that matter. I am much obliged to you for the little paper
you sent me. I do not see any traces of the thoughtlessness or want of
information you speak of, nor of presumption, unless you allude to the
sarcastic sentence on Bentham. I think I agree in your view of the
character of Hamlet, though you appear to go farther or to have gone
farther at that time with the Coleridgian and German metaphysics than I
do. But it is a great pleasure to meet you as I do in all regions of
speculation. I believe, contrary to the vulgar opinion, that there never
was a first-rate mind which was not universal, I mean in its studies,
reflections, and feelings, although almost everyone must limit himself
to a comparatively narrow sphere in his actual contributions to science,
or art, or the business of life, for want of time to acquire the
requisite practical skill in many different lines of activity.

Edition: current; Page: [232]
I have a strong wish, of a higher kind than curiosity, to see anything
which you ever write on any subject. I should like particularly to see
your paper for The F.Q. as soon as it is in a state in which you would
like to let it out of your hands.

Your plan, in The Fife Herald, for the adjustment of the corn laws, is
good, under certain conditions, but I doubt it will be with that
question as with the Catholic—it will not be carried at all until it be
carried out and out.

I will write to the Australian people10 about your suggestion. They
intend, I know, to have agents in various parts of the country; and
Scotch labourers, both agriculturists and mechanics, are of the very
kind they will most value. They will, I doubt not, grant free passage
from the outset.

Brougham is only showing his true character, which is much public spirit
and little honesty, with extreme excitability and a tongue ungovernable
either by good feeling or discretion.11 It is quite false, I believe,
that he drinks, but there is madness in the family; and his flightiness
is only the temperament of madness, without the actual disease.12 Our
friend Tait appears to sell well, but his writers are mostly naught. Let
me hear from you soon again, and believe me,

Yours ever faithfully,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

4 septembre 1834

India House

Victor Cousin

Cousin, Victor

110.


TO VICTOR COUSIN1

India House

,
4 septembre 1834

Mon cher Monsieur,

Il y a déjà bien longtemps que je me reproche tous les jours de n’avoir
pas répondu à votre aimable lettre. Je ne veux pas retarder davantage ma
réponse.

Edition: current; Page: [233]
Je savais que les séries des Rapports des deux Sociétés n’étaient pas
complètes. Ceux qui manquaient aux envois, manquaient aux Sociétés
elles-mêmes. J’ai pourtant renouvelé ma demande à l’une et à l’autre
Société, en y ajoutant celle de vous envoyer tous les ans le rapport
annuel. J’ai reçu de M. Dunn,2 secrétaire de la British and Foreign
School Society, une réponse des plus promptes, dans laquelle il disait
qu’il tâcherait d’obtenir pour vous, de quelque membre de la Société, le
Rapport de 1832, et qu’il se préparait de vous écrire incessamment. Le
Secrétaire de la National Society, le Révérend J. C. Wigram,3 ne m’a
point répondu. Peutêtre serait-il en correspondance avec vous. Si non,
une lettre de vous pourrait bien avoir un meilleur résultat. L’adresse
est Central national schools, Westminster.

Quant aux Poor Law Reports, Mme Austin n’est nullement coupable de leur
non-arrivée. Permettez-moi d’écrire en mauvais français, quand je n’en
ai pas de bon. Le fait est que mon ami Chadwick, qui vous envoya les
Factory Reports, n’a pas envoyé ceux de l’Enquête des pauvres.
Cependant, il m’a promis de vous envoyer incessamment le Rapport
général; plus, un volume de rapports choisis des Assistant Commissioner;
plus, son propre rapport en entier, dès qu’il en aura des exemplaires.
C’est tout ce qui est en son pouvoir, bien qu’il soit nommé secrétaire
du Bureau des pauvres, créé par la nouvelle loi.

Nous travaillons toujours à la cause de l’éducation. Cette année,
Roebuck a prononcé un nouveau discours encore meilleur que le premier;4
et il a obtenu un comité d’enquête, qui a fait du bien et qui annonce un
renouvellement d’enquête dans la session prochaine. Le système coërcitif
effraie surtout nos sectaires religieux, soit dans le sein de l’Eglise,
soit hors d’elle. Le public l’a assez bien accueilli. En attendant, nous
aurons, d’ici à la fin de l’année, un commencement d’écoles normales. En
fait de fonds, les anciennes dotations suffisent, dès que le
gouvernement les reprend d’entre les mains de mandataires infidèles, qui
les gaspillent sans pitié. Je ne parle pas des Universités, mais des
nombreuses Charity schools, et surtout des fondations, où des écoles
devraient être et ne sont pas. Mais nos Universités, plus encores que
nos Académies, ont besoin d’une réforme et même d’une réorganisation
complète. L’Eglise seule s’y oppose, parce que les établissements
d’Oxford et de Cambridge lui appartiennent; et s’ils ne forment pas de
chrétiens, ils forment des churchmen.

Edition: current; Page: [234]
Malgré le retard que j’ai mis à répondre à votre lettre, j’ose encore
vous prier que vous me chargiez de toute autre commission que vous
auriez à faire ici.

Veuillez agréer ma plus haute éstime.

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

14th October, 1834

London

John Pringle Nichol

Pringle Nichol, John

111.


TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1

London

,
14th October, 1834

.

Dear Sir,

When I received your first letter on the subject of the office, I
happened to be in Buckinghamshire, thirty-five miles from London, taking
advantage of the short holiday time which we are allowed at the India
House. I wrote immediately to my father. When I received your second
note it was Saturday, and, of course, writing again to hurry him would
have done no good, the election coming on so soon as Tuesday. I found
yesterday on my return that he had actually prepared a letter, which he
expected to get Mr. Senior to sign along with him, but was prevented by
a sudden attack of illness, from which he has only just recovered; and
it would at all events have been too late. So you see it was not from
any want of zeal on his part or on mine, but from cross-accidents, that
the certificate did not reach you; a circumstance which I should
extremely regret if it had any influence on the result of the election.
We are both of us very sorry that the Edinburgh Bailies did not do
themselves the honour of electing you; but the office after all was no
very advantageous one, and one at least equally suitable to you can
hardly fail to fall in your way. My father thinks that a professorship
in a Scotch university2 would suit you; and it may be in his power to be
of some aid to you in obtaining one, if it were vacant. He thinks you
would promote your success by writing in some work more known and talked
of among the people on whom such things depend, than any you write in
now; as, for instance, if you were to write something for that new
society of the chancellor’s for the diffusion of Political Knowledge.3
For my part I feel certain, notwithstanding my father’s name and
Grote’s, and those of several other Radicals,4 that the society in
question Edition: current; Page: [235] will be thoroughly Whig; but
Political Economy, at least, is of no party. I am satisfied that my
father will do everything he can to serve you, whenever he can find any
opportunity.

Your long letter, received last month, interested me very much. I am
glad that so competent a person as you are, has turned his attention to
the philosophy of mathematics. I have thought, and even written on the
subject, ever since I began to speculate on metaphysics at all; but with
very imperfect success. I think, however, that my logical speculations
have at length given me a clue to that subject also, and that I shall be
able to get to the bottom of it in time; but I shall need all the help I
can obtain from you, and from any other of the very few who have any
capacity for such enquiries. One thing which I had already meditated,
your letter has determined me to do; and that is, as you have found my
Political Economy speculations not uninteresting to you, to request that
you will allow me to send to you as much as is written of my book on
Logic; if book it can be called, which is but the raw material out of
which I shall some time or other make a book.5 I anticipate the greatest
pleasure and advantage from your remarks, whether they are in
confirmation or contestation of my own ideas; and I see you are exactly
in that stage of your enquiries, on this particular subject, in which
what I have done may perhaps help you over some difficulties. You will
then, I know, lend a hand to help me over mine.

For the present I am obliged to suspend this, which is my favourite
pursuit, in order to stick to the Review. I am writing for it an attack
upon Sedgwick’s precious discourse,6 which you perhaps know. I am not
yet convinced of the possibility of using that Political Economy
discourse7 for the Review. The first part, on the definition, strikes me
as being too technical; and the latter part, on the method of the
science, though it may, as you suggest, admit of condensation, would I
think, to produce any effect in a popular review, require amplification
also, and illustration from the mistakes actually committed by
individuals or schools of political economists. This might be done,
though it scarcely suits my vocation, which is not for illustration or
exemplification; I am always much too dry and abstract. But then I
should be stirring up divisions among Political Economists, Edition:
current; Page: [236] and giving a handle to the enemies of the science;
which such men as Torrens8 and Malthus and even Senior are constantly
doing, and which I systematically avoid. I am even anxious that in your
article on the theory of a “glut of capital,” you should avoid the
phrase “glut” or any other which will bring you into seeming collision
(though not real) with my father’s and Say’s doctrine respecting a
general glut. It may easily be shown that they were right; and yet that
Chalmers and Wakefield9 are not wrong. However, I need not say these
things to you.

You were mistaken in ascribing the article on Bentham’s Deontology10 to
me; it was written by the Rev. James Martineau,11 brother of Harriet
Martineau, and a Unitarian minister at Liverpool. He is a clever man,
and has consented to be a frequent contributor to our Review. I think
him one of the best metaphysicians of the day; as he has shown by a
series of articles on Dr. Priestley, which appeared in The Monthly
Repository early in 1833,12 and which if you have not read them, are
worth your reading. I agree in your high opinion of much of the article
on that unfortunate book, which Bowring has made out of fragments of
Bentham;13 but I do not agree with him on all points. I dissent
particularly from his adoption of what is called the selfish system, and
which he has put under the same mantle as the utilitarian doctrine. I
once wrote a brief statement of my views respecting Bentham’s
philosophy, and Bulwer printed it as an appendix to his England and the
English,14 where, perhaps, you have seen it. It is not, and must not be,
known to be mine. You will observe, if it fall in your way, that my
views differ from Mr. Martineau’s both in going further and in not going
so far. On the whole, the article disappointed me. There are few who can
grapple with first principles on any subject. Of all views I have yet
seen taken of the utilitarian scheme, I like Austin’s best, in his book
on The Province of Jurisprudence;15 but even that falls very far short
of what is wanted.

Edition: current; Page: [237]
The few sketchy paragraphs which I added to the notes on the Phaedrus16
do not give any just notion of my metaphysical creed, which is quite
different from that of the Condillac school, and comes nearest to
Hartley’s and my father’s. Have you ever read my father’s metaphysical
work?17 If not, let me send you a copy. I think it explains completely
the cause of our attaching the ideas of infinity and necessity to space
and time. I know not that anyone can analyse or explain succession and
co-existence, when reduced to their simplest forms. The theory of
association presupposes them both, and divides associations into
synchronous and successive. We must, I think, rank them as ultimate laws
of our minds, or (what is the same thing in other words) of the
phenomena of nature.

Believe me, yours ever faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

26th November, 1834

India House

John Pringle Nichol

Pringle Nichol, John

112.


TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1

India House

,

26th November, 1834

.

My dear Sir,

Your letter gave me all the pleasure such a letter from you must give. I
feared I had made an unfavourable impression on you merely from
consciousness of my own want of tact in expression, by which I
continually give notions of my feelings and character different from the
true ones.

I like your plan for the article on Chalmers exceedingly. I think,
however, that the main point might be put in a more trenchant manner
than you put it. . . . If you do not agree with me, write in your own
way, which will probably in that case be the right one.

I should wish, if convenient to you, to have the articles on Tithes2
first, and as soon as possible, because that is absolutely indispensable
for the first number. The other, not being of temporary interest, we may
be Edition: current; Page: [238] obliged to postpone till No. 2, in
consequence of the superabundance of serious, and, to the many, dull
articles. I am obliged myself, having now finished a very long article
on that precious “Discourse” of Sedgwick’s,3 to turn to a literary
subject,4 though out of my proper line, merely to give relief to the
number. The article on Sedgwick will, I am sure, interest you. I have
said a number of things in it which I have never put into print before,
and have represented the “utilitarian theory of morals,” as he calls it,
I think for the first time in its true colours. At all events, I have
incidentally represented my own mode of looking at ethical questions;
having never yet seen in print any statement of principles on the
subject to which I could subscribe.

I will send the Logic5 very soon. I anticipate the greatest help in it,
both from your general powers of thought and from your peculiar
acquaintance with the philosophy of algebra, in which I am myself far
from profound, but yet have found the little I do know to be of the
utmost possible use.

Well, here is the trial come at last,6 and has already done more good
than the Whigs would have done in a twelvemonth. The movement has
advanced several years by this universal demonstration throughout the
country, at once of hatred to the Tories, dissatisfaction with the
Whigs, and conviction of the necessity not only of reforms, but of
further constitutional reforms. We begin to think here that Peel will
not accept office and that there will be no Tory ministry. At all
events, whoever is in place, the march of Reform is wonderfully
accelerated. How nobly and with what wisdom the people have acted. In
the meantime our friends, as individuals, have gained vastly in
importance and reputation. You have seen how this crisis has called
Buller out, and made him what I always knew he was capable of being. If
he improves his position, as I think he will, he will now be a very
important man in Parliament. Roebuck also has raised himself greatly. We
now see the importance of the rallying point which Lord Durham7 has
afforded. Any banner, placed so high that what is written upon it can be
read by everybody, is all-important towards forming a party; but Lord
Durham has really acted with consummate skill and in Edition: current;
Page: [239] the best possible spirit. Whether he is ever minister or
not, we have a great prize in him.

I will not fail to send Malthus’s book8 as soon as I can get a copy of
it.

Believe me, ever faithfully yours,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

28th November 1834

India House

Adolphe Narcisse Thibaudeau

Narcisse Thibaudeau, Adolphe

113.


TO ADOLPHE NARCISSE THIBAUDEAU1

India House

28th November
1834

My dear Thibaudeau

I have not had a single line from you since you left London: however as
I have myself been almost equally remiss, we will consider that account
as balanced, & now I will proceed to business.

We are going to start our Review immediately. The first number will
appear in two months unless we should think it necessary to postpone it
till the public know who is to be minister, & are willing to read
something besides newspapers. Now, it is of the utmost importance that
we should have the best articles possible on France: & for this purpose
we are anxious to keep up a regular communication with you & Carrel, or
whichever of you has most leisure. It has occurred to me that the
following arrangements might be made. 1. You, or Carrel, of both, might
send articles, to be translated here, with liberty for us to make such
alterations as are necessary to adapt them to the English public. In
your articles, little alteration would probably be necessary, because
you know England: in Carrel’s, probably much more. 2dly. In other cases,
some one here might write the articles, from materials furnished by you,
the payment being equally divided. To give you an idea of what I mean:
We want an article on Henry Bulwer’s France.2 Now what I should like
would be that you, or if you have not time, Carrel, should take the
trouble to read the book attentively, & write down every remark of
importance which occurs to you on it, particularly in the way of
correcting matters of fact. With such annotations before me, I could
venture to review the book, & I am sure that I could make a very good
article & one which would serve both countries extremely. But without
such help I should not like to attempt it. Now tell me what you think of
such an arrangement.

Edition: current; Page: [240]
In the second place—if you would not object to send me the National in
exchange for the Examiner, I beg you will send it by post, & I will pay
the expenses, reduced as they now are.

In the third place, there is now at Paris a Mr. Priaulx,3 a young man of
a rich Guernsey family, who is a particular friend of Wilson,4 of the
Globe, & a clever & interesting person. He is authorized to communicate
with you on all subjects relating to the Globe. Wilson has asked me to
give Mr Priaulx a letter of introduction to you. Will you be so kind as
to consider this an introduction.

On the state of our politics5 you will learn as much from the English
newspapers as I could tell you. The change of Ministry would have been a
great evil if the people had remained quiet; but after the demonstration
they have made, I think the effect will be very good. It is very
probable that Peel will not chuse to accept office; if he does not, the
whole thing is at an end. But if the Tories do come in, it must now be
as Reformers, & even greater reformers than the poor Whigs were,
otherwise they will be turned out on the very first day of the session.
We might have waited whole years for such a unanimous declaration from
the whole country in favour of the ballot, triennial parliaments & a
further extension of the suffrage, as this has produced. We shall have
no more now of the “final measure.”6 Be assured that the Movement has
gained immensely by all this, & is gaining every day. In fact, it is
impossible that anything which produces political excitement should not
now do good. I am quite tranquil & easy about public affairs whichever
way the present crisis terminates. We shall either have a Tory ministry
granting large reforms, & a Whig & Radical opposition demanding larger;
or we shall have the Whigs in again, & the two parties competing for the
favour of the Radicals, who will evidently be the supreme power in the
country; for all the present demonstrations are the work of the
radicals; not a Whig stirs a finger even to bring the Whigs into place
again.

Will you make my best regards to Carrel. I will write to him soon.—Pray
write to me as soon as possible.

Yours ever

J. S. Mill

I send you the Examiners. I suppose it is to you & not to Carrel that
they should now be sent.

Edition: current; Page: [241]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

29th November 1834

India House

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

114.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

India House

29th November
1834

My dear d’Eichthal

You would have a right to be greatly offended with me for having made no
answer to two such letters as yours. I assure you my silence did not
proceed from indifference; I was deeply interested in all the
particulars you told me about Greece,2 and highly gratified by the
intelligence respecting yourself. I can only say that between my
occupations, which have been unusually great, & my natural laziness, I
always procrastinated, feeling that I ought not to write a short letter,
& shrinking from the trouble of writing a long one: but I hope now that
we shall correspond regularly. My present letter may be interesting to
you, being written while we are in the midst of a political crisis. You
have heard by this time of the dismissal of the Whig ministry & the
reappointment of the Duke of Wellington, who however waits until Peel
returns from Italy to form a Ministry. When this most unexpected event
occurred, our friends were in some apprehension at first, because they
knew how the lukewarmness, the temporizing, and general imbecility of
the Whigs, had cooled the ardour of the people in their support, & it
seemed not improbable that the people, thinking the Whigs no better than
the Tories, might quietly look on. That was the hope of the Tories
themselves. But the result has completely disappointed them. The conduct
of the people has been noble. There has been one unanimous shout from
the whole nation that they will not have the Tories on any terms;
declaring at the same time that the Whigs have not satisfied them, &
that they must have a ministry who will not only give them the
consequences of the Reform Bill, but further organic reforms; the
suffrage extended to all householders, triennial elections, & vote by
ballot. Happily, Lord Durham had just before placed himself at the head
of the radicals, first at the Edinburgh dinner to Lord Grey,3 by taking
up the gauntlet which Brougham had thrown down; next at the dinner given
to himself Edition: current; Page: [242] by the Glasgow Reformers,4
where he publicly declared for the three constitutional changes which I
have just mentioned. His words have gone forth & been reechoed by the
whole people, & the Movement party now everywhere look to him. There
have been already some addresses to the King to appoint him Minister.
Nevertheless, he will not be minister yet, nor perhaps ever: he is too
vain, too imperious, & too much the slave of mere temperament. But you
need fear nothing for us; the Tories, at first elated, are already
crestfallen: the growing opinion is, that Peel, when he sees the state
of the country, will not accept office; & if he refuses, the Duke of
Wellington will not go on. At all events, if they do take office, they
will not survive the first day of the session except by outbidding the
Whigs in popular measures. Their own calculations do not give them a
majority in the elections if they dissolve parliament at present, & my
belief is that they will not. At any rate, be assured that the Movement
has advanced exceedingly by these events. You will be glad to hear that
Buller & Roebuck have taken a most conspicuous part in this crisis, &
have distinguished themselves exceedingly, Buller especially, who has
headed the London reformers throughout, even from the first day. Roebuck
at that time was out of town. They are sure to be important men in the
history of their country before long. Roebuck during the last two
sessions has risen in reputation & influence both in & out of
Parliament, in a degree which would astonish you. The other radicals
have all disappointed us: even Grote, who has been very inactive. Only
one other man in the House, Clay, from whom we expected nothing, has
distinguished himself on the popular side. I consider it certain that
either the Whigs will come in again, with the Tories no longer resisting
them in front & the people more than ever pressing them on from behind;
or there will be a Tory ministry which will do more for the people than
the Whigs have yet done, & a strong popular opposition consisting of the
radicals joined by the best of the Whigs.

And now for our personal share in the Movement. One of the radical
members, a friend of Buller’s and mine, Sir William Molesworth, is about
to establish a review at his private expense, & all our friends are to
write in it, as well as all the Movement writers whom we have thought it
worth while to ask; not one has refused. It will, unless I am much
mistaken, be infinitely the best review ever yet published. You must not
look in it for a doctrine générale et unitaire; you know as well as I do
that English minds are not yet ripe for that; but whatever vues d’avenir
there are in England, will be presented there in full detail. The object
is, to rally the instructed radicals round a common standard, & induce
the other radicals to follow them. And now I have a request to make. You
have it in your power to serve us and our cause & to serve Greece at the
same time, by chusing Edition: current; Page: [243] our review as a
means of making known here, the present state of Greece. If you would
send us, either as a review of Thiersch’s book,5 or in the form of an
original essay, an article on the recent history, & present state &
prospects of Greece, you will do us a great favour. We have no objection
to publish the severest strictures on the conduct of our own Government
or its functionaries, provided we are not committed to any facts which
cannot be substantiated. We have the most perfect reliance on you, &
should publish without hesitation any statement which came from you or
recommended by you. The same article might be made a means of furthering
your views of colonization, by giving publicity to the facilities &
advantages the Greek Government affords to settlers, & by shewing the
very favorable prospects which the state of Greece holds out to
speculations of that kind. Our first number will be published in two
months,6 but I hope you will be able either to write, or get written for
us, a paper which can appear in the second.

I suppose your plans of colonization are by this time in some degree
matured. I have no doubt you are right in thinking it desirable that the
first emigration should be of capitalists, & of mechanics and artizans.
I have no doubt of your success. Numbers of both, are emigrating every
year from this country, & if they feel any confidence in the security of
person & property in Greece, they will emigrate thither as readily as to
any other place. I can suggest no plan, except that of appointing some
mercantile house in England the agent of the Greek Government for
emigration, & making extensively known through them, the terms on which
the Government will grant land, & the advantages of all other kinds
which it will hold out. The main point is, to convince our capitalists
that they & their property will be safe. This must be done by giving
publicity, & repeated, continual publicity to all that the Government
has done & goes on doing to restore order. I know no one thing so likely
to have that effect, as the article I am proposing to you to write for
our review, which we could get quoted & commented upon by the whole of
the newspaper press, London & provincial. There are plenty of first-rate
mechanics in Scotland who are ready to go, but they must be taken out by
capitalists who will ensure them employment when there. The grand thing
is to gain the confidence of capitalists. This depends wholly upon the
impression you can make concerning the state of the country.

I am most truly glad that the Greek Government has had the good sense to
place so important a department of its affairs in the hands of yourself,
& of two such men as you describe your colleagues. If they chuse all
their Edition: current; Page: [244] other agents as well, I have no fear
for the good administration of their country. The absence of a
territorial aristocracy, & the deep root which popular municipal
institutions seem to have in the country, are immense advantages. Have
you seen Urquhart’s book, “Turkey and its Resources”?7 If so, is it to
be depended upon?—Pray do not imitate my negligence, but write to me
soon, & believe me

Ever faithfully & affectionately yours

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

10 Dec. 1834

I.H.

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

115.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

I.H.

10 Dec. 1834

My dear Chadwick

Monsieur Guilbert,2 one of the editors of the Bon Sens,3 has come over
here to learn all he can of the present condition & prospects of this
country and its people. Your assistance would be of great use to him, by
indicating documents & letting him know your own general views, & you
will much oblige me by doing anything to aid him which your occupations
allow.

Ever yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec., 1834

Francis Place

Place, Francis

116.


TO FRANCIS PLACE1

[
Dec., 1834

?]

Dear Mr Place

M. Guilbert, one of the editors of the French newspaper, “Le Bon Sens,”
is desirous of the pleasure of your acquaintance. He is anxious to learn
all he can about the state, moral, physical and intellectual of our
working people, and nobody can tell him more on the subject than you
can.

Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [245]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

18th December, 1834

India House

John Pringle Nichol

Pringle Nichol, John

117.


TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1

India House

,

18th December, 1834

.

My dear Sir,

I am grieved to hear of your narrow escape, and most heartily
congratulate you and myself that the danger is past. By all means keep
yourself as quiet as possible, and do not even think of any intellectual
exertion till you are completely recovered. I once lost a most valued
friend, one of the most valued I ever had—though not to be compared with
you in intellect—in consequence of a similar disease—the eldest son of
Tooke, the political economist.2 I believe he brought on the malady
almost entirely by intense and unremitting study. I most earnestly
entreat you, for the sake of us all, not to expose yourself to a similar
danger. It is better that our first number should even appear without
your article, than that your health should be exposed to the slightest
risk. However, I hope that your health will be firmly re-established
before we shall need your article. We do not think of publishing the
first number while the crisis3 lasts; and on the whole, if your paper
reaches us by the end of January, I have no doubt that it will be in
time. When I know whether a still longer delay will be compatible with
its appearance in the first number, I will let you know.

On the whole, our prospects grow better and better—those of the Review,
I mean, though I might add, those of the nation too. The Review is, and
will be, principally deficient in articles on literary subjects. If you
have leisure, may I hope that you will give some assistance in that
department, as well as in your own peculiar one? I am obliged to do the
same; and I find that we can in general trust none except our scientific
writers with even our literary subjects. I shall have two in the first
number; one on Sedgwick, and one on Tennyson’s Poems4—the best poems, in
my estimation, which have appeared since the best days of Coleridge.

Have you seen Peel’s address to the electors of Tamworth?5 Was there
ever such empty mouthing? Nothing appears clearly in it but that he
means to halve the reforms of even the poor Whigs. I hope they will
dissolve Parliament. It will be a thousand pities now to lose the
triumph which the elections will give us.

Yours in haste,

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [246]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

25 Dec. 1834

Kensington

Albany Fonblanque

Fonblanque, Albany

118.


TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1

Kensington

25 Dec. 1834

My dear Fonblanque

Could you insert the enclosed2 in your next paper?

You are fighting the good fight nobly—and you are the only writer
(except Buller occasionally in the Globe) who are doing it with any
spirit.

I send copies of the Prospectus of the new review. Some notice of it in
your paper would be useful—but perhaps not during the present
excitement. We shall send round our advertisements presently; & the
Prospectus will appear in the January periodicals.

We do not think of publishing our first number till after the crisis:3 &
consequently not till after the meeting of Parliament, unless (which is
most unlikely) the Tories should be so discouraged by the result of the
elections as to retire.

Will you allow me to remind you of our hopes of an article from you for
the first number? & to say that I am ready to work for the Examiner to
any extent that could be needful while you are about it.

We have promises of support (as writers) from my father, Grote, John
Austin, Bailey of Sheffield,4 Peacock,5 Fox, James Martineau of
Liverpool, Nichol of Montrose, Cornewall Lewis, Buller, Roebuck,
Wilson,6 Strutt, Mrs. Austin—everybody in short whom we thought worth
asking, except Bulwer, and he has almost promised. But without you we
should be weak in some very important departments—& there would not be
sufficient relief to our heaviness & dulness.

Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [247]


1835

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1835

James Martineau

Martineau, James

119.


TO JAMES MARTINEAU1

[
1835

]

The last two pages of the concluding paper2 made an impression upon me
which will never be effaced. In a subsequent paper of my own in the
“Repository” headed “The Two Kinds of Poetry” (October, 1833) I
attempted to carry out your speculation into some of those ulterior
consequences which you had rather indicated than stated.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday Jan. 17, 1835

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

120.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

Saturday
 [
Jan. 17, 1835

]2

My dear Sir

When I had the pleasure of seeing you today, I forgot to mention that I
shall not be here on Monday, as I am going with my brother3 (who is
destined for the civil service in India) to the East India College near
Hertford. We must therefore defer our next conversation till Tuesday.

Yours most truly

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [248]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

26th February 1835

India House

Joseph Blanco White

Blanco White, Joseph

121.


TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1

India House

26th February
1835

My dear Sir

I am truly delighted to hear that you are willing to cooperate in the
new Review. There are few persons whose aid could be of so much, or
nearly so much, importance to it, both with reference to its usefulness
& to its success.

I do not know if you have yet seen the Prospectus. It has appeared on
the cover of most of the reviews & magazines. The spirit of the review
will be democratic, but with none of the exclusiveness and narrowness of
the Westminster Review; & the plan adopted of individual signatures
enables the various writers to indulge the liberty of individual opinion
within considerably less narrow limits than are imposed by the plan of
most reviews.

I will immediately send you some copies of the Prospectus under Sir
William Molesworth’s cover. I suppose Senior2 told you that Sir William
is the founder & proprietor of the review.

We hope to publish the first number by the end of March. I fear its
fault will be, a deficiency of literary & other light matter & a
superabundance of politics. At our first starting there is no way in
which you could be of so much assistance to us as by writing some of
those excellence pieces of literary criticism several of which you wrote
for the former London Review;3 such as that on Pollok’s Course of Time,4
for instance. I am afraid of trespassing on your kindness & “riding a
willing horse to death” but yet I cannot help saying that if you could
be prevailed upon to write something of this kind, even though short,
for the first number, it would be of so much importance to the review
that we would gladly keep the number open for it even till the last
moment.

Edition: current; Page: [249]
I have not read Tocqueville’s book,5 but from what Senior says of it, I
have no doubt of the great value to us of such a review of it as you
would make. For this we can give ample time, as it could not be printed
before the second number.

The editor of the review is Thomas Falconer6 Esq. 7 Gray’s Inn Square, a
friend of mine whom I think very highly of. As I am in continual
communication both with him & with Sir W. Molesworth, any letter to me
answers all purposes, and I should be proud to increase our acquaintance
by corresponding with you on review matters.

Believe me
 Most truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2d March 1835

India House

Joseph Blanco White

Blanco White, Joseph

122.


TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1

India House

2d March
1835

My dear Sir,

The objection to “Pompeii”2 is that Bulwer writes for the review; & it
would be impossible to review it fairly without pointing out the gross
blunders in scholarship & even in Latin grammar; now as no principle
requires that we should point out errors of this kind in our friends, it
is of no use wounding their amour-propre & depriving ourselves of their
hearty cooperation.

But the other subject you mention, the works of Martinez de la Rosa,3
would suit the review perfectly. The prose translations which you
propose will be quite sufficient.

Edition: current; Page: [250]
Mr. Falconer will see this note, & if you receive it you may know that
he agrees with it. I have no doubt that if he can suggest any other
subject which would to him appear preferable, he will not omit to avail
himself of the kind disposition which you manifest towards the review.

You have, I presume, received some copies of the Prospectus by this time

Believe me
 Most truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

5th March 1835

India House

Richard Bentley

Bentley, Richard

123.


TO RICHARD BENTLEY1

India House

5th March
1835

My dear Sir

I send M. Fiévée’s memorandum on the nature of his work, and a note of
my own stating what I know of M. Fiévée.2 I should think the work might,
if published in France, reckon upon a great sale in France itself, where
the author does not wish to publish it himself, lest his work should be
supposed to have some party object.

If Mr Bentley should wish for any further information I will give it, or
obtain it from M. Fiévée, and if he thinks there would be any use in my
meeting him I will (though it would be rather inconvenient) call upon
him or should be glad to see him if he happened to be coming into the
City.

Ever yours

J. S. Mill

[The enclosed note]3

Monsieur Fiévée is one of the cleverest and liveliest French writers of
the present age, as his “Correspondance politique et administrative”4
published in the first few years after the restoration of the Bourbons
sufficiently shews. His political opinions & the general character of
his mind bear more resemblance to Burke than to any other English
writer; though his great experience as a man of office & business, has
supplied him with Edition: current; Page: [251] much more practical
knowledge of the affairs of the world than Burke had. He was much
trusted by Napoleon, although Napoleon knew him to be in correspondence
with the exiled family. It is well known that Napoleon’s conseil d’état
was composed of all the ablest administrators in France: M. Fiévée,
besides being one of his préfets, was for a long time a member of this
body. M. Fiévée enjoys a very high character in France & his statements
may be depended upon. His sentiments and personal connexions were mostly
royalist, but he gradually became alienated from that party as he found
that they could not be induced to govern in a manner suited to the wants
& circumstances of the age. He has never attached himself to Louis
Philippe or his government.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday March, 1835

I.H.

Albany Fonblanque

Fonblanque, Albany

124.


TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1

I.H.

Monday
 [
March(?), 1835

]

My dear Fonblanque

Thanks for the ticket. Thursday does quite as well. As you so kindly
permit me I will some day soon ask for an order for Lestocq;2 but I
cannot yet say when.

I send a short paper on Swiss politics, which has been sent to me from
(& is written by) Siebenpfeifer,3 one of the leading German radicals, &
now a Professor in the University of Berne. If it suits you it can be
published & I shall be happy to translate it if necessary but I suppose
your subeditor now renders you independent of such help.

Molesworth I know means to send you the sheets of the London Review. I
suppose you guess the authorship of the Dialogue on the Ballot.4 There
are parts of it in which I do not wholly agree, but the speculations you
allude to are not among them.

It is a great loss to the review not to have anything of yours in the
first number—but if you could find time to write anything in the second,
though I know how much you are occupied, your aid is too important not
to be very urgently pressed for.

Ever faithfully

J. S. Mill

Bulwer will write for the 2d number & is zealously with us.

Edition: current; Page: [252]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

7th March [1835]

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

125.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

7th March [1835]

.

My dear Carlyle—I will endeavour as you advise, to think as little as I
can of this misfortune,2 though I shall not be able to cease thinking of
it until it is ascertained how far the loss is capable of being
repaired—or rather reduced to a loss of time & labour only—There are
hardly any means I would not joyfully take, if any existed by which I
could myself be instrumental to remedying the mischief my carelessness
has caused—That however depends not upon me. But there is one part of
the evil—though I fear the least part—which I could repair—the loss to
yourself of time & labour—that is of income. And I beg of you with an
earnestness with which perhaps I may never again have need to ask
anything as long as we live, that you will permit me to do this little
as it is, towards remedying the consequences of my fault & lightening my
self-reproach. It is what you would permit as a matter of course if I
were a stranger to you—it is what is even legally due to you—and to have
brought an evil upon a friend instead of a stranger is already a
sufficient aggravation of one’s regret, without the addition to it, of
not being allowed to make even the poor amends one would make to a
stranger.

Edition: current; Page: [253]
If I could convince you what a relief this would be to me, & what an act
of friendship—to say nothing of justice—it would be on your part I am
sure you would not hesitate—Yours affectionately

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday March 10, 1835

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

126.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

Tuesday
 [
March 10, 1835

]

My dear Carlyle

Nothing which could have happened, could have been at this time so great
a good to me as your note,2 received this morning. I never thought it
probable, & I wonder now how I could have thought it possible, that your
answer would be different: it could not be so (gigmanity out of the
question); but my anxiety made me exaggerate the chances against me.

Yes—when the thing is again done, & I have realised the feeling of
certainty that another volume is there, as true & as beautiful as the
former, all will be wholer than ever. I never before felt so fully the
whole amount of the good of having somewhat more than one actually needs
for urgent wants. That which can buy peace of conscience is precious.

You shall see or hear from me again almost immediately—but I will not
take the Fête des Piques3—not that I believe such a thing could possibly
happen again, but for the sake of retributive justice I would wear the
badge of my untrustworthiness. If however you would give me the pleasure
of reading it give it to Mrs. Taylor—in her custody no harm could come
to it4—and I can read it aloud to her as I did much of the other—for it
had not only the one reader you mentioned but a second as good. I can
borrow De Stael’s Considerations5 easily—as my father has them. I did
not think of them when I sent you other books—as there are very few
facts in them—they are mostly speculations.6

Edition: current; Page: [254]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

19th March 1835

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

127.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

19th March
1835

My dear Monsieur Guilbert

You have much reason to complain of me for not writing to you sooner.
The fact is, I waited too long for an answer from the Globe, which I
might have had sooner if I had taken a little more trouble. I got an
answer the very day before I received your letter; & I have been so busy
ever since, & have had to write so many letters that I was obliged to
put off yours—knowing that you were already doing whatever was right,
while others perhaps were not.—First, about the Review; I considered
that from the first as certain. Molesworth, the very first time I
mentioned it to him, agreed at once to your being our correspondent at
Paris; & since receiving your letter he is very glad that he did
consent. As for terms—you said, 150 or 200 francs per month; it will be
either sum, according as you understood it. Your cooperation would be
cheaply purchased at either price. Only, as our review is in some degree
a doubtful speculation & our funds not unlimited, I have proposed to
Molesworth & I now propose to you, to make the engagement at first for
three months only. At the end of that time we shall know whether we can
reckon upon sufficient assistance from French contributors to make it
worth while retaining a French correspondent (though of this your letter
leaves little doubt) & also, whether the success we can expect at first
for our review, is such as renders it unnecessary for us to restrict our
expenses to the utmost. If you agree, then, we will consider you as the
correspondent of the review, from the 1st of this month (March) at 150,
or 200 francs as you understand it. The payment will be made at the
times & in the modes most convenient to you.

We are all much delighted with all you have done for the review, & with
the prospects your letter holds out. The name of Carrel has done much
for us already: his speech before the Chamber of Peers2 has spread his
fame in this country. The editor3 of one of our best journals, the
Spectator, advises strongly that we should request Carrel’s permission
to print his signature at full length. We shall be delighted to have an
article on Courier4 from him. Edition: current; Page: [255] Half a page,
of the most general kind, will be sufficient on the subject of Courier
as a Hellenist; you have judged quite correctly that it is not in that
point of view we wish for an appreciation of that great writer. The plan
you have marked out for M. Nisard’s first article,5 seems very good. It
is necessary to keep in mind that the English public are almost entirely
ignorant that there exists a contemporary French literature; & their
ideas of French writers are still those of the Voltaire period. The
object therefore should be, first, in a general article, or more than
one if necessary, to give a general view of the change which has taken
place in French literature, & afterwards to follow this up by separate
articles on separate writers. This, M. Nisard, from what I have seen of
his writings, will I am convinced, do in the way best suited to us. I
have seen a letter from him to his German friend, M. Garnier,6 which
shews him to be extremely well satisfied with my letter, & I am
therefore well pleased at that scène de comédie which you recollect. He
expresses a wish to remain anonymous, & says that you agreed in the
expediency of it—I dare say you suggested it to him, though he thinks
the suggestion came from himself.

The changes in French philosophy I think I shall myself treat in the
review,7 & shall be greatly indebted to you for all hints, & for
suggesting to me all the books which I should read.

About placards, & advertisements, I will write to you again. There will
be time, for the review will not appear for at least a fortnight. There
will however be notices of it in some of the London papers before it
appears.—We are anxious to have M. Nisard’s first article in the second
number, which will be published in June. Will you therefore beg him to
set about it at his earliest convenience. The same request to Carrel;
except that as his article is on a special subject, & not one of a
series, we need not press him to have it ready by any given time, though
of course the sooner the better. As both these articles will be very
interesting, we will not limit them in point of space: say if necessary
30 to 40 pages of the review: & you know our pages are much larger than
those of the French reviews.—We should like to exchange our review with
any French reviews which may be willing, & which you may recommend.
Carrel’s offer of articles on the principal men of the Revolution is
highly prized, & I will write to you again about it. We shall not want
an article on the Salon this year at least; we must first prendre notre
place as to Art in general. Cavaignac’s writing Edition: current; Page:
[256] I am afraid will not suit England; we will say nothing to him just
yet, unless you have already spoken to him. Dussard8 will be of
considerable use to us, though at present I will not propose any article
to him, as we already overflow with the sort of articles which he would
write. The fact is, his line is also the line of most of us. We shall
have an article on the Liberty of the Press very soon; & at all events
we shall not fail to notice Carrel’s admirable speeches. Tell us how
many copies you would like to have of the sheets of the review & through
what conveyance.

The Globe, it seems, is not inclined to have a regular correspondent at
Paris—but would willingly insert, & pay for, occasional articles written
in English. You know the kind of tone which suits the position of that
journal.

As for politics, my dear friend, the game is up, as we say. The Tories
will remain in place. The Opposition have spoiled all by their want of
spirit & courage. The day after their victory in the choice of a
Speaker, they could have done anything they pleased: the prestige of
strength was wholly on their side. This instead of giving them courage,
made them tremble lest their small majority should escape from them: &
by conceding every point to the most timid among them, lest they should
lose one or two votes, they have made such perpetual demonstrations of a
belief in their own weakness that instead of one or two they have lost
scores. The attempt to expel the ministry has been abandoned; they now
only harrass them in detail. This reproach I address to our own friends
as well as to others. Grote, Clay, and Warburton have spoiled all.
Roebuck & Molesworth are the only ones among our friends (Hume I do not
reckon such, though I esteem him much) who have a grain of spirit or
energy. Those two are staunch, & if need be we shall unfurl the banner
of our review against the radicals as well as the Whigs and Tories. They
are giving us du Maughin et Odilon Barrot9 over again. All parties are
cowardly & torpid with us.

I am really grown so indifferent to all that these people do, that I
cannot prevail upon myself to enter further into particulars; but you
will see what we say in the review. The public mind, however, with us,
is steadily progressive, & will force more & more improvements upon even
a Tory ministry; for ministries, with us, always yield when they see
that public opinion really requires it. We shall have either a Peel, or
a Peel & Stanley10 ministry, for years to come, I think.

Edition: current; Page: [257]
We shall be glad to have Paul de Kock11 from M. Barba,12 on the terms
you mention. If the proprietors of the Histoire Parlementaire will send
it to us we will promise to make it the text of our first article on the
French Revolution.13 In general we shall be glad to receive any books
which may be sent to us, though whether we can notice them will depend
upon many various circumstances; but if not in the review, I can almost
always, if they have any merit, get them favourably noticed somewhere.
Will you thank all our friends for their kind interest in the review.
The articles in the Bon Sens on England were true, & good: thanks for
sending them. By the bye, do not write on the outside “for the
Examiner.”

Ever yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday March 23, 1835

I.H.

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

128.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

I.H.

Monday [March 23, 1835]

My dear Carlyle

Notwithstanding all which you said on Thursday night, I cannot feel that
I have made you anything like compensation by placing you exactly in the
same pecuniary state as when you began to write, the time which you have
expended in writing being lost and gone, without result either to
yourself or any one else, except the doubtful one of your making a
better book the second time.

It would be not only more accordant with my conception of the justice of
the case, but would be a much more complete relief to my conscience and
in every way more pleasant to me, if you would consent to receive the
sum I first mentioned2 or at least something intermediate between that &
the smaller one. This would be a gratification to me only inferior to
that of being permitted to make compensation at all.

Ever affectionately yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [258]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

15th April 1835

India House

Joseph Blanco White

Blanco White, Joseph

129.


TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1

India House

15th April
1835

My dear Sir

I have learnt to my great surprise this morning, that owing to some
inexplicable misunderstanding, Crabbe2 has not yet been sent to you. You
will, however, receive it immediately, along with your copy of the
London Review and as we wish the second number to appear in June, we
shall be very glad to have your article in the shortest time in which
you can write it satisfactorily to yourself.3

Mr James Martineau, with whom I know you are in communication, has
kindly offered to review for our next number, Bailey’s excellent
“Rationale of Representation”.4 Perhaps you would do us the favour to
say to Mr Martineau that after a good deal of deliberation among the
three or four persons who take most share in the conduct of the review,
it has appeared to us that a subject involving so directly and
comprehensively all the political principles of the review, should be
retained in the hands of the conductors themselves, rather than placed
in those of a contributor, however highly valued, who is not in direct
and continual communication with them. But for this consideration, there
is no writer for the review in whose hands we would rather see such a
subject. The objections which Mr Martineau thought might be felt to his
undertaking an article on Robert Hall,5 we should not feel to be
objections at all unless he himself felt them so, or unless he would
feel bound to enter into a discussion of Hall’s theological tenets,
which probably he would not. In mentioning Hall, it was however, only
intended to throw out a suggestion; & if Mr Martineau would either
dislike that, or prefer any other subject, there is no wish to press it
upon him. We are only anxious to have, at as early a period as may be
convenient to him, some article from his pen. Anything similar or
comparable to those admirable papers on Priestley in the Monthly
Repository,6 would be of the greatest value to us.

Would you and Mr Martineau have the kindness to mention any
quarters—especially public institutions & the like—to which it would be
advantageous Edition: current; Page: [259] to send copies of the review.
Molesworth is disposed to distribute it pretty extensively—the first
number at least—as the cheapest, and most useful, mode of advertising
it.

I have begun to read Tocqueville. It seems an excellent book: uniting
considerable graphic power, with the capacity of generalizing on the
history of society, which distinguishes the best French philosophers of
the present day, & above all, bringing out the peculiarities of American
society, & making the whole stand before the reader as a powerful
picture.—Did you ever read Guizot’s Lectures?7 If not, pray do.

Ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday April 20, 1835

I.H.

Albany Fonblanque

Fonblanque, Albany

130.


TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1

I.H.

Monday
 [
April 20(?), 1835

]2

Dear Fonblanque

Thanks for your mention of the London Review.3 I hope you will give us a
formal article besides4—as we shall have but a poor chance of success
unless our friends exert themselves for us—some of them are treating us
as friends usually do.

We all greatly regret that the review was obliged to appear without
anything of yours in it; & we hope exceedingly that you will write
something in the second number. Nothing has occurred to any of us which
we should like so much, as an article on the magisterial interferences
with the people. But as you are so fully occupied, we should be too
happy to have anything which you could do most easily & in least time.

If you give us something, we shall have an excellent bill of fare for No
2, twice as good as No 1.

Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [260]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 20, 1835

Albany Fonblanque

Fonblanque, Albany

131.


TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1

[
April 20, 1835

]

How do you like the new Cabinet?2 All things considered I am very well
satisfied with it—but I hope you will push them to the ballot & a few
other things—they can’t stand without.

Ever yours

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday Spring or summer, 1835

I.H.

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

132.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

I.H.

Saturday
 [?
Spring or summer, 1835

]

My dear Carlyle

If you have no objection to receive the Chronicle instead of the Globe,
for the next fortnight or thereabouts, I find that to be the most
convenient arrangement now when the whole household except my father &
myself are in Surrey & my brother2 still at the East India College.

If however you would rather have the Globe I can still contrive to
supply you with it.

Ever yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

I shall probably be with you on Monday evening.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

8th May 1835

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

133.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

8th May
1835

My dear Monsieur Guilbert

I yesterday, by making a casual enquiry, learnt to my extreme
astonishment, that no remittance had yet been made to you. I imagined I
had Edition: current; Page: [261] taken measures which had ensured its
being done long ago. I have now set the matter to rights, & you will
receive without delay 450 francs, for the months of March, April, & May.
Pray let me know whether you have received copies of the review. They
were sent, or at least orders were given for their being sent, through
Black & Young, booksellers here. If you have received them I hope you
have considered yourself at liberty to give them, in exchange or
otherwise, whenever you thought it useful to the review to do so.

I have not written to you about the change of ministry2 because I knew
not what to write. I fear the whigs will do as little for the people as
they possibly can: all their speeches & manifestoes indicate it, except
Hobhouse’s speech at Nottingham:3 & you will see, that even Lord John
Russell’s defeat in Devonshire by the intimidation practised by the Tory
squires & parsons will not make him an advocate of the ballot. Brougham,
however, being excluded from office, is putting forth pamphlets &
articles of very decided radicalism to the extreme annoyance of his
former associates. You see how justly I described him to you.

At the late change it was well understood that the radicals as a body
would not consent to take office. They thought, justly, that they had
more power out of office than in it. To several members of the body (but
to none of the leaders) offers were made of places, which they all
refused, unless the leaders came in too. Brougham is reported to have
said to a near relation of a cabinet minister “this may succeed, but it
is the first time the attempt has been made to form a ministry excluding
the able men of all parties.” I don’t believe this, but the mot is
excellent.

Toqueville’s book, “de la démocratie en amérique” is an admirable book.
Can you tell me anything of Toqueville? What is his history? & in what
estimation is he held in France?

We are anxious to receive the notice you promised respecting Paul de
Kock. When & how is the copy of his works, to be paid for? We persist in
our intention of bringing out our second number before the end of
June.—Ever truly yours

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [262]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

19th May 1835

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

134.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

19th May
1835

My dear Guilbert

You may judge how much we have been annoyed by the neglect of the
booksellers to send the copies of the review to Paris. It is one of
numerous instances of such negligence which have occurred to us, proving
the great difficulty of making a review succeed which is not the
property of a bookseller. On receiving your letter I took immediate
measures for having the omission supplied, & I hope it has been so. Pray
apologize to our friends, & present copies to such of them, & of your
editors & littérateurs generally, as you think ought to have it;
obtaining for us in exchange, when you can, all your best periodicals.

You are aware that we do not want an article on Paul de Kock, but merely
a short notice, to serve towards writing an article. The article itself
is to be written by one of our English contributors, a man of great wit
& learning.2

I have not received Carrel’s letter. We attach great importance to
having his article in our next number.3 You do not say anything about
his autograph. I have done nothing with it as yet.

I am much disappointed that M. Nisard has been obliged to renounce an
undertaking for which he was so eminently qualified. We gladly accept
his offer of separate articles on Victor Hugo, Lamartine &c. but it
appears to us indispensable that they should be preceded by a general
article on the new French literature generally. We do not wish for a
detailed history of its origin—since that would cost M. Nisard so much
research—but a general character of the old, & of the new literature,
could cost neither much time nor labour to the author of those admirable
papers in the Revue de Paris.

I said nothing about the article which M. de Cormenin4 was so kind as to
offer, because we should not have room for it for some time to come, &
it is as well not to fix on a subject long beforehand. But his
cooperation would be highly valuable to us.

As for politics—the grand struggle will be at the next registration.
Peel’s Edition: current; Page: [263] speech at Merchant Tailors’ Hall5
speaks the voice of the whole party. The Tories will strain every nerve
to get a majority in the Commons—but we shall beat them.

Yours ever

J. S. Mill.

The review is exciting great attention here, & already possesses very
considerable political influence, which every number we publish will
still further increase—J.S.M.

We will send you all the affiches we can spare.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

19th May 1835

India House

Joseph Blanco White

Blanco White, Joseph

135.


TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1

India House

19th May 1835

My dear Sir

I should have written to you sooner, but I really could not make up my
mind at once what to say about Tocqueville. I was quite ignorant of
Falconer’s intention to make such a proposition to you, & I am by no
means confident that I can write such an article on the book as I wish
to see written. It is not a subject requiring familiarity with the
politics of the day, & I am far from being convinced that the Review
will not be a loser by my writing the article instead of you. However if
the subject is one on which you would rather not write, & it would be a
relief to you to place it in other hands, that is decisive—& there are
some disadvantages in having articles which involve the political
principles of the review (though this does not involve them nearly so
much as Bailey’s book)2 written at a distance from the conductors of the
review & by contributors not in daily intercourse with them & with the
details of whose opinions they are not conversant. I have therefore no
objection to write the article if it be your wish & Falconer’s also, for
the third number.3

Many thanks for your remarks, which will be of great use to me.

Our second number is full—including your article on Crabbe, which I
Edition: current; Page: [264] hope the negligence of Willmer4 will not
prevent us from having the benefit of. We confidently reckon upon some
paper of Mr Martineau for No. 3. Would he review the “Second Travels of
an Irish Gentleman”?5 It would be very important to make that book more
known.

May we reckon upon your undertaking to give an account of Guizot’s
Lectures?6

I think our future numbers will far surpass our first—with which, though
it was fully as good as I expected, on the whole I was far from being
pleased.

Would you be kind enough to suggest to us any subjects on which we ought
to have articles—& to Mr Martineau, any on which you think he might be
induced to write.

Ever yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 26, 1835

James Martineau

Martineau, James

136.


TO JAMES MARTINEAU1

May 26, 1835

.

In the opinions you express respecting a Church Establishment I entirely
agree, and though some of the habitual contributors to the review still
differ from us, the general tone of the review will, I have reason to
hope, be that which you approve. A considerable change is, I think,
taking place in the tone of thinking of the instructed Radicals on that
point. Indeed, as they have (very generally) so far departed from Adam
Smith’s doctrines as not to admit the voluntary principle even with
respect to secular education, it would be very strange if they admitted
it with regard to religious. The mistake, I think, is in applying the
test to the doctrines which the clergy shall teach, instead of applying
it to their qualifications as teachers, and to the spirit in which they
teach. When you give a man a diploma as a physician, you do not bind him
to follow a prescribed method; you merely assure yourself of his being
duly acquainted with what is known or believed on the subject, and of
his having competent powers of mind. I would do the same with clergymen.
. . . One of the most important objects which the review could be
instrumental to, would be to discredit dogmatic Edition: current; Page:
[265] religion and encourage the boldest spirit of rationalism. This too
is the spirit which is spreading among the young and cultivated members
of the English clergy. This I know from my acquaintance with some
striking instances of it. There will shortly appear a posthumous work of
Coleridge2 (which I saw in manuscript before his death) altogether
smashing the doctrine of plenary inspiration, and the notion that the
Bible was dictated by the Almighty, or is to be exempt from the same
canons of criticism which we apply to books of human origin.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

11 Juin, 1835

Alexis de Tocqueville

de Tocqueville, Alexis

137.


TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1

11 Juin, 1835

.

Vous me demandez, mon cher Monsieur, dans quelles limites doit s’exercer
la collaboration que j’ai osé vous demander en faveur du London Review.
C’est une question fort naturelle, mais qu’il n’appartient pas aux
rédacteurs de la Revue de résoudre. La Revue n’a pas pour but la
propagation d’un système donné, d’une doctrine générale et unitaire; je
n’ai pas besoin de vous dire que jusqu’ici cette doctrine est encore à
créer. En défaut d’une théorie complète, les fondateurs du London Review
ont désiré que cet ouvrage périodique devînt un recueil des meilleures
idées du siècle, notamment en fait de philosophie politique: et dans ce
but ils voudraient obtenir la coopération des plus forts penseurs et des
hommes les plus éclairés de notre temps, du moins parmi ceux qui
sympathisent avec les tendances dominantes du siècle. Cette seule
condition est de rigueur, attendu que pour pouvoir travailler utilement
avec des amis du mouvement il faut l’être soi-même.

Dans une réunion de pareils hommes il ne vous appartient pas de jouer un
role secondaire. Aussi ce que nous vous demandons n’est pas une
collaboration en second ordre: nous ne vous invitons pas à mettre votre
talent à notre disposition pour exposer ou pour discuter telle ou telle
série d’idées ou de faits. nous vous engageons à fixer, de concert avec
nous, ce que sera la Revue elle-même; dans quel esprit, et sous
l’influence de quelles idées, elle sera faite. La Revue a la prétention
de représenter ce qu’il y a de plus avancé dans les doctrines
démocratiques: c’est précisément ce que vous avez, vous-même, ou créé,
ou fait ressortir avec une vigueur jusqu’ici inconnue, des faits ou des
principes connus. Vous êtes donc fait pour dicter des conditions à la
Revue, et non pour en recevoir d’elle. Notre vœu serait que vous vouliez
bien vous joindre à nous, et vous servir de la Revue Edition: current;
Page: [266] comme organe de vos opinions. Elle est déjà l’organe de ce
qu’il y a de meilleur parmi nos hommes du mouvement; mais ces hommes,
avec de grandes connaissances spéciales, sont, du moins la plupart
d’entre eux, tellement au-dessous de votre niveau quant aux idées
générales, que la direction que vous pourrez imprimer à la Revue par vos
articles et par l’influence qu’exerceront ces articles sur les autres
rédacteurs, décidera peut-être si ce journal servira à éclairer le
public anglais sur les questions de haute politique, ou seulement à
exciter l’esprit démocratique sans lui donner des principes capables de
régler sa marche.

Quant aux moyens particuliers de présenter vos idées, aux questions
particulières à traiter, etc., il ne nous appartient pas de vous les
indiquer, encore moins d’y mettre des bornes. Un esprit comme le vôtre
sait toujours ce qu’il peut et ce qu’il lui convient de faire, mieux que
ne pourrait le lui indiquer même son plus intime ami. Tout ce que nous
pourrons, c’est de vous dire de quoi nous avons le besoin le plus
pressant. Il y a deux pays très importants à bien comprendre, ce sont la
France et les Etats-Unis : nous ressentons un grand besoin d’expliquer
ces pays à nos compatriotes; nous-même nous ne les connaissons pas assez
pour cela et il n’y a peut-être que vous au monde qui soit capable de la
faire. Ce serait déjà un cours de haute politique qu’une série
d’articles de vous sur ces deux pays; vous avez assez fait vos preuves
pour que nous ayons dans la justesse et dans la profondeur de vos vues,
ainsi que dans leur impartialité, une confiance que nul autre écrivain
ne saurait nous inspirer; vous êtes, enfin, précisément l’homme qu’il
nous faut pour écrire sur ces deux pays, et s’il nous fallait désigner
un sujet, c’est par là, et en premier lieu par la France, que nous vous
prierions de commencer.

Veuillez, mon cher Monsieur, agréer l’hommage de mon éstime et de mon
attachement.

J. S. Mill

India House

.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

23d June 1835

India House

Joseph Blanco White

Blanco White, Joseph

138.


TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1

India House

23d June
1835

My dear Sir

Such a letter as your last might well have called forth an earlier
acknowledgment than this. I assure you if I have delayed writing to you
it was not for want of sympathizing in the warmest manner in all the
Edition: current; Page: [267] feelings which your letter expresses. I
wish to heaven there were more persons capable of feeling & thinking in
the same manner—& most earnestly do I hope that your sufferings bodily &
mental may come to an end, & give you many years of tranquillity &
activity at a time when such men are more than ever needed.

As for Guizot—there can be no objection whatever to making two articles
provided each can be made in form independent of the other. English
readers do not, I think, like articles which are ostensibly continued
through several numbers of a periodical, but to the reality they do not
object, only to the appearance. Therefore pray adjust it in the manner
you find most convenient. I quite agree with you that only the most
scanty justice can be done to the subject in one article.

I have not yet read Lord Brougham’s Discourse2 but the opinion of all
competent judges with whom I have conversed accords with yours, which is
besides in accordance with the character of his mind. He knows no
subject well, having never seriously studied anything: he has more half
knowledges than perhaps any man of our time, but I never could perceive
that he had any complete knowledges at all, & I observe, all who really
know any one of the subjects he writes about, think him a very wonderful
man, but wonder why he is so unwise as to write on that particular
subject.

Is there any literary subject which you would undertake for No. 3, in
addition to Guizot? Forgive my encroaching upon you in this stile!3

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1st July 1835

India House

Joseph Blanco White

Blanco White, Joseph

139.


TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1

India House

1st July
1835

My dear Sir

I write chiefly to inform you that I am about to set out for the Rhine
next Saturday,2 & shall not be back till the 10th of August, therefore
till Edition: current; Page: [268] that time it will devolve upon
Falconer to correspond with you respecting the review.

Lamb3 will be immediately sent—before sending Anster’s Faust4 we are
anxious to know in what way you think of treating it—for it would seem
too difficult to make an article on one of the most celebrated of
Goethe’s works, without entering into a complete examination of Goethe
himself, his writings & his influence—& that is so great a subject, that
we must think of it, & discuss it among ourselves for a good while
before we can safely embark upon it. Will you write to Falconer
expressing your views & inclinations as to the matter?

The review will be published next Wednesday unless something unexpected
should delay it. I am anxious to know what you think of the article “The
Church & its Reform”;5 it is not such as you, or such as I would have
written, & perhaps is too brusque in manner, but I think it will do us
no discredit.

I should gladly write to you many more things but I am pressed for time.
I shall read your work with great interest when I return.

Ever most truly yours

J. S. Mill

M. de Tocqueville will be at Liverpool in a few days. I suppose he has
an introduction to you from Senior, but I will at all events write to
him & ask him to call upon you.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

14th August 1835

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

140.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

14th August
1835

My dear Guilbert

I yesterday remitted to Monsr Delamarre Martin Didier, a banker of
Paris, for you, the sum of 870 francs, which, with about five francs
overpayment last time, will about make up,

Edition: current; Page: [269]
1. the 400 francs for Messrs Maurel & Blanchard2

2. the 300 francs due to yourself for the months of June & July, & 150
francs for the present month

3. the 25 francs due from myself to M. Faucher3 for the notice on the
subject of M. de Tocqueville.

When I asked you to procure notices of Paul de Kock, & Leclercq,4 I did
not contemplate their being so elaborate as those which you have
furnished nor costing so much to the review. Both works are already in
the hands of a distinguished English writer,5 & of course we could not
use, & did not wish to pay for, two criticisms of the same author: but
as English reviewers are often ignorant of various things, necessary to
be known in reviewing a French author, I was anxious that any
particulars, the ignorance of which might expose our English reviewer to
the commission of blunders, might be supplied to him from France. I do
not say this by way of complaint; you did the best you could for the
review, & the articles, that on Paul de Kock especially, are worth much
more than we are to pay for them. I mention it only to account for your
misunderstanding with Falconer. I never told him of the articles, but
gave them at once to the gentleman who is reviewing Paul de Kock &
Leclercq for us. The review will only pay for them when the articles are
finished, & that was always my intention: but I always intended to
advance whatever money might be needful from my own funds, being
indemnified by the review hereafter; and this I have done by the
remittance I have made to you. By applying to M. Didier you will be able
to receive the money immediately.

How do you like our second number? It is well liked here, but has not
yet acquired a large circulation, & its progress is so slow that we are
obliged to economize our funds as much as possible. I consequently do
not like to recommend to Sir William Molesworth to be at any further
expense for a Paris correspondent. We originally hoped for some sale at
Paris & for considerable aid from the Paris literary men of our own way
of thinking: but we do not seem likely to have any sale at all, nor any
literary assistance of much importance except from M. Nisard, even if we
succeed in obtaining his. I feel myself very strictly accountable for
the expenditure of funds which are not my own, & as Sir W. Molesworth is
only willing to risk a limited sum on this experiment, I should regret
much if that sum were not made to go as far as possible.

We have not yet received any French newspapers or reviews in exchange
for our review: have you been able to effect any exchanges?

Edition: current; Page: [270]
Will these odious laws against the press pass?6 & if they do, will any
person of the least public spirit or love of freedom, consent to live in
France under them?

Our Lords will pass the corporation bill,7 with modifications, very bad
in themselves, but leaving much good. They will not pass the Irish
Church Bill. Have you taken notice of the numerous public meetings, &
how the speeches & petitions almost always declare the House of Lords a
nuisance.

Have you seen any of Roebuck’s pamphlets?8 They now sell 10,000.

Ever yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

28th August 1835

India House

Joseph Blanco White

Blanco White, Joseph

141.


TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1

India House

28th August
1835

My dear Sir

I have now been about a fortnight returned from my continental
excursion, but have been too much occupied in various ways to be able to
write to you before: & I must now for the same reason cut this note very
short.

I write in the first place to say how exceedingly pleased I have been
with your pamphlet on Heresy & Orthodoxy.2 It seems to me one of the
most efficient protests which have been made in our time against the
doctrine which has been the bane of Xianity, the doctrine that religious
duty consists in the reception or adoption of a particular set of
opinions, & not in the state of the affections & will.

In the next place, as we are obliged to think seriously now about our
third number, we are anxious to know whether we can expect from you
either the paper on Guizot,3 or any literary article, which, as we are
scant of such articles for this number, would be particularly precious.

Edition: current; Page: [271]
You mentioned Lamb’s Specimens of early English Dramatists as a
subject—have you written anything upon it?

Believe me
 Ever yours

J. S. Mill

Pray inform me particulars of the state of your health.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept., 1835

Alexis de Tocqueville

de Tocqueville, Alexis

142.


TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1

[
Sept., 1835

]

My dear M. de Tocqueville,

I write in English because it takes me so much more time to write in
French. To you who understand English so perfectly I need not apologise.

Your letter2 was most grateful to me on every account—for the
expressions of personal friendship, which I hope I shall never deserve
to forfeit—& which I trust I may some day have it in my power to prove
to you how deeply I value. Next to that I was most delighted with the
sure prospect your letter affords of our obtaining from you a
cooperation which, while it would be of the greatest importance to the
London Review would probably do more good in this country than the
London Review itself; for, while a strong & general desire has of late
years grown up here, to know something about France, there is as yet no
source from which knowledge can be drawn. We have not so much as one
readable history of the Revolution; & not our people merely, but our
politicians & publicists, know about as much of France as they do of
Timbuctoo. They do not even know the titles of the most celebrated
books, or the names of the most celebrated men. Hardly any, even
instructed Englishmen . . .3 even looked . . . [at] Paul Louis Courier,4
or Guizot’s lectures,5 or Thiers’ history.6 I do not think there are two
hundred who if you spoke to them of these works would not be obliged to
ask what they were. Therefore you see, my dear M. de Tocqueville, you
need [not] be afraid of being tedious, or telling a twice told tale, if
you write to the English about what France was before the Revolution. I
should ask you to do so, even if it were not necessary as a preparation
for Edition: current; Page: [272] understanding the France of the
present day. In itself it is a matter most necessary to be set forth &
interpreted to the English. And besides, if the mere facts, the mere
husk of the ancien régime, were ever so stale to us, it would come fresh
& with all the colours of youth out of your hands; for the oldest thing
seems new when shewn as you shew it, in all kinds of previously
unsuspected relations to all the other things which surround it.

Either the form of letters, or that of articles, would suit the plan of
our review; perhaps that of letters, which you suggest, would be best,
as leading the reader to feel that each paper is part of a series. Do
not restrain yourself in space. We can afford you on an average between
30 & 40 pages of each number, & a page of the L.R. is equal to at least
two of your book.

Almost everybody here thinks that the ministers, & the House of Commons,
have shewn a deplorable want of energy & courage in the contest with the
Lords.7 It is not that. . . . However . . . the Lords & the Tories are
the sufferers, in this instance. You can hardly conceive how the tone of
the public about them is changed since I last saw you. Six months or a
year ago, everybody would have been satisfied with a fournée of peers;
now nobody mentions, or thinks of such a thing; everybody is full of the
necessity of an absolute reorganization of the House: & by this time
next year everybody will be for abolishing it, (at least as a hereditary
& aristocratic body) altogether.

What you say of the probable effect of these . . . laws against the
Press,8 is encouraging, & in itself . . . highly probable. I know, too,
that Carrel thinks . . . as you do on the subject—& him I conceive to
be, next to you [the] best authority I know on the state of France. He
has been desirous to moderate his tone, & this gives him an opportunity
of doing so without loss of influence.

I have nearly finished a review of your book [for the] L.R.9 The chief
merit of it will be in the extracts: if I [have] succeeded in
introducing them so as to excite attention to them I have done all I
have aimed at. My article will be, as you [will] see, a shade or two
more favourable to democracy than your book, although in the main I
agree, so far as I am competent to judge, in the unfavourable part of
your remarks, but without carrying them quite so far. The third number
will appear in a fortnight & we shall endeavour to bring the fourth out
in December, in which we hope to have your first article. Apropos, did
M. de Beaumont. . . .

Ever, my dear M. de Tocqueville, yours faithfully,

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [273]
Pray make my kindest remembrances to M. de Beaumont.10 I will write to
him very soon.

Is there a chance of your writing anything about Ireland for the French?
It would be very instructive.

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday 3d Oct. [1835]

I.H.

Thomas Falconer

Falconer, Thomas

143.


TO THOMAS FALCONER1

I.H.

Saturday
3d Oct. [1835]

My dear Falconer

I write to report progress. D’abord I wish you would by the first post,
write to Pringle,2 to say that from the length to which some of our
articles have gone, & the great quantity of matter not acceptable to
light readers, which the number will contain, we are obliged to put off
his article to No iv.3 which is the less to be regretted as matter of
the kind will be likely to be more read then than now. You may add (if
you will venture to do so on my testimony) that the article is very
good, & will be useful to us.—I want him to receive the first notice of
the postponement from us, & not from the advertisement.

We shall be out next week. The only matter not sent to press is my
Postscript4 (which I think you will like) & the last half of Buller’s
article,5 which he promised shd have been here yesterday. What we have
of it is very good, & pleasantly written. On the whole it is a good
number. We shall rather exceed our 16 sheets, though we must omit the
Nebulae.6 By the bye, Nichol sent to me by post the first sheet of the
Nebulae, saying that an accident had rendered his MS. illegible & that
he was obliged to recopy it: & would send by every post one sheet, using
thereafter alternately Grote’s & Roebuck’s frank: consequently I have
received no more, both being out of town. But as we have not room for
it, that is of no consequence.

Edition: current; Page: [274]
Chapman7 goes on very well.

Molesworth wants to write on Orangm.8 & I should like him to do so, but
as the Atlas man9 wants the same thing, & as it may be good to have a
friend in the Atlas—will you tell me how I can manage to get a sight of
some numbers thereof, that I may see how he writes.

Nichol says his mode of treating the subject, being scientific & a
priori, will not interfere with Wakefield’s.10

We are to print 1000 of Law Reform11 & sell it for 6d. That was
Chapman’s ultimate opinion. We must distribute it very largely. Could
not you send some to the agents for the Political Pamphlet?12

I have set on foot a greater quantity of advertising than usual, as
people complain of our not being advertised enough.

Ever yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

7th October, 1835

India House

John Pringle Nichol

Pringle Nichol, John

144.


TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1

India House

7th October, 1835

.

My dear Nichol,

In consequence, I suppose, of Grote’s and Roebuck’s absence from town, I
have received no part of your article on “Nebulae”2 except the first
sheet, which you sent to me direct. This, however, is of the less
importance, as the unexpected length of some other articles would at all
events have compelled us to omit it from this number. We will have it
set up as soon as we receive it, and send you a proof—for we mean to
bring out No. 4 in December. I hope your article on “Chalmers” will be
ready by that time. The one on “Quetelet”3 would in that case be better
postponed.

Edition: current; Page: [275]
You will, I think, like No. 3; and No. 4 will be excellent. De
Tocqueville has promised us a set of articles containing all that he
knows and thinks about Maree.4 Grote has promised one on “Greek
History;”5 and we have many other good articles, either ready or in
prospect. But we are particularly anxious for the one on “Chalmers.”

I shall read Combe’s book6 with a pleasure increased by receiving it
from you. Phrenology, no doubt, may be to a certain extent reconciled
with analytical psychology, that is, if it can be discovered that
certain nervous peculiarities, affecting the kind or the intensity of
our sensations, have to do with peculiar conformations of the brain.
Thus, for instance, what they say about their “organ of amativeness” has
some foundation, because we know that nymphomania can be traced to
inflammation of the cerebellum. It is, I believe, ascertained that the
nerves of external sense terminate mostly, if not wholly, in the
cerebrum, those of internal in the cerebellum and spinal marrow. What or
how much can be inferred from this I do not know. But the difficulty I
feel in limine about phrenology is the insufficiency of the induction. I
do not believe in anybody’s judgments of the characters of individuals
from anything the public ever know of their history. Besides, many of
the skulls they argue from are not sufficiently authenticated as
belonging to the persons to whom they ascribe them; e.g., the skull of
Raphael—when his tomb was lately opened his real skull was found there.7
I can easily imagine, however, that fine perceptions of sight may be
connected with peculiarities of the optic nerve, probably continued into
the adjacent parts of the brain, and so on. My opinion on the subject is
not that of a competent judge, but I will read Combe without prejudice,
and tell you my opinion of what he makes out.

Touching my outward man, which I wish much I could show you in propriâ
personâ, if I can get any competent person to describe me to myself, I
will give you the benefit. I do not know anybody that I am like, and am
neither able to describe my own physique nor that of anybody else.

We print one thousand separate copies of an article of my father’s on
“Law Reform”8—the best popular paper ever written on the subject. We
Edition: current; Page: [276] sell it for 6d. How many can you dispose
of usefully by distribution? and do you think Mr. Tullis9 can sell any?

I will write again soon.

Yours faithfully,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13th October 1835

I.H.

145.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

I.H.

13th October
1835

My dear Sir

I have not had time before now, to fulfil my undertaking on the subject
of the book I wrote to you about. Neither have I now time to write
anything elaborate on the matter—but if a rather slight article would
suit you, combining the trumpery book in question, with another called
“Thoughts on the Ladies of the Aristocracy by Lydia Tomkins”2 & made up,
in considerable part, of extracts from the latter, I think I should now
have time to undertake it.

Will you oblige me with a speedy answer & believe me

Ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13th October, 1835

India House

John Murray

Murray, John

146.


TO JOHN MURRAY1

India House

13th October, 1835

Mr. John Stuart Mill presents his compliments to Mr. Murray, & begs to
inform him that he is authorized (through a common friend)2 by the
Edition: current; Page: [277] well known French writer M. Fiévée, to
propose to Mr. Murray the publication of a work3 which he has prepared
for the press containing the particulars of his conversations &
confidential communications with Napoleon during a series of years.

Mr. Fiévée is doubtless well known to Mr. Murray, as not only one of the
cleverest & most spiritual writers but one of the most experienced &
most practical politicians in France. Although Napoleon knew him to be a
decided royalist, & a correspondent of the exiled Bourbons, he made him
not only a member of his conseil d’état (a body to which none but men of
great & tried capacity were admitted) but also, as is well known,
consulted him confidentially on many of the transactions of his reign.
There is more to be learned of Napoleon’s system of government from M.
Fiévée’s Correspondence politique et administrative4 (published soon
after the restoration) than from almost any other work; & the
publication which he has now in contemplation must be still more
valuable and interesting.

M. Fiévée’s tone of thought & political opinions at the time when his
Correspondence appeared, were very like those of Burke. He became more &
more alienated from the royalists as they, having more & more chance of
keeping in power, clung closer & closer to Napoleon’s monstrous
centralisation system of which M. Fiévée has always been a most decided
and efficient enemy.

If Mr. Murray should be inclined to undertake the publication of the
work, M. Fiévée will immediately send the manuscript, and place himself
in direct communication with Mr. Murray.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

17th October 1835

I.H.

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

147.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

I.H.

17th October 1835

My dear Carlyle

If I had not promised to write to you I think I should hardly have
written; for I have scarcely a simple fact to communicate, and as for
sentiments and speculations one is not so desirous to communicate those
by letter when one has and expects to have ample means of doing it by
word of mouth. The only event in my history, of the slightest interest
to you, which has occurred since you went away,2 is the coming out of
the 3d Edition: current; Page: [278] number of the London Review;
whereby I have a little breathing time before I am obliged to busy
myself about another. I cannot yet tell you either how the number is
selling or how it is liked, but I expect a [. . .]3 that those who read
it, who I fear will not be many, will like fully better than it
deserves. I hope I shall soon write something for it myself, much better
than anything I have written in this number.

Buller is now in town, on his way to the Exeter sessions, and is in
capital health and spirits. I have no news to tell of anyone else—almost
everybody is out of town, and of those who are here I have seen scarcely
anything.

I suspect you must be nearly confined to indoor pleasures in
Dumfriesshire now, for there can be little comfort in ranging the moors
with such weather as we have had, of which you have probably had an
enlarged edition. You have the good fortune at any rate to be free from
newspapers: you have heard nothing about Don Carlo’s [sic],4 nor about
O’Connell’s dining with Lord Mulgrave,5 nor the enormity of his calling
the Duke of Cumberland a “mighty great liar,”6 and you have remained a
stranger to the infinite quantity of railroad projects which fill all
that part of each day’s newspaper which is not engrossed with the above
topics. There has been nothing endurable but an article or two of
Buller’s in the Globe, and I fancy he will not write much more, in that
newspaper at least.

Perhaps, by the bye, you did7 not see, before you went away, the
announcement that Bulwer is to publish a History of Athens8—what will
this world come to! but I much wonder what it will be like.

Louis Philippe threatens to interdict even English papers which attack
his government. I should much like to know what old Sieyes9 thinks of
the present state of France. That man’s thoughts must be worth knowing.
Austin’s brother10 who has been travelling in France says that all the
people he conversed with at inns &c. though many of them disapproved
Edition: current; Page: [279] of the conduct of the government, yet
insisted on the necessity of standing by it, for fear of worse—he also
says that the Govt people are trying to revive the anti-English
feeling—& that one can see in their newspapers. They are adopting all
Napoleon’s maxims of internal policy—but one could see all this in
Thiers’ book.11 What a curious page all this is in the history of the
French revolution. France seems to be désenchanté for a long time to
come—& as the natural consequence of political disenchantment—profoundly
demoralized. All the educated youth are becoming mere venal commodities.

Grant12 desires to be remembered to you. I have nothing else worth
saying till we meet, which will be I suppose in a fortnight or so—.

Ever affectionately

J. S. Mill.

This letter would not be worth paying for so I have taken care to
procure a frank.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

19th October 1835

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

148.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

19th October
1835

My dear Guilbert

I have delayed writing to you so long, hoping that I might be able to
tell you by what means the Review will be sent to you—but unhappily I
cannot yet tell you. As for Bennis,2 I have tried him, & know that he
cannot be relied on. A parcel which was delivered to him in Paris for
me, did not reach London till three months after. However we will employ
him if we find we can do nothing better.

I am well acquainted with M. Fiévée’s writings & have a very high
opinion of him. I have written to Mr Murray,3 whom you know of course by
name, proposing to him to publish M. Fiévée’s work; & I expected to have
had his answer before this; but it has not yet come.

Edition: current; Page: [280]
I send herewith, letters to M. de Cormenin, M. Garnier-Pagès,4 & M.
Nisard, as well as to another friend of mine, M. de Beaumont.5 In the
letters to the first three I tell them that you will give them copies as
soon as they reach you: to M. Nisard the last number, & the present, to
the others a complete set.

I will write to y[ou]6 again almost immediately.

Believe me
 Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

21st October 1835

I.H.

Joseph Blanco White

Blanco White, Joseph

149.


TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1

I.H.

21st October
1835

My dear Sir

I have been thinking for some days past what subject I could propose to
you for a literary article, but almost every thing lately published is
so worthless that there is much difficulty in finding a dignus vindice
nodus. I have been able to think of nothing better than the
republication of Charles Lamb’s own works. Is there not matter for some
good & curious articles in Spanish literature? If you would give us
specimens & criticisms of the principal Spanish authors, or articles on
Spanish history, I think they would be interesting to the public and one
is obliged to go abroad now for subjects for the literary critic.

Your article on Guizot is excellent as far as it goes but something
seems still wanting to give a complete notion of the nature & value of
Guizot’s historical speculations. I will not ask you to take in hand
again a subject of which I do not wonder that you should be tired, but
if you would permit me, I should like much to add, mostly at the end of
the article, a few more observations & specimens—especially that noble
analysis of the feudal system in Lecture 4 of the first volume. The
whole should then be submitted for your approval, either in MS. or in
type.2 If you consent to this do not trouble yourself to write only on
purpose to say so as I shall consider silence as consent.

Edition: current; Page: [281]
Your remarks in your last letter respecting the conduct of persons in
the position of Bishop Coplestone3 are profoundly true & admirably
expressed.—I think you mention that you have not read the article which
the Archbishop complained of—if you have time to read it, I should much
like to know your opinion of it.

I hope you have duly received No. 3. If not, apply at once to Willmer
for it, and make him send one to Mr Martineau likewise. You had better
always apply to W. at once for books as we cannot depend on our
publishers. They have too much to do.

Ever truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

30th October 1835

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

150.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

30th October
1835

My dear Guilbert

I wrote to you a few days ago through M. Fillonneau,2 sending at the
same time letters to MM. de Cormenin, Garnier-Pagès, and Nisard. I had
written a short letter to M. Nisard some time before.

I now write to say that 20 copies of No 3 & some copies of Nos 1 & 2 of
the London Review have been sent to Galignani3 in a packet addressed to
you. I have made enquiry respecting the non-arrival of the copies of No
2, & I find that (while I was in Germany) they were sent, not to
Baillière4 but to Galignani, viz. 20 copies for sale, 8 addressed to
you, a copy addressed to Carrel & another to M. Nisard. If you find any
difficulty in getting the packets with your name & address on them from
Galignani write to me directly. They have arrived at Paris or they will
soon arrive. The parcel from Messrs Baldwin & Cradock booksellers,
Paternoster Row.

When they reach you would it be too much to request the favour of you to
give copies to those who ought to have them? in particular Carrel,
Nisard, MM de Cormenin, Garnier-Pagès, Charles Comte, Odilon-Barrot,
Alexis Edition: current; Page: [282] de Tocqueville (Rue de Verneuil No
49) Gustave de Beaumont (rue du Bac, no 36 bis) Dussard (rue Richer No
22) & any other persons or periodical works whom you may select. I wish
you would also give copies of all the three numbers to M. Gustave
d’Eichthal, Rue Lepelletier No 14 & to M. Fiévée.

I mentioned in my letter that I had written to Mr Murray,5 one of our
leading booksellers, respecting M. Fiévée’s work. I am much astonished
at not having yet received an answer from him. If I do not speedily, I
shall apply to another bookseller. The little essay which you sent by
Madame Foulon,6 is very good, it seems designed as an introduction to a
set of Exercises: were the Exercises ever completed? If so, I think you
should publish them here & I have little doubt of their success. For
separate publication the essay would require some alterations, & would
suit various other periodicals better than the London Review. But I
could probably procure its insertion somewhere.

You said once that the proprietors of the “Histoire parlementaire de la
révolution”7 would be willing to send us that work if we would undertake
to notice it. I already have it from the commencement to the close of
the Constituent Assembly. If the proprietors would promptly send all the
following volumes, & would continue to send the remainder, I will
undertake that it shall be noticed, not only in the London Review but in
other works. I say promptly, because if they do not send it I must buy
it and then I shall not take any trouble to get it noticed.

Our third number is much more generally liked, I find, than our second.

Yours ever faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

11th November 1835

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

151.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

11th November
1835

My dear Guilbert

Mr Murray, the bookseller, is unluckily out of town, & the only answer I
have been able to get from his son, is a recommendation to M. Fiévée to
Edition: current; Page: [283] send the manuscript for Mr Murray to see.2
I think it would be advisable to send it, or at least part of it, as I
am, myself, quite convinced that it will suit Mr Murray, but in case it
should not, I could then apply at once to some other bookseller.

Have the copies of the London Review No 3, which were sent to you
through Galignani, yet reached you? Pray enquire for them & let me know.
I do not know exactly on what day Messrs Baldwin & Cradock sent them—but
they were addressed to you, at your own residence, Rue de Joubert No 47.

M. Nisard has positively promised an article on Victor Hugo for the next
number.3 The letter he wrote to me on the subject amused me extremely—it
quite corresponded with the character you gave him.

Our politics are in appearance sleeping—the ministry doing all they can
to stop the discussion on the reform of the peerage—& they have
succeeded, with respect to the daily newspapers—but not as to the
weekly, or the country papers—& public opinion has in reality, fully
decided the question, as you will see in a year or two.

Ever yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

19 novembre 1835

Alexis de Tocqueville

de Tocqueville, Alexis

152.


TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1

19 novembre 1835

.

Permettez-moi, mon cher M. de Tocqueville, de vous adresser les plus
vives félicitations sur l’événement que M. de Beaumont m’a annoncé dans
sa lettre du 8 de ce mois.2 Puisse-t-il réaliser tous vos vœux et vous
assurer le bonheur que vous méritez si bien et qui échappe si souvent à
ceux qui, dans notre temps, et peut-être de tout temps, se sont occupés
de faire quelque chose pour le bien de l’humanité.

Comme il se peut très bien, par la négligence des libraires, que vous
n’ayez point encore reçu l’exemplaire qui vous était destiné du London
Review, je vous en envoie un autre, accompagné d’un exemplaire de mon
article sur la « Démocratie en Amérique »3 que je soumets à votre
bienveillante critique, en désirant vivement de votre amitié la
communication Edition: current; Page: [284] de toutes les observations
qui pourront naître dans votre esprit des doutes que j’ai exprimés sur
une petite partie seulement de vos conclusions. Je suis loin d’avoir des
idées fixes sur les questions dont il s’agit, et je suis avide de tous
les renseignements qui pourraient m’aider à en former, et que personne
autant que vous n’est dans le cas de me donner. Si je me trompe dans
quelques-unes de mes observations, je le regrette d’autant moins que les
lecteurs du London Review ne sont guère encore capables d’accueillir des
opinions plus conformes aux vôtres que celles que j’ai exprimées, et je
pourrai, avec le temps, rectifier mes erreurs.

Vous pensez bien que je ne veux pas, dans les circonstances présentes,
vous importuner au sujet des articles que vous voulez bien destiner au
London Review. Je vous dirai seulement que nous nous sommes décidés à ne
faire paraître la 4e livraison que le 31 décembre, ce qui nous
permettrait d’attendre plus longtemps un article dont il nous serait si
avantageux d’enrichir cette livraison.

Croyez toujours, mon cher M. de Tocqueville, à ma haute estime et à mon
amitié dévouée.

J. S. Mill.

India House

.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday Nov., 1835

I.H.

Henry S. Chapman

Chapman, Henry S.

153.


TO HENRY S. CHAPMAN1

I.H.

Monday.
 [
Nov., 1835

]

Dear Chapman,—

I send two articles which should be set up directly. One by J.R.2 and
another (the one on Guizot which I have, I think, with tolerable
success) manufactured from a so-so article into a good one.3 If they
cannot print from the pencil I wish you would get somebody to put my
alterations into ink.

Let me have proof as soon as possible of both these and of the
“Aristocracy”4 in which my father wishes to make some corrections.

I shall have an opportunity in a day or two for Mrs Austin, and I will
send her one of my copies.

Yours ever,

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [285]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24th November 1835

India House

Joseph Blanco White

Blanco White, Joseph

154.


TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1

India House

24th November
1835

My dear Sir

I have now the pleasure of sending you a proof of the article on
Guizot,2 in which I hope you will point out every, the smallest, thought
or expression to which you in the slightest degree object, & will make
any suggestions for the improvement of the article, which may occur to
you. I think it will be very interesting & instructive & it is a kind of
article which the review much wanted.

Perhaps the few remarks which I have inserted near the beginning of the
article, respecting M. Guizot’s political conduct, are not sufficiently
in the tone & spirit of the rest of the article—if you think so, pray
cancel them & substitute anything which you prefer—but it strikes me
that something on that topic was wanted in that place.

I return, at the same time, a few pages of your MS. which I was obliged
to omit in order to make room for what I added & to render the general
character of the article less discursive.

Joanna Baillie3 is just about to publish three more volumes of plays:
would that not be a good opportunity for a review of her? She has never
been properly reviewed. If you think so, I will undertake it, we will
get them from the publisher & send them to you.

Ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

Let me hear from you soon respecting your health.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

5th December 1835

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

155.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

5th December
1835

My dear Guilbert

I think precisely as you do about M. Nisard’s article.2 We shall insert
it, almost unaltered.

Edition: current; Page: [286]
We have also the promise (but do not mention this) of several articles
on French society & civilization by M. de Tocqueville,3 author of “La
Démocratie en Amérique.”

These articles & those of M. Nisard, are likely so much to increase the
interest taken in the review in France, that we certainly ought to have
a regular agency at Paris, & that of M. Paulin4 is the one we should
desire above all others. I do not however quite understand his
conditions. Are the 600 francs you mention, 600 francs per month? If so,
the expense is greater than we can afford; & we can hardly hope for
advertisements enough to pay that expense when the tax on advertisements
is deducted. And in regard to our “good offices for the books published
by him” an English review which is more political & philosophical than
literary, & does not notice, even English books unless they fall in its
way while writing for some other purpose, could hardly, even with the
best inclinations, engage to notice every book published by a particular
house at Paris—neither could we undertake to notice any book with praise
unless we thought the praise merited; but perhaps all that is meant is,
to notice it in the advertising sheet—that we will readily do, though we
shall have to pay taxes for all such notices as advertisements.

Let me hear from you again immediately on this subject.

I will get a written authority for your receiving the books from
Galignani. I sent 20 copies of No 3. by M. Fillonneau.

I have not heard further from Mr Murray—I wait for M. Fiévée’s note
descriptive.

Ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9th December 1835

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

156.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

9th December
1835

My dear Guilbert

I suppose you have seen Falconer’s brother & that he has told you all
about Paulin. His name will appear as Agent on the cover of the
forthcoming review, & I will thank you to conclude with him on the terms
he proposes. It will be as well to have a written agreement merely as a
memorandum Edition: current; Page: [287] for both parties. It will suit
us best to pay the money four times a year, 250 francs on the
publication of each number. Will you likewise request M. Paulin, as our
agent, to expend a sum not exceeding 125 francs in advertising the
present number. I will remit to you the money both for M. Paulin & for
M. Nisard to any banker you may name, or we can remit it to M. Paulin
that we may not give you trouble now when we have a paid Agent. Unless
M. Paulin names some other banker—we will remit to M. Didier as before.

The fourth number is not yet out, owing to extreme misbehaviour on the
part of our printer, which we shall not suffer to be repeated. Falconer
has some arrangements in view at Dover & Calais by which we may ensure
the rapid conveyance of our copies to Paris. We will send 30 copies to
M. Paulin as soon as possible after the review appears. Should we send
30 copies only or 30 for sale in addition to, how many? for
contributors, & exchanges.

M. Paulin is at liberty to sell them at any price (not lower than three
francs) which he thinks most advisable, with a view as well to the
reputation of the review as to its pecuniary profit.

Immediately on receiving M. Fiévée’s paper, I forwarded a copy of it to
Murray, from whom I have not yet received any answer. If one does not
come soon, I will wit[hout] further delay, try an[other] bookseller.2

How goes on “le Progrès”?3

I suppose you hear sometimes of or from Mad. Foulon—I have done all I
could for her, & I think Mrs Hume4 or Mrs Grote will be of some use to
her if she should not, as there is reason to hope, attain her object
without them.

Ever truly yours

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

11 Décembre, 1835

Alexis de Tocqueville

de Tocqueville, Alexis

157.


TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1

11 Décembre, 1835

.

Mon cher ami,

Quand votre lettre est venue j’étais au lit et souffrent par une maladie
dont je suis maintenant complètement rétabli. Votre lettre m’a causé la
plus vive satisfaction. Rien ne pouvait m’être plus flatteur que
l’approbation Edition: current; Page: [288] que vous avez donnée à mon
article.2 Tout ce que j’ai dit, je l’ai senti, et j’aurais pu dire
davantage sans dépasser l’admiration que je ressens pour votre ouvrage
et pour son auteur. Quant à la discussion que j’ai ouverte avec vous sur
plusieurs points, ne croyez pas que j’aie une conviction pleine et
parfaite sur ces questions. Je les regarde certes comme très
susceptibles d’une discussion ultérieure, et vous êtes, mon cher
Tocqueville, un du très petit nombre de ceux avec une pareille
discussion pourrait mener à quelque chose. J’en attends avec impatience
l’occasion.

Je regarde avec vous la distinction entre délégation et représentation
comme capitale. Ce n’est pas d’aujourd’hui que je tâche de la mettre en
avant. Déjà en 1830 j’ai vivement soutenu dans l’Examiner la même
opinion;3 et en 1832, époque où l’on discutait beaucoup ici le mandat
impératif, M. Fonblanque eut assez de patriotisme pour imprimer dans un
journal deux longs articles de moi,4 qui offensèrent beaucoup le public
radical et lui fit perdre plusieurs de ses abonnés. Mon père, qui au
reste est beaucoup plus démocrate que moi, partage très décidément la
même opinion, seulement il pense avec une certitude que je suis loin de
partager au même degré, que le peuple confondra rarement cette
distinction.

Je n’ai senti aucun étonnement de ce que votre premier article ne nous
soit pas encore parvenu. On ne peut pas faire vite, et faire aussi bien
que vous faites; et ce sentiment consciencieux, qui vous empêche de
faire les choses à demi, je l’éprouve moi-même; traiter un sujet moins
bien que j’aurais pu le traiter, c’est une nécessité à laquelle je suis
forcé quelquefois de me soumettre mais je la subis toujours avec une
peine extrême. Si nous avions pu faire connaître publiquement votre nom,
cela nous aurait été très utile, je crois même que cela aurait décidé le
succès matériel de la revue, car vous êtes maintenant assez connu ici,
et pas trop connu, pour que votre apparition dans une revue anglaise
piquât vivement la curiosité publique par le double attrait du mérite
reconnu et de la nouveauté. Cependant les raisons que vous me donnez
sont trop fortes pour que je tâche de vaincre votre répugnance. Nous
userons de votre permission en laissant percer votre nom. La prochaine
livraison doit par des raisons d’affaires se publier le 31 de ce mois,
par conséquent elle devra paraître sans votre Edition: current; Page:
[289] article à moins qu’il ne soit déjà fait. C’est une perte pour
nous, mais nous sommes consolés un peu par la réflexion que notre marché
avec le Westminster Review n’est pas terminé encore et le sera
probablement avant la livraison d’Avril.5 Votre article obtiendra par là
dès le commencement une publicité plus étendue.

Rien ne me serait plus agréable que de faire un voyage à Paris et de
vous y voir—Hélas! je suis lié pieds et mains pendant onze mois de
l’année et il me faut attendre jusqu’ à l’été prochain, alors je serai
peutêtre à Paris au moins plusieurs jours.

Tout à vous de cœur, mon cher ami, je vais signer ma lettre quoique vous
n’ayez pas signé la votre.

J. S. Mill.

India House

.

Mille amitiés à Beaumont. Je n’ai pas encore une réponse de M.
Crawford.6

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

26th December 1835

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

158.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

26th December
1835

My dear Guilbert

I was just writing to you when I received your note. I am most happy to
hear of the journal you are about to establish2 & of the excellent plan
on which it is to be carried on. I am concerned that the popular party
should now use les intérêts matériels as one of their main levers. “Il
faut arriver à la république par les épiciers.” You can with the more
propriety announce yourself as a writer in our review, as your
observations on l’épicier will appear in the present number as part of
an article on that personage.3

Edition: current; Page: [290]
I shall advise the proprietor of the review to accept M. Paulin’s
proposition. In the meantime write directly & tell me—considering the
interest likely to be excited by M. Nisard’s article—how many copies you
would advise us to send—& what advertisements to insert in the Paris
journals—& what you think would be the cost, & in what way the copies
would get to Paris quickest & at what price you would advise that they
should be sold.

Falconer would have sent the order upon Galignani, by his brother who
has just gone to Paris, had he not set out in an unexpected hurry.
Falconer told me some days ago that he would send it by letter to his
brother at Paris, & I trust he has done so.

Was it 300 francs per sheet that you agreed were to be paid to M.
Nisard? We will send the money either to him or to you, through any
banker that you may prefer.

I have been waiting for M. Fiévée’s paper—rather impatiently as our
publishing season is approaching. There was no use in speaking again to
Murray, or to any other bookseller, till the paper arrived. I am glad it
is so soon coming.

Our forthcoming number will be far the best we have yet published, &
will greatly eclipse all the other reviews. We have three articles on
France: one on Guizot’s Lectures, one on l’Epicier & the one on Victor
Hugo.

I shall probably be able to send a positive answer to M. Paulin on
Monday. In the meantime as we publish next Thursday without fail, pray
write directly.

I shall write to M. Nisard on Monday—I have myself translated his
article.

Ever truly yours my dear Guilbert

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [291]


1836

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1836

India House

Adolphe Narcisse Thibaudeau

Narcisse Thibaudeau, Adolphe

159.


TO [ADOLPHE NARCISSE?] THIBAUDEAU1

India House

Samedi

[
1836

?]

Mon cher Thibaudeau—

Ce serait une chose utile à la Revue de Londres si nous pouvions y
insérer un bon et amusant article biographique et critique sur Thiers.2
Ce n’est pas que ce petit fripon en vaille la peine, mais c’est que cela
serait lu, chose très essentielle quand on écrit. C’est pourquoi je
m’adresse à vous pour vous demander l’indication des renseignements
nécessaires pour cela, et vos bons offices pour en obtenir. Ecrivez moi,
je vous prie, un petit mot là-dessus, ou faites mieux, venez me voir,
soit ici, soit à Kensington. J’irais vous chez vous si je le pouvais,
mais il y a quinze jours que je le désire et que je ne le puis pas

tout à vous

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9th January 1836

India House

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

160.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

India House

9th January
1836

I wrote to you, my dear Mütterlein, by Mr. Barry2 but owing to his
unexpectedly going away without seeing his brother to whom my letter was
delivered he never received it, & it was brought back to me next day—so
here goes to repair it.

Thanks for your kind note. I was only confined at home for a week, by a
slight stomach attack, which as they tell me & I believe, has probably
saved me from a much worse one—but I fancy I resumed my ordinary amount
of bodily exercise too soon, & thereby retarded the recovery of Edition:
current; Page: [292] my strength, & I am still by no means completely
reestablished.3 My father has had no returns of unfavourable symptoms
for many weeks now, but his recovery is very slow, & I do not expect
that he will quite get rid of the cough before the warm weather. He does
not feel the cold much, as while it lasts he does not stir out of a room
which is kept of uniform temperature—& he does not suffer from the
confinement nearly so much as I should have expected. He frequently
enquires about you and Mr. Austin from every person whom he thinks
likely to have heard from you.

I told Chadwick of the opportunity by Mr. Barry, & as I understand
several parcels went to Boulogne with him I hope C. sent what you
wanted. I did not send anything except my letter, literally because I
knew nothing worth sending. The books & periodicals are even worse than
they were before you went away. Even the Examiner has degenerated, &
grown comparatively tame & dull. Fonblanque is using himself up by
writing in the Chronicle,4 the euthanasia of those who live at a greater
expense than they can wisely afford—they kill themselves, or at least
the best part of themselves, their minds, by demanding too much of
them—“to this favour they must come” if they do no worse. The fourth
number of the London Review, which is really a good number, would be
better worth sending than anything else, but unluckily it was not, & is
not even yet, out, thanks to the scurvy conduct of the printer. I will
send it by the first opportunity I have, & if there is anything else in
particular that you or Mr. Austin feel any curiosity about, tell me & I
will be sure to send it.

What you say about my coming to see you is very kind of you my dear
Mütterlein but I am not fit for travelling, nor yet unfit to be at the
India House from which in my father’s absence I could ill be spared.

I hope Von Raumer5 is worth all the trouble you take about him—but
heaven knows whether our stupid public will read or buy a book by a
German gelehrte who is neither prince nor minister & whom they never
heard of. My father suggested the other day that you should translate
Thiers’ history—it has never been translated, & would be sure to sell.

I grieve to hear that Mr. Austin is not well, though all I have heard of
him since he was at Boulogne has been favourable as compared with his
health anywhere else. What does he mean to do about the Examinership?6
Edition: current; Page: [293] that is a sort of employment which
probably would not knock him up, like writing—& the improvement in his
circumstances with leisure & freedom from anxiety, might give him a
better chance than he ever had before of being well in London.

I have nothing new to tell about Carlyle, Sterling, the Bullers, Grotes,
&c.

My brother James has left Haileybury7 with very great credit, & goes to
India in about a month. The rest of the family are much as usual, except
Jane, who is in indifferent health. Give my love to Lucy.8 Farewell

Your Söhnchen

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 27, 1836

Thomas Falconer

Falconer, Thomas

161.


TO THOMAS FALCONER1

[
Jan. 27, 1836

]

Dear Falconer,—

A strange fatality attends our review. I do not believe there ever was
any undertaking in which every single thing which ought to be done was
so regularly left undone. We advertised the number as out when it was
not out,2 and to make amends (I suppose) I have not been able to find a
single advertisement that made known the fact since it actually
happened.3 There was no advertisement in the “Examiner” on Monday,4 nor
in the “Chronicle” yesterday or to-day. It is true, as Peacock says,
that “the London Review comes out surreptitiously.” I also ascertained
yesterday that at least two contributors, Bisset5 and Garnier, had no
copies sent to them. Bisset asked Chapman for one, and got it, and I
shall give one to Garnier to-day, but for aught I know, not a single
contributor has received a copy, except Peacock, who had one already.
You have not answered my note enquiring whether Sterling and W. H.
Smith6 have had copies.

Edition: current; Page: [294]
I wish you would get a copy of the Index of Vol. 2 for Peacock, as his
copy being an early one, was destitute of that appendage.

Ever yours,

J. S. Mill.

We are the laughing stock of everybody who knows us, for our way of
doing business.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday Feb., 1836

I.H.

Henry S. Chapman

Chapman, Henry S.

162.


TO HENRY S. CHAPMAN1

I.H.

,

Tuesday.
 [
Feb. (?), 1836

]

My dear Chapman,

I received your note only yesterday evening, at Kensington. I will
endeavour to arrange matters with Falconer on the footing which you
approve of. I quite agree with you as to what should be the limits of my
own interference. The reading of proofs only devolved upon me because
there were often alterations to be made after the article was already
set up, and because time often pressed and it was desirable to make the
alterations before sending the author his proof. We are now, however, so
much in advance with our stock of articles that we need not hereafter be
pressed for time as we have been hitherto.

As to any other interference on my part, it has been completely forced
upon me against my will, and has been progressive with the necessity for
it. When I began I counted upon Falconer’s saving me the trouble either
of acting or thinking as to business matters; and for a time I left him
to himself. I presently found that nothing whatever was done by him
unprompted. I therefore, to my great annoyance, had to suggest
everything that occurred to me, but I now found that suggesting was not
enough, for the suggestions though not objected to, were never acted
upon. I supposed that this was for want of remembering them, and in this
way I got the habit of reminding him continually, and asking him if the
things were done or not. Finally, I found on asking, that in many cases
they were not done even after numerous remindings, and thus has been
brought about a relation between us so distasteful to me that I never
will allow it to go on. At the same time I cannot sit calmly and see the
thing go to the devil for want of doing a single thing that is
necessary. Every person I know is continually complaining to me of the
mismanagement; our utter incapacity is become a subject of general
sarcasm and jokes, and at length our printers and publishers have such a
contempt for us as men of business that they will not attend to a single
one of our orders. If this is the case when I am Edition: current; Page:
[295] continually dunning Falconer, what would it be if I intrenched
myself in my own department and let the thing go to ruin, saying it was
his concern not mine? If Falconer had not been a friend, and of my own
choice, and a person I like much and think very highly of, I should have
spoken to Molesworth and said “find me another editor, or I give it up.”
The contrary being the case, I spoke to Falconer himself, and resolved
to take upon myself the trouble he ought to have saved me, and if even
that had produced any tolerable management I would have let the thing go
on. But as even that will not, it must be changed.

Senior has some copies of his article,2 but his publishers made such
objections to the circulation of them here, that he has scarcely been
able to give any away except to foreigners. He gave me one because I
wanted to review it; if you like I will lend it to you.

I am still far from well—indeed rather worse than better, and I fear I
shall be unable to write anything for No. 5,3 and shall have to go into
the country and give up for a time all work. I am the more anxious to
have the editorship placed on a satisfactory footing that I may not feel
anxious while I am away about the mode of its going on.

Will you oblige me by sending the enclosed to Liverpool.

Ever truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday Feb., 1836

I.H.

Henry S. Chapman

Chapman, Henry S.

163.


TO HENRY S. CHAPMAN1

I.H.

Friday
 [
Feb., 1836

]

Dear Chapman,

I have just written to Falconer to propose your being Sub-editor.2 In
the way I have put it, it cannot possibly hurt his feelings. In case he
should not object what salary (disinterestedness apart, for Molesworth
is anxious to give you the full value of your time and labour) should
you consider adequate?

Edition: current; Page: [296]
So Pam.3 is at an end,—it serves us with its dying breath. Is there to
be a Sunday paper or not?4

Ever faithfully yours,

J. S. Mill.

We shall get the Westminster, Molesworth says—he has brought them almost
to terms by giving them money in hand.5

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

17th February 1836

I.H.

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

164.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

I.H.

17th February
1836

My dear Mutterlein

Your letter is kind as you always are—& you know how great a pleasure it
always is to me to be with you & Mr Austin. I am however so decidedly
better within the last few days that I can perhaps do without going into
the country at all, & certainly a few days in the country would quite
reestablish me—against going so far there are therefore two reasons—the
great inconvenience that even a week’s absence is to my father while
absent from the India House—& that the fatigue of the journey would do
me more harm at present than a very short stay would do me good—the
great thing I have to do is to avoid fatigue—there is nothing the matter
with me but want of tone and strength. I certainly shall not allow
myself to get into bad health, & I should [have]2 gone out of town
before this if it had not been for the inconvenience to my father—& you
may be sure he would not have allowed me to make that a reason, if I had
been seriously ill.

Pray write again & give me more news of yourself & of Mr Austin. I
seldom hear about you except in the most general terms.

Edition: current; Page: [297]
My father gets on very slowly—but he does get on. There is no news—as to
public matters, the ministry are more popular & the radicals in better
humour than at any time since the Reform Bill.

Your Söhnchen

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday Feb., 1836

I.H.

Albany Fonblanque

Fonblanque, Albany

165.


TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1

I.H.

Friday
 [
Feb., 1836

]

My dear Fonblanque

Molesworth has just bought the Westminster Review to merge it in the
London.2 As the sole radical review we shall surely now have a good
chance of success; but we have more need than ever of good articles,
that the first number after the junction may be a striking one. You have
now rather more leisure, I suppose, than you had during the last year—it
would be of the very greatest importance to us if you would write
something for the next number. Had you been able to write for us from
the commencement it might have made a great difference to us. There are
very few of the good radical writers who have not written for us—but you
who for popular purposes are universally allowed to be the best, have
not. I wish you would.

Yours ever faithfully

J. S. Mill

P.S. Was the article on the “Fudges in England” in the last Westr3 by
Mr. Savage?4 If so, I wish you would tell him that my father was greatly
struck with it.

So they blackballed [Fellowes?] by 47 & [Hill?] by 67.5 The radicals
should blackball all Tories till they put down the conspiracy. I shall
go there on purpose whenever I can & shall proclaim my intention.

Edition: current; Page: [298]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday Feb. 23, 1836

I.H.

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

166.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

I.H.

Tuesday
 [
Feb. 23, 1836

]

You know that Molesworth has bought the Westminster & that it is united
with the London? That gives us a better chance of success—I should hope
a very good one—but which depends entirely on our being able to make the
combined review a striking one. I know that you do not like the London
Review & I do not know how it is possible you should—still I hope you do
not dislike it so much as to be unwilling to write in it—do not suppose
that any article of yours would have the fate of Horne’s.2 There is
nothing to induce one to put in his articles unless one completely
agrees with them, but such articles as many of yours would be desirable
for the review even if one differed from every word of them. I should
differ from them occasionally, but not nearly so much as I differ in a
contrary way from many which I am obliged to put in now—& I am the more
desirous to throw something into the other scale.

You know I suppose that you are put upon the list of the Reform Club3 as
an original member.

How striking some of your Lectures must have been to hear. I admire them
exceedingly. It is a pity the first two,4 from the comparative triteness
of the subject have less in them than the rest

[J?]S.M.

will you5 give him this? & will you try to persuade him to do as it asks
him to?

she6 is well—that is as well as she ever is—I am still out of health—

J.S.M.

Edition: current; Page: [299]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday Feb. 27, 1836

I.H.

Albany Fonblanque

Fonblanque, Albany

167.


TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1

I.H.

Friday
 [
Feb. 27, 1836

]

My dear Fonblanque

I would have answered for Carlyle with the most perfect assurance on the
points you mention, but as I anticipated, it does not suit him. He
recommends Craik,2 late of the Printing Machine3—of whom he says “he is
a man limited, but honest, & singularly healthy & even robust, within
his limits. He cannot be brilliant, but he can be decided, clear, & even
emphatic. I should think him a believer with his whole heart in such
policy as this present Russel-Melbourne & open to all manner of further
light. The man is good tempered, courageous; can take a handsome lift of
anything. If I mistake not, such an offer would be excellent news to him
at present: I have not heard of him for months; which means, I fear,
that he is in straits & uncertainty.”

I am delighted to hear of the Selection from the Examiner4—many of your
papers in it are too good to be let die. The selection will live as long
as any such collection in our language. I am glad too for another
reason—that we will have a swinging review of it in the “London &
Westminster.”

Pray let me know when the question you allude to is decided & in the
meantime is there anything Mr. Savage5 would write? He once offered to
write for us & would have been asked to write on Orangeism then, if
Molesworth had not wanted to do it himself.

I have given your message to my father & it was received as you would
wish—but I think there was more need for him to send such a one to
you—because you have seemed once or twice to think that when he attacked
an opinion of yours, e.g. on the Pension List—he felt or thought with
less estimation of you than I know he does. Now the fact I believe is
that on that point of the P. List & on some others he had actually
forgotten that you were of the opposite opinion—& being accustomed to
find you on Edition: current; Page: [300] what he thought the right
side, he instinctively concluded you were so on these points. About the
Pension list if he had anybody in view it was Grote, with whom he had
previously had some personal discussion about it.

Ever yours

J. S. Mill

If you are at the Athenæum on Monday I wish you would vote for John
Sterling6—& get anybody else you can to do so.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

31st March 1836

India House

Lord Wellesley

Wellesley, Lord

168.


TO LORD WELLESLEY1

India House

31st March
1836

Mr John S. Mill is instructed by his Father, who has been for several
months confined at home by illness, to express to Lord Wellesley his
sense of the honour which his Lordship has conferred upon him by
presenting him with a copy of his Dispatches,2 and to say that he will
do himself the honour of writing as soon as his health permits, to make
his personal acknowledgments to Lord Wellesley.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2 avril 1836

Alexis de Tocqueville

de Tocqueville, Alexis

169.


TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1

2 avril 1836

.

Mon cher Tocqueville,

Le London and Westminster Review No 5 L 48 vient de paraître. Votre
article2 en est le principal ornement. J’ai moi-même surveillé la
traduction que nous en avons fait faire, et j’espère que nous avons pu
rendre vos idées avec fidélité et que nous n’avons pas absolument gâté
le reste: nous avons au moins soigneusement suivi la clarté et la
simplicité de votre style, que je regarde comme bien près de la
perfection du style philosophique. Nous avons fait imprimer séparément
quelques exemplaires de l’article, et Edition: current; Page: [301] nous
nous permettons de vous en faire l’hommage; ils vous parviendront en
même temps que la Revue elle-même, du moins je l’espère.

Nous sommes aussi vos débiteurs d’une somme de 600 francs que vous
toucherez chez M. Delamarre, banquier. Ce n’est pas sans honte que je
vous parle d’argent et surtout d’une si faible somme lorsqu’il s’agit
d’un travail comme celui dont vous avez enrichi notre recueil.

Pourrons-nous espérer que la prochaine livraison offrira à notre public
la suite de ce travail?3

Vous verrez que nous n’avons pas donné à l’article (comme nous avions
pensé à la faire) la forme d’une lettre, puisqu’il n’y avait ni dans le
style, ni dans le fond rien qui exigeât un changement dans la forme
ordinaire de nos articles de la Revue.

J’apprends de M. Gustave de Beaumont qu’il s’occupe d’un ouvrage sur
l’Irlande;4 cette nouvelle m’a fait un plaisir extrême. Il me demande
des renseignements; je me suis adressé à M. Cornewall Lewis pour en
avoir, et j’ai appris qu’il avait déjà envoyé à M. de Beaumont tout ce
qu’il jugeait utile, et notamment le livre qu’il vient de livrer au
public et qui me paraît fort intéressant. Au reste j’écrirai très
incessamment à M. de Beaumont.

C’est ici seulement un petit bout de lettre fait à la hâte; je vous en
promets un meilleur en quelques jours.

Votre dévoué

J. S. Mill.

India House

.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9th April 1836

India House

Joseph Blanco White

Blanco White, Joseph

170.


TO JOSEPH BLANCO WHITE1

India House

9th April
1836

My dear Sir

I quite agree with you as to the desirableness of striking more directly
than we have hitherto done against the prevailing tendencies of English
religion.2 Mr Martineau has at my request written an article on your two
Edition: current; Page: [302] books, the “Second Travels” & the “Heresy
& Orthodoxy” which breaks ground on the subject very well.3 It could
have been ready for the 4th number, but we were obliged to omit it even
from the 5th, to make room for political or literary matter of a
temporary kind. It will certainly be in the next, & I will suggest to
him to append something on the Hampden controversy.4 But I have long
looked forward to having the same subject treated by yourself, whom from
your published writings I cannot but regard as the best writer by far
whom the country at present has on such topics. I hope you will think of
it. We can, you see, afford you ample time, & you can yourself chuse the
mode & the opportunity. It is only necessary to avoid directly
expressing any opinion on points of faith or rather of dogma; that the
review in attacking sectarianism may not get the character with the
stupid part of the public, of being itself connected with any sect.

With regard to an article for our next number I have had some scruples
about proposing anything to you so long as the article on Lamb remained
pending. I never had more difficulty in making up my mind about any
article than I have about that. It is an article which on many accounts
it would be a great loss to the review not to insert—besides which it
would be a thousand pities that all the trouble you have had about it
should be lost. On the other hand I foresee that it will do us very
serious injury with a large class of those who take most interest in
literature & who as being friendly to the cause of movement are friendly
to us—& will raise a storm about us which however ready to encounter
when required by duty, I do not so much like to face on a matter on
which even after all the modifications & explanations you have so
good-naturedly given, I still find that my own views differ
fundamentally from yours. I take it that in our estimation of the class
of writers called humourists you & I should hardly ever agree5—&
Edition: current; Page: [303] that you dislike everything which has not
a serious & truthful object. Do you not (I should think you did) prefer
Schiller to Goethe? & do you like Falstaff & Poins—I should think not. I
am obliged in these embarrassments to take a little more time for
consideration.

As for any other subject, I can at present think of none but Joanna
Baillie. What is your general notion of her merits? I ask this because
you see we have broken ground at last on the subject of the greater
poets of our age,6 & it is therefore more necessary than heretofore that
we should maintain in our future judgments, a consistency with what we
have said in the literary articles of this number.

I believe Schmidt-Phiseldek is a very good view of Kant.7

I sympathize in your annoyance about your house.8 How the vices of
English law shew themselves in every relation of civil life.

I am slowly getting rid of my ailment. To accelerate the cure I am going
for a short time to Brighton—probably on [Thurs]day.

What would you think of a historical subject? That is the kind of
articles we now most want—for the first time we are at length able,
though by no means desirous, to give you a holiday in pure literature.
But there is a noble field open in European history which hardly any of
our writers are able to tread.

I am delighted that you approve of my “Civilization.”9

Ever yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April, 1836

Brighton

Henry Mill

Mill, Henry

171.


TO HENRY MILL1

[
Brighton

,
April, 1836

]

There seems to be a change considerably for the better in my bodily
state within the last three days; whether it will last, I cannot yet
tell; nor do I know whether the place has contributed towards it, as the
more genial weather of yesterday and to-day is probably the chief cause.
[He then says Edition: current; Page: [304] that he will continue his
stay if the improvement goes on, but is reluctant to be long absent,
partly on account of his father’s illness and partly on account of his
tutoring “Mary and George”. He trusts to Henry to keep him informed on
the state of matters, and if he can be of any use to his father, he will
forego the present advantages and trust to getting well as the summer
advances.]

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

27th April 1836

Brighton

Alexis de Tocqueville

de Tocqueville, Alexis

172.


TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1

[
Brighton

]

27th April 1836

.

My dear Tocqueville,

You must be surprised that I did not immediately answer your letter—& so
I would, if it had not found me ill & in bed—I have been in indifferent
health all the winter & have lately had a short attack of rather a
sharper kind. I now write to you from Brighton where I have come to try
to get well—& I am just now too tired to write in French, but for that I
need not apologize to you, though I ought for the shortness of this
note.—As for the delay of your second article in the Review—I am less
sorry for that than I am glad of the cause—I anticipate from the
continuation of “La Démocratie” a more than ordinary share of the
pleasure & instruction your writings always give me—I have more to learn
of the influence of Democracy on private life & individual character
than of its influence on political interests & you have taught me so
much on the last that I hope you will teach me still more on the first.

Your article in the review though generally considered a little abstract
(as the people here say of anything which is consecutive & methodical)
has on the whole been very successful here; all who have read it admire
it, & its successors are likely to have a still more numerous class of
readers as they will relate to circumstances of more immediate &
contemporaneous interest. Though we should have liked much to have had
the second in our next number, we can very well wait for it till the
number after, & should accept it most thankfully however long it might
be delayed. The only thing that embarrasses us is—we want to review
Bulwer’s France2 & cannot do it because we cannot interfere with a
subject which we wish to have entirely in your hands. Could you—I will
not ask you to suspend your labours even for a day—but could you
persuade Beaumont or any other judicious friend, to send us a few
cursory remarks on Bulwer’s book which Edition: current; Page: [305] we
might work up into an article of our own—of course not entering
philosophically into the subject, as that will be so much better done by
you—we only wish to do justice to what is useful & meritorious in the
book, & to correct any gross errors. Do not however give yourself any
trouble or gêne about this, but I am sure your friendship will not feel
itself taxed by my asking your advice how we may best treat Bulwer’s
book.

A letter which must have reached you immediately after writing your last
will have explained to you about the 600 francs which were as much a
debt as anything could be, though we were almost ashamed to offer you so
mere a trifle—I will write again soon—I always say so, but this time you
shall find me as good as my word.

Yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

(May), 1836

Brighton

Henry Mill

Mill, Henry

173.


TO HENRY MILL1

[
Brighton

(May?), 1836

]

[John was at Brighton for his own health during his father’s last
illness; but wrote assiduously to Henry, to know whether his hurrying
back would be of any use.] As to my father, tell me as fully as you can
how he is, both as to his illness itself, and as to spirits, and what
you think would be pleasantest to him; not what he would wish or say out
of kindness to me.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

15th June 1836

India House

Alexis de Tocqueville

de Tocqueville, Alexis

174.


TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1

India House

15th June 1836

.

My dear Tocqueville,

Many thanks for your very kind note. I would not on any consideration be
the cause of your interrupting for ever so short a time, meditations so
important to the world as those must be which are to give rise to the
second part of La Démocratie en Amérique. We have ample time before us,
as it is already too late for the July number of the review, & perhaps
Beaumont will be able to finish his article in time for the 30th of
September. Will you oblige me by offering to him my best thanks for his
kindness in having undertaken & commenced an article of so much
importance to us & my warmest congratulations & wishes for his
happiness.2

Edition: current; Page: [306]
There is not much happiness in our home at present. My father is sinking
to his grave under a lingering pulmonary complaint—I fear there is no
chance of his recovery. My own complaint does not cause me any
uneasiness, it is slight, & not painful, & there is nothing serious in
it but its obstinacy. It has hitherto resisted all remedies—if I should
be obliged to travel, which I think not unlikely I must I fear go
further off than Paris or any part of the north of France—not so much
for climate as for a complete change of scene—.

I will write soon again at greater length.

Yours ever faithfully,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday June 25, 1836

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

175.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

Friday
 [
June 25, 1836

]

There is nothing, that I am aware of, my dear Mütterlein, that requires
the help you so kindly offer—we have been so long expecting this that
most of the necessary arrangements were made, or ready to be made, at
once. But you may be sure that if we do need anything which you can do
for us there is no one we would more confidently apply to.

I am grieved that Mr. Austin is again ill—I thought him so well
yesterday. He will receive an invitation to the funeral, but of course
he will not come if he is ill or if it is inconvenient.

Your proposal about Derry2 is very kind but quite impracticable—some
time hence such a thing might be beneficial to him—but now I am sure he
would dislike to leave us & his younger brothers & sisters would be made
quite unhappy by his absence—he is their great friend, companion and
teacher. We mean to send them all to Mickleham directly—where all,
especially Derry, are anxious to go. If I should be obliged to travel
for a longer time than a month or two I shall take the two boys with me
for the whole or part of the time.3

Ever affectionately yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [307]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wednesday July 20, 1836

I.H.

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

176.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

I.H.

Wednesday
 [
July 20(?), 1836

]

My dear Carlyle My annotations, & proposed alterations in phraseology,
amount as you will see, to but little; less than I expected—& you will
probably think most of them trifling. My object has been to remove, when
it can be done without sacrifice, anything merely quaint in the mode of
expression—but I have very often not ventured to touch it for fear of
spoiling something which I could not replace. The only general remark I
have to make on the stile is that I think it would often tell better on
the reader if what is said in an abrupt, exclamatory, & interjectional
manner were said in the ordinary grammatical mode of nominative &
verb—but on that as on everything else I ask nothing but that you will
deal with it as you like, disregarding all my observations if you do not
think them just—& in any case that you will not make the thing an
annoyance to you. It is quite good enough & too good for us as it is.

Ever faithfully yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

3 August 1836

Paris

Clara Mill

Mill, Clara

177.


TO CLARA MILL1

Paris

3 August 1836

One having written to W[illie] & one to H[arriet] I must write to
Clara—so here goes—We are all quite as well, perhaps rather better than
was to be expected. George & Henry do not seem at all struck with
Paris—they are I think too young to care much about it or to be
impressed by it at all. Edition: current; Page: [308] They seemed
pleased with the country, & on the whole their excursion has been
hitherto tolerably successful. But the only piece of thorough solid
delight that George seemed to have was in meeting with a playfellow2
about his own age whom he likes & who likes him very much. Nothing is
settled yet about our travelling further—it is not finally settled
whether we shall go alone or with our friends here, much less when we
shall go & how—the places are all taken by the diligence for nearly a
week to come, & posting so far is very expensive—but we shall see. One
thing seems certain—that both Derry & I can stand travelling. We have
not tried any night work to be sure yet. We will write you again from
Geneva.

ever affectionately yours

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 4, 1836

Paris

Mrs. James Mill

Mill, Mrs. James

178.


TO MRS. JAMES MILL1

[
Paris

]

[
Nov. 4, 1836

]

As we shall so soon be at Kensington there is not much to write. I have
no doubt you did the best you could as to the house, & the sale;2 & as
the house is taken we will stay there till we can find another that we
thoroughly like—& as we do not know how long it may be first, I shall
have the bookshelves put up. You may as well do it before I come unless
you have any doubt how I should like it to be done. I am much the same
as to health—my head is often rather bad, otherwise I am as well almost
as I ever was.

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 9, 1836

Lundi

Alexis De

De, Alexis

179.


TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1

Lundi

.

[
Nov. 9, 1836

]

Après avoir été bien près de vous en Suisse, mon cher Tocqueville, sans
vous rencontrer, j’arrive à Paris et vous êtes encore à la campagne,
ainsi Edition: current; Page: [309] que Beaumont, et par là je me trouve
privé du plaisir de voir, pendant le très peu de jours que je reste ici,
presque les deux seules personnes que je tenais beaucoup à y trouver. Je
regrette beaucoup de ne pas vous voir, et j’aurais voulu vous voir à
Paris—nous ne nous sommes encore connus qu’en Angleterre, et cela aurait
aidé à combler le vide que laisse pour moi à Paris la mort funeste de
Carrel2—le seul homme en France, execpté vous, mon cher Tocqueville,
pour qui je ressentais une véritable admiration—et cependant vous savez
que j’aime les Français—la nation en général, et un grand nombre d’entre
eux en particulier. J’ai à vous dire mille choses, mais avant tout j’ai
à vous demander comment va la deuxième partie de la Démocratie. Je
l’attends avec impatience, pour les lumières qu’elle répandra sur bien
des questions dans mon propre esprit, pour le bien qu’elle fera à notre
siècle et aux temps à venir, et pour l’intérêt que je porte à votre
gloire. Je crains que votre voyage en Suisse, dont j’ai appris avec
peine le motif n’ait dû retarder un peu la complétion de votre tâche.
Moi-meme j’ai été forcé de suspendre mes travaux par des motifs de
santé, et de faire un voyage en Suisse et en Italie, qui m’a fait du
bien mais qui ne m’a pas guéri; mon mal pourtant n’a rien de très
sérieux, c’est un dérangement local de la circulation du sang dans la
partie droite de la tête; il a duré une année, c’est ma première
maladie, mais elle se montre obstinée et il faut que je me résigne à la
subir. Je m’y accoutume peu à peu et je crois que cela ne m’empêchera
pas de travailler beaucoup cet hiver. Je suis assez content de la
livraison de la revue qui a paru dans mon absence; je ne l’ai vue que
chez Bennis,3 depuis mon arrivée à Paris; mais comme, moi absent, on
néglige tout, il s’est trouvé qu’on a négligé d’envoyer des exemplaires
à nos amis d’ici et entre autres à Beaumont et à vous; je vais écrire à
Londres pour mettre ordre à cela: dans huit jours vous aurez des
exemplaires. Nous aurions bien besoin de votre secours pour le prochain
numero; mais si votre grand travail n’est pas encore achevé, nous ne
sommes pas assez peu modestes pour vous en demander. Seulement je vous
engage beaucoup à faire usage de votre influence auprès de notre ami
Beaumont pour tirer de lui un article ou au moins des notes sur la
“France” de M. Henry Bulwer.4 Tout en faisant de la haute philosophie
historique sur la France au moyen de vos articles, nous voudrions en
même temps nous trouver dans le cas de rectifier en passant les erreurs
qu’on commet en écrivant sur la France, et rendre justice à ce qu’il y a
de bon (et il y en a beaucoup) dans les idées de M. Bulwer. Nous ne
pouvons pas faire cela sans la coopération de nos amis en France et j’ai
une confiance dans les jugements de Beaumont que ne m’inspirerait nul
autre à qui je pourrais m’adresser, confiance qui est due autant à son
propre mérite Edition: current; Page: [310] qu’à l’étroite union qui
existe entre lui et vous, union qui lui donne toujours l’occasion et
l’habitude de comparer ses idées avec les vôtres. J’ai lu chez Bennis
deux notices sur la Démocratie: l’une dans le Quarterly Review, qui est
évidemment de Basil Hall;5 tout ce qu’il a mis de lui est pitoyable,
mais heureusement il y a mis beaucoup de vous, et il parle de vous et du
livre comme il le doit. L’autre article est du North American Review;6
j’attendais celui-là avec beaucoup d’intérêt pour savoir le parti que
prendraient les écrivains américains sur le livre: j’ai été très content
de voir que l’article est fait dans un esprit favorable; on y dit
seulement que vous généralisez quelquefois un peu trop, et j’aurais
voulu qu’on eût dit en quoi. A propos, j’observe que le American
Quarterly Review, dans sa dernière livraison, s’élève très fortement
contre le système des pledges:7 cela m’a charmé, d’autant plus que cette
revue passe (n’est-ce pas?) pour être démocrate, et pas fédéraliste
comme le North American.

Ecrivez-moi vite, je vous prie: je serai ici pour deux ou trois jours.
Parlez-moi de votre santé, de celle de Madame de Tocqueville, de vos
travaux, de vos idées sur l’état de choses actuel et de sa durée
probable; parlez-moi aussi de Beaumont et enfin de ce que vous ou lui
pourrez faire pour la revue.

Avez-vous vu Senior en Suisse? Vous savez qu’il est Master in Chancery8
et très content de l’être. Cela le rend plus riche et plus indépendant
aussi.

Tout à vous mon cher Tocqueville.

J. S. Mill.

Hôtel Mirabeau, rue de la Paix

.
 (Compiègne November 9 1835.)9

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

22d Novr 1836

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

180.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

.

22d Novr 1836

My dear Guilbert

I write to you in great haste, to say that I have this day directed
Messrs Prescott & Grote & Co to remit to you £25. I presume it will be
receivable at Delamarre’s as usual.

Edition: current; Page: [311]
If your article2 is to be inserted in the forthcoming number, we must
not only have the article itself by the 15th of December, but we must
have it soon enough to be translated before the 15th of December.

With many apologies for the brevity & abruptness of this note believe me
my dear Guilbert

Ever yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

23d November 1836

India House

Edward Lytton Bulwer

Lytton Bulwer, Edward

181.


TO EDWARD LYTTON BULWER1

India House

23d November
1836

My dear Sir

I have just returned from an absence of nearly four months on the
Continent, rendered necessary by an obstinate though in no way alarming
indisposition, which has lasted for more than a twelvemonth & which
together with another far more melancholy circumstance2 had obliged me
during that period to put aside all occupations which could be dispensed
with & among other things to leave my friend Molesworth’s review3 very
much to shift for itself. Now, when I am sufficiently recovered to be
able to revert to my former interests & pursuits, one of the things I am
most concerned about is how the greatest value & efficiency may be given
to that review—& I am sure that I speak the sentiments of all connected
with it, when I say that nothing would conduce so much to either end as
your hearty cooperation, if we could be so fortunate as to obtain it. I
have, since my return, read your article on Sir Thomas Browne4 with an
admiration I have seldom felt for any English writings on such
subjects—I did not know, at the time, that it was yours, & could not
conceive what new accession had come to the Edinburgh Review. I first
thought it might possibly be Macaulay’s, but as I read on I felt it to
be far too good for him—it has much of the same brilliancy, but not his
affected and antithetical stile, & above all a perception of truth,
which he never seems to have, & a genuine love of the True & the
Beautiful, the absence of which in him, Edition: current; Page: [312] is
the reason why among his thousands of clever things & brilliant things
there are so few true things—& hardly one which is the whole truth, &
nothing but the truth. I could not help saying to myself, who would look
for these qualities in the Edinburgh Review? how the readers of that
review must be puzzled & bewildered by a writer who actually takes
decided views, who is positively in earnest, & is capable of downright
admiration & even enthusiasm! I am sure your writing must be lost upon
them; they are not people who can recognise or care about truth; your
beautiful things will be to them merely clever things & amusing things
comme tant d’autres. Among us you would at least find both writers and
readers who are in earnest. I grant that you, & such writing as yours,
would be nearly as much out of place in our review as it has been, as in
the Edinburgh: but not, as I hope it will hereafter be. As good may be
drawn out of evil—the event which has deprived the world of the man of
greatest philosophical genius it possessed5 & the review (if such little
interests may be spoken of by the side of great ones) of its most
powerful writer, & the only one to whose opinions the editors were
obliged to defer—that same event has made it far easier to do that, in
the hope of which alone I allowed myself to become connected with the
review—namely to soften the harder & sterner features of its radicalism
and utilitarianism, both which in the form in which they originally
appeared in the Westminster, were part of the inheritance of the 18th
century. The Review ought to represent not radicalism but neoradicalism,
a radicalism which is not democracy, not a bigotted adherence to any
forms of government or to one kind of institutions, & which is only to
be called radicalism inasmuch as it does not palter nor compromise with
evils but cuts at their roots—& a utilitarianism which takes into
account the whole of human nature not the ratiocinative faculty only—the
utilitarianism which never makes any peculiar figure as such, nor would
ever constitute its followers a sect or school—which fraternizes with
all who hold the same axiomata media (as Bacon has it) whether their
first principle is the same or not—& which holds in the highest
reverence all which the vulgar notion of utilitarians represents them to
despise—which holds Feeling at least as valuable as Thought, & Poetry
not only on a par with, but the necessary condition of, any true &
comprehensive Philosophy. I know I am writing very loosely & expressing
myself very ill—but you will understand me—& as I have, through
Molesworth’s confidence in me, complete power over that review whenever
I chuse to exercise it, I hope you will believe, that if the review has
hitherto been too much in the old stile of radical-utilitarianism with
which you cannot possibly sympathize very strongly (nor I either) it is
because the only persons, who could be depended upon as writers, were
those whose writings would not tend to give it any other tone. Edition:
current; Page: [313] My object will now be to draw together a body of
writers resembling the old school of radicals only in being on the
Movement side, in philosophy, morality, & art as well as in politics &
socialities—& to keep the remnant of the old school (it is dying out) in
their proper place, by letting them write only about the things which
they understand. But this attempt must fail unless those who could
assist it, will. Why should you not write, for us, a series of articles
on the old English writers, similar to that on Browne? They would be
quite invaluable to us: we have not among our habitual writers any who
could be trusted to write on such subjects—those who would have enough
of the requisite feelings & talents, have not the requisite reading. We
have now, since the junction with the Westminster, readers enough to
make it worth while; & readers who are in earnest, readers by whom what
you write would be taken au sérieux & not as a mere play of intellect &
fancy. Your writing for us need not hinder you from writing for the
Edinburgh also if you like it—but I am sure you must often feel that not
to be a fitting vehicle for anything not of a stationary character
either in literature or politics—passe encore if you could hope by your
writings to modify the character of the work itself—but that is
hopeless. Now among us you could.

Do pray think of it & tell me the result of your thought. The time is
evidently approaching when the radicals will once more be a distinct
party & when people will look to the review as their organ—& much will
depend upon its being an organ which represents the best part of them
and not the narrowest & most repulsive.

Ever yours faithfully,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday Nov. 29, 1836

I.H.

Edward Lytton Bulwer

Lytton Bulwer, Edward

182.


TO EDWARD LYTTON BULWER1

I.H.

Tuesday
 [
Nov. 29, 1836

]

My dear Bulwer—Accept my best thanks for the kind expressions in your
letter. Nothing could be more gratifying to me than the whole tone of it
& I could not be so unreasonable as to ask, under the circumstances you
mention, for any greater degree of immediate cooperation than that which
Edition: current; Page: [314] you so kindly offer. I have been long
looking for your work on Athens,2 & rejoice in the prospect of its being
out so soon. If it be not delayed longer than the time you mention we
may perhaps hope for something from you for our April number? Everyone
who writes criticism worthy the name, must write it as you say “slowly &
with great labour” for it is precisely, of all things, that which it is
most difficult to write well, & which is least supportable when
slovenly—but a greater number & variety of important truths, (truths too
with their application annexed) may be thrown into circulation in that
way than in almost any other mode of writing. Though I shall in common
with most people lose a great deal of pleasure when you leave off
writing romances, it is still very good news that you are looking
forward to an early time at which your powers will be devoted—I will not
say to nobler, or more important objects, for Politics are not
intrinsically nobler, & as usually pursued are far less noble than Art,
but at least to objects of more pressing exigency, & where there is a
wider field of usefulness open just at the present time. Nobody can
doubt that whenever you do make politics & the things which are to be
effected through politics, your principal object—& pursue that object
with the energy & perseverance which you have so conspicuously shewn in
the application of the same powers to other objects—there is a place
reserved for you in the political history of this country which will not
be a humble one.

If you do not find the atmosphere of the L. & W. Review more & more
congenial to you it will not be my fault. Even at present when bad
things are put in, it is not because they are liked, but for want of
better—your aid, to whatever degree afforded, much more if (may I say,
when) it may hereafter be habitually afforded, would of itself
supersede, & displace much that it would be very desirable to see
displaced. It would also conduce extremely to the success of the review,
but the great thing is that it would conduce, more than any other
literary assistance I can think of, to render the review what it is not
now even in the slightest degree, an organ of real literary & social
criticism.

What you say of the radi[cal]s3 is too true—but I think they are, now,
bestirring th[em]selves in all quarters—& as their jealousy is, I think,
chiefly the natural carping of those who do nothing against all which is
done, as they grow more active they may shake it off. The most active
among them are the least capable of jealousy even now. I think they
would all follow a good leader & would not be jealous of one whose power
they felt & saw to be exerted in their behalf. They are really sincere
men, & would value a man who worked vigorously in the cause.

Ever yours faithfully,

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [315]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

3rd December 1836

I.H.

Sir William Molesworth

Molesworth, Sir William

183.


TO SIR WILLIAM MOLESWORTH1

I.H.

3rd December 1836

Dear Molesworth,

I send you some more of your article.2 Do not be frightened at the
number of pencil marks. This part bears the proof of being more hastily
written than the preceding part. The ideas are not presented in so lucid
an order. My suggestions will do something to do this: but you probably
could do more.

You have, I believe, an article of Bisset’s on the Universities: is it
good for anything? would you send it for me to see?

I want your permission to propose you for the Political Economy Club.
What think you of it?

Ever yours

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1836

David Barclay

Barclay, David

184.


TO DAVID BARCLAY1

[
1836

]

The chief points are the time and place of his birth; who and what his
parents were, and anything interesting that there may be to state about
them: what places of education he went to: for what professions he was
educated. I believe he went through a medical course, and also that for
the Church, and I have heard that he was actually licensed as a
preacher, but I never heard him say so himself, and never heard of it
till after his death. I do not know whether it is true or not; perhaps
you do. How long did he remain at the University, or prosecute his
studies for the Church? The history of his connection with the late Sir
John Stuart.2

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

184A.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE (see page 743)

Edition: current; Page: [316]


1837

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

7 Jan. 1837

Alexis de Tocqueville

de Tocqueville, Alexis

185.


TO ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE1

7 Jan. 1837

.

My dear Tocqueville,

This is the first moment in which I have been able, with any comfort to
myself, to take up my pen in order to write to you. And now, it is
rather to ask for news of you than to say anything from myself. I am
anxious to hear how you are getting on with the second part of La
Démocratie—& when there is a likelihood of its appearance. I look
forward with great eagerness to the pleasure first of reading it, & next
of reviewing it. A propos, it would be of the greatest importance to the
London & Westminster Review, to be the first English periodical that
contained a notice of it, & if that notice could be given before the
publication of the work, it would be a very great benefit to us indeed.
Would this be possible? Could you send it to me in sheets? Or even by
piecemeal, in order that I might be studying it & preparing myself to
have an article ready at the first moment. One of the great secrets of
success for a review in this country, is to have early notices of books
that excite a general interest, & as often as possible to notice them
before publication. Murray continually keeps back the books which he
publishes, in order that the article in the Quarterly Review may precede
the book it reviews.

The number of the review which has just appeared, & which if you have
not yet received you soon shall, will I think interest you very much.
The first article2 in it is a coup de parti, a manifesto as we say of
the radicals (or rather for the radicals) on the subject of the
Whigs—intended to awaken the slumbering energy of the radical leaders, &
to force the Whigs to take a decided part. It is written by Sir W.
Molesworth, who has been making a considerable figure for the last few
months—if you have seen English papers during that time. You will have
marked the gradual development of the plan which he & several other of
the radical members Edition: current; Page: [317] have formed and are
executing. I think them quite right. Whatever may be the appearances do
not suppose that the mass of the middle & working classes are
indifferent to the movement: they seem so, because, at elections &
otherwise, everything they do for reform costs them immense sacrifices
of their personal interests, sacrifices which they are ready to make for
a great object but not for a small one. If any ministry would now bring
forward the ballot, they would excite greater enthusiasm than even that
which was excited for the Reform Bill. But as matters stand, the Whigs’
majority is slipping away from them, & nothing will keep the Tories long
out of power except either the adoption by the Whigs of a more radical
policy, or the rise among the radicals themselves of able & energetic
leaders, acting quite independently of the Whigs, as Molesworth,
Roebuck, Leader & others are doing now. Of these two outlets from our
false position, if we can but gain the last, we shall soon have the
first two. You will soon see the ballot a cabinet measure, & then reform
will have finally triumphed: the aristocratical principle will be
completely annihilated, & we shall enter into a new era of government.
The approaching session will be next to that of 1830/1831, the most
important since 1688—& parties will stand quite differently at the
commencement & at the close of it.

Did you see Buller when he was at Paris? I have seen him but once since
his return, & forgot to ask him. He arrived at Paris, & at the very
hotel where I was, the day after I had left it. He will I think play a
very conspicuous part hereafter in our politics—he rose exceedingly in
public estimation last year. At present his rôle is that of a mutual
friend, or conciliator, between the Whigs & radicals—it is very
desirable that there should be such a person, & he is well suited to the
character. As for your politics—they seem to be still in the same torpid
state.

I send today, to Beaumont, through the embassy, a very important
pamphlet on Ireland, by the Secretary to the late Commission of Poor Law
Enquiry.3 I am not able to send a letter along with it, for I positively
have not time. Pray make my excuses to him & tell him that it would be
of the greatest use to the review if he (or you) would furnish at least
notes for a review of Bulwer’s book.4

Is there a chance of your coming here soon? I hope very much that we
shall have Beaumont for a few months in the spring. Ever, my dear
Tocqueville, yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

India House

.

Edition: current; Page: [318]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday Jan., 1837

18 Kensington Square

Edward Lytton Bulwer

Lytton Bulwer, Edward

186.


TO EDWARD LYTTON BULWER1

18 Kensington Square

Saturday
 [
Jan., 1837

]

My dear Sir—Your note found me laid up with the influenza, which must be
my excuse for not having immediately answered it. I had not previously
contemplated a review of LaValliere,2 for the same reason which has
prevented our reviewing any former writing of yours: a critical estimate
of you & your works was too serious a task to be lightly ventured upon,
& your reputation had long passed the stage at which the cursory notice
of a review could promote the success of any of your writings. However
since an occasion has arisen on which you think that something we can do
may be of service, the case is altered, & since I received your note I
have been considering what would be the best way of having it done. I
have good hopes, & I can promise that nothing shall prevent it, unless
the very few persons who could do it as it ought to be done, should all
fail me.3

There can be but one opinion as to the attacks in the Times;4 those in
the Spectator5 I have not seen: but nobody can well doubt that if such a
play as LaValliere had been written by anybody against whom there was no
personal or political jealousy or hostility it would have obtained the
loud encomiums of the whole press. You can however well afford to
despise such attacks. Nobody whose judgment one cares for pays the least
regard to the theatrical criticisms of newspapers—how they may affect
the playgoing public I do not know.

I have been looking impatiently for some token of the appearance of
“Athens”6—& did not like to say anything more to you about articles till
I was sure that was off your hands but I have been thinking very much
about subjects, & now when your most welcome announcement comes, I can
suggest two, viz. Goldsmith, (Prior’s Life)7 & Cowper, a propos of the
two new editions of him.8 Either would be an excellent subject for an
article of Edition: current; Page: [319] philosophical & imaginative
criticism. But I have no preference for them, if you should like
anything else better, especially any old writer.

Molesworth has not measured his words very scrupulously,9 but the object
was to act upon the radicals, who are people not easily moved. He wanted
to give them a violent shake, in order to set them going. You will not
find him at all intemperate now, or in the least desirous of turning out
the ministry.

Ever yours faithfully

J. S. Mill.

I am concerned to see your note edged with black—whom have you lost?

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan., 1837

18 Kensington Square

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

187.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

18 Kensington Square

[
Jan., 1837

]

I hope our Poor Law offences2 have not made it hopeless to induce you to
write for us a notice of Bulwer’s play3—no one but you can do it in the
only way in which it ought to be done, that of setting the stage in its
proper position of worthiness, and encouraging the best writers to write
for it. Bulwer wishes that we should notice it, because he is rather
more sore than need be at the newspaper attacks, & thinks his play needs
support against them—if it can need support against such attacks it
should have it. You I believe think highly of the play—& if so there
would be nothing to guard against, except that we should not seem to be
paying him in puffs for an article of his which we shall probably have
in the very same number—& that we should not seem to sanction as much as
is merely conventional in the morality of that LaValliere story—but this
is a point on which it is quite unnecessary to say anything to you—

You have no conception how much you would oblige me if you could manage
to do it—though I know well what it is to ask more work from an
overworked person—

I am here laid up by influenza, & have been so for some days.

J.S.M.

Edition: current; Page: [320]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday Jan. 27, 1837

18 Kensington Square

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

188.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

18 Kensington Square

Friday
 [
Jan. 27, 1837

]

I feel the position you are in with regard to Horne2—& all the rest of
what you say on that subject. I feel it to my cost too. What to do I do
not know. There is not a creature living who would do that for me, &
whom I could trust to do it, unless it be you. Is there no remedy? could
I in any way forward it? is there anything I could do for your paper3
that would give you a few hours respite from it? or is there no hope?

I put “our” to the “poor law offences”4 because it would be cowardly
not, since I am as much responsible for them as any one can be. I hope
you believe without my saying it, that I should not have put the article
in, if it had appeared to me as it does to you, personally disrespectful
to yourself—& this not because you are a contributor, but because you
are you. The two between whom you are placed5 may be “thieves”—I do not
know them—& if so, it is natural you should feel offended—but I am
persuaded the writer of the article does not think them such; in fact he
compliments one of them, & I have reason to think, has a good opinion of
at least the intentions of both. Neither did it seem to me that the
T[rue] S[un] was spoken of disparagingly on the whole, though a
difference of opinion was expressed with much warmth on a particular
point.

I differ from you as entirely as the writer does, on the Poor Law
question, & on a whole class of questions therewith connected. Nor have
your articles in answer to the review, though I recognize in them your
best & most effective stile of discussion, at all narrowed the
difference between us, but rather widened it. But I hope there is no
reason against letting this be an “open question” both among radicals &
among London reviewers.

J.S.M.

I am not out yet—I mean not at the I.H. but I shall on Monday, I hope.
she6 is much better—how are you & yours?

Edition: current; Page: [321]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

28th January 1837

18 Kensington Square

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

189.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

18 Kensington Square

28th January 1837

My dear Mütterlein—I could not send you the review last month, as I
could not get a copy soon enough. If you ever see English newspapers,
you will have seen that Molesworth’s article2 has been making
considerable noise—as indeed it ought. His letters, speeches, & conduct
in all respects for the last three months, have raised every one’s
opinion extremely of his talents & caractère & made him a sort of hero
of the day—which however he is not intoxicated by, but as docile &
modest as any one can well be.

You may wonder that I have been so long in writing to you—though after
all, I write first: but you would not wonder if you knew the endless
drudgery I have had upon my hands, with arrears of India house business,
& private affairs, without counting review matters or any other writing.
I came back with my general health & strength everything that could be
wished for, though the complaint in my head, as a mere local affection,
did not give way & is still nearly as troublesome as ever;3 that is,
would be troublesome if I had not learnt not to mind it. I saw
Switzerland well, & Milan & the Italian lakes, & Piemont & the bay of
Genoa thoroughly, but could not get further unless I had chosen to pass
a fortnight in a lazaretto. Pray tell Mr Lewis4 that I gave his present
to M. Lacroix5 at Nice whom I found a very obliging good natured old
gentleman & liked very much: he spoke with much regard of Mr Lewis.

I have heard nothing of you, any of you, subsequent to your arrival at
Malta—& wish very much to hear of everything which concerns you but
especially about Mr Austin’s health. I wish to ask his advice too about
an inscription on a marble slab we are going to erect in the church
where my father was buried. Nobody’s opinion in such a matter would be
of a tithe of the value of Mr Austin’s, & I certainly will not do
anything in the matter without his approbation. What has occurred to me
is, to add after the usual particulars, these words—

-   

    “His life was one of consistent usefulness,
-   

    and history will appreciate its results.
-   

    His works are his best monument.”

Edition: current; Page: [322]
If Mr Austin does not like this, or not so well as any other, perhaps he
could in some interval of his laborious duties, find five minutes to
think of something better—He perhaps alone of all persons living is as
much interested in the matter as I am.

There is a review just started called the “Church of England review” the
first number of which contains an attack on Lewis’s last article6—pray
tell him this. I have not seen it.

I can tell you little of any one in whom you are interested—for I see
nobody but those who come to me. I have time to go to nobody. I must
except Carlyle who has finished his book7 & is in great joy thereat—not
for any hope he may have of its success, but for having done with it.

I do hope I shall hear from you some time—though I am a bad
correspondent I am always your Söhnchen

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

29th January, 1837

18, Kensington Square

John Pringle Nichol

Pringle Nichol, John

190.


TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1

18, Kensington Square

,

29th January, 1837

.

My dear Nichol,

You must think me sadly neglectful of you, for I have not written to you
a single line since that from Milan, although I knew how much you would
wish to hear something about my health, at least. My excuse is, the
quite oppressive weight of business I find resting on me. Till now I
never knew what it was to be a thorough mechanical drudge. The
accumulation of India House business from my long absence, and slack
performance of duty for nearly a year previous, leaves me none of the
occasional hours and days of respite I used to have there; above three
hours a day are taken up by exercise; my occupations, pecuniary,
preceptorial and other connected with my several trusts as executor,
guardian, and so forth, take up much time; and I have not needed your
caution against writing much for the Review, for the mere mechanical
drudgery connected with editorship has so filled up the chinks of my
time that I have hardly written a line since I returned. You saw the
very little I wrote for the last number;2 even that was all prepared
last spring, though I had not put any of it on paper. And then you would
hardly believe the quantity of letters I have to write—further, Edition:
current; Page: [323] I am general referee, and chamber counsel to
Molesworth and others of the active Radicals—whenever anything is to be
done, I am to be asked whether it is right—whenever anybody is to be
moved to do anything, I am to be moved first to move him—then I have to
prepare myself for the Political Economy club every month—in short this
will not do—and shall not. As for my health—I returned with my head no
better,3 but my general health and strength quite restored—nor has my
head got at all worse since; indeed, no quantity of thinking or writing
affects it at all; reading India House papers, beyond a certain number
of hours, affects it, but on the whole I have to keep any tendency to
increase (if there be any) completely under. I have not contrived,
however, to keep off the influenza, which has run through our family as
through most others, and has kept me in confinement here for the last
fortnight, with cough, catarrh, sore throat, feverishness, and
disordered stomach, the usual pleasures which accompany it. I have got
quite rid of it now, or next thing to it, and shall go to the India
House to-morrow to resume my drudgery.

And you—how are you? and what are you thinking of? Your class,4 of
course, in the first instance, but that can give you so little trouble
that you cannot need to think of it much. What think you of the last
number of the Review? What of the aspect of politics? What do people in
your part of Scotland think of the Molesworth controversy?5 Here there
is a great outcry against Molesworth by all the Whigs and the timid
Radicals, but for all that those very Radicals are making note of
preparation for the active and unshackled line of conduct which
Molesworth inculcates, and which they never would have felt themselves
either prompted or compelled to if he, or some person of mark, had not
taken a decided position, and so forced them to do the like. Whoever
takes a step boldly in advance, risks much for himself, but is sure to
do good to his cause. One thing is certain, Molesworth has greatly
raised his character for judgment and tact—all those letters of his he
wrote down in Cornwall with nobody near him to consult except Leader,6
and yet how skilfully they were all worded—not a false step, except,
indeed, that pettish letter to Fonblanque,7—and there he saw his error,
and has since sent an ample apology, and they are now friends and will
soon be allies. He is trying to form a party. I do not Edition: current;
Page: [324] know what chance he has. Hume and Grote are with him, and
Hume will act up to what he professes; whether Grote will, time only can
show; Grote’s was a good speech at the dinner.8 You probably have not
heard Molesworth’s last move; he refused to go to the dinner at Leeds
because the Radicals and Whigs jointly had sent resolutions to him
pledging him to support ministers. He told them what kind of support
alone he could give; thereupon they held a meeting, and the Radicals
carried resolutions by an immense majority against the Whigs, concurring
completely in his views, and sent a deputation to him to communicate
them. This has broken the union of parties at Leeds, but he has the
Whigs in his hands, for if he stands and does not turn out Beckett9 he
will turn out Baines,10 therefore, the Whigs must end by coming to a
decided coalition with him. I do think something will come out of the
Radical party in this session, but I cannot foresee exactly what. I
often wish I were among them; now would be the time for knitting
together a powerful party, and nobody holds the scattered threads of it
in his hands except me. But that cannot be while I am in the India
House. I should not at all mind leaving it if I had £300 a year free
from anxiety and literary labour, but I have at most £100. Sed tempus
veniet. Write to me soon.

Yours affectionately,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday Feb. 9, 1837

I.H.

Francis Place

Place, Francis

191.


TO FRANCIS PLACE1

I.H.

Thursday.
 [
Feb. 9(?), 1837

]

Dear Place

I do not above half like Roebuck’s speech2—but friends, & radicals,
should stand by one another—& therefore if it be decided to reprint the
speech, there shall be no obstacle from the want of a pound from me.

Edition: current; Page: [325]
I heartily wish that those who did such great things for the Stamp
Question3 would set about doing the same thing for the Ballot. It seems
to me of infinite importance that Grote’s motion4 this year, should be
preceded by a strong demonstration from the country in the form of
public meetings & petitions. There are a hundred reasons for this, which
to you, I need not state. Perhaps with the ballot might be joined repeal
of the rate paying clauses—& if they were also to moot the question of a
new schedule A for the small boroughs (where the ballot would have no
effect)—either abolishing those boroughs, or throwing them (together
with other unrepresented towns) into districts of boroughs, like the
Scotch & Welsh—so much the better. I would not meddle with household
suffrage at present. It raises enemies & does no good that would not be
done by repealing the ratepaying clauses, though this appears so much
smaller a change. Do not you think it was injudicious in Hume5 to give
notice of a motion for household suffrage?

Yours ever

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday Feb. 9, 1837

I. H.

Francis Place

Place, Francis

192.


TO FRANCIS PLACE1

I. H.

Thursday
 [
Feb. 9(?), 1837

]

My dear Place

I am very glad to hear of the Ballot meeting—there should be a Common
Hall, after the Westr meeting.

If you lose that £10, or any part if it, I will ask permission to divide
the loss with you.2

The meeting should not merely vote resolutions & a petition, but should
name a deputation to go to Lord Melbourne & Lord John Russell & badger
them on the subject. That is the way to bring them to terms—but I am
speaking to you who know all these things far better than I do

ever yours

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [326]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday Feb. 10, 1837

I.H.

Francis Place

Place, Francis

193.


TO FRANCIS PLACE1

I.H.

Friday
 [
Feb. 10, 1837

]

My dear Place

It is disgraceful that those who rendered so great a service should be
out of pocket.2 Since there is a loss I must be allowed to bear my part
of it to which purpose please to apply the enclosed.3

As for the ballot—there is nothing like timing the matter well. If £100
would suffice this time as well as last, I am convinced it might be
raised in two days, for the radicals are feeling at last the necessity
of doing something, & they want public meetings & petitions now to help
them on.

As for Roebuck’s speech4—it has greatly raised his character, & will do
good—but in so far as it goes beyond Molesworth, I do not agree in it.

I think Fonblanque in the wrong,5 but you need not I think regret having
served him, for he is still as radical as ever & will be with us again
soon, I am convinced.

Pray do not think of hibernating.6 Radicalism seems to me to have a
better chance just now than it has ever had before—the few who are
active, having now determined to go on without the rest, which will soon
oblige the others to follow.

Ever truly yours

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday Feb. 13, 1837

I.H.

Albany Fonblanque

Fonblanque, Albany

194.


TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1

I.H.

Monday
 [
Feb. 13(?), 1837

]

Dear Fonblanque—I called on you yesterday, (which I had not been able to
do any evening last week) wishing to talk over a hundred things with
Edition: current; Page: [327] you—but there is one thing which cannot
wait, & which I must write to you about.

Unless you and a few others bestir themselves, & give the word to the
people to meet & petition for the ballot during the next three weeks,
Grote’s motion2 will go off as flatly as it did last year & if so, the
consequences will be unspeakably mischievous. I reckon a Tory majority,
& a Tory ministry almost certain at a very early period, unless we have
a government which will propose the ballot. I know nobody at all
acquainted with the constituencies who does not think the same. Buller
for instance is half mad about it, & is for throwing overboard Reform of
the Lords & everything else & pushing for the ballot & the ballot only.
As for Ministers—I have advised Molesworth & shall advise every radical
I know, to be guided in his tone & conduct about the ministry, mainly by
the part they take on Grote’s motion.

It is enough to drive one mad to see everybody thinking of everything
except the precise thing which is of importance at the time, & so every
opportunity lost.

I wrote to Place3 to see if the Committee who managed all the
correspondence & petitioning on the newspaper stamps for two sessions &
only spent £110, would do the same for the ballot—he answered, that even
those £110 they had not been able to raise & were £20 out of pocket! I
had subscribed both years, that is £2, which was in proportion to my
means, but I could not help sending him £5 now4 for my share of the
loss. In answer I received the enclosed which I shall keep as a memorial
of the spiritless, heartless imbecility of the English radicals.5 Pray
read it & send it back to me, as I mean to fling it in the teeth of some
of them.

I shall be surprised if after reading this you still think that it was
not worth while risking something in order to awaken the people from
their torpor.

Ever faithfully yours

J. S. Mill

I am delighted with the three volumes6—everything in them is quite
fresh, & as good as new.

Edition: current; Page: [328]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday Feb. 16, 1837

I.H.

Albany Fonblanque

Fonblanque, Albany

195.


TO ALBANY FONBLANQUE1

I.H.

Thursday
 [
Feb. 16(?), 1837

]

My dear Fonblanque

Since I wrote to you I have heard again from Place, who says—but I had
better enclose what he says. I do so that you may be au courant of what
is doing as a word in the Examiner would be of great importance to the
object.

Please return this & Place’s other letter, which I want to shew to
Molesworth & others.

It was a good debate on the qualification2—& a good division but
Warburton, I think, played the fool3—& his bill must be watched. If they
get the law merely relaxed, so as to include personal property, they
will enforce it, & so make it practically worse than at present.

Ever yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 23, 1837

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

196.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

[
Feb. 23, 1837

]

Mr Hunt’s Article2 will be in time if it be not later than the 12th of
March: and whether it be printed or not in this N° (tho’ I am anxious
that it should) I undertake that he shall be paid for it.

Edition: current; Page: [329]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

3d March 1837

India House

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

197.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

India House

3d March
1837

My dear d’Eichthal

I have indeed been very remiss in answering the letter which you wrote
to me from Ems. But if you knew how completely my time has been occupied
all this winter, I am sure you would pardon me. I was absent from the
India House full five months last year & from England 3½ months in hopes
of getting rid of a troublesome local affection of the head, which has
not even yet left me. Since my return I have had arrears of all sorts of
business to clear off, & have been obliged to put off everything which
could be put off. I did not however postpone reading your book.2 The
copies you ordered to be sent to me I have never received, & I should
not have known that the book existed, if I had not, in passing through
Paris in November last, called upon your brother Adolphe, who gave me a
copy. This I have read & read with very great interest indeed. It would
be very difficult without going through the whole book chapter by
chapter, to say exactly how much of the book I agree in—but in the main
it appears to me very valuable: & your views respecting the difference
between the Oriental & the European character, seem to me perfectly
just. I quite agree with you that an infusion of the Oriental character
into tha[t]3 of the nations of northern Europe would form a combination
very much better than either separately. All the doubt I have, is,
whether any considerable effect of that kind can be expected from the
causes you contemplate—But doubtless whatever promotes friendly
intercourse between these two varieties of mankind, & whatever teaches
them to know & to like one another, must have a certain tendency of that
sort.

In your little note from Vienna you do not tell me anything of your
health—I am very anxious to hear whether it is completely reestablished.

I am forced to write to you very hastily & very briefly, as I am still
so busy, I actually [do?] not know which way to [turn?]. You I suppose
have more leisure, at least for the present, & I hope to hear from you
soon at greater length.

I cannot close this note without saying how sincerely I lament the loss
of your excellent Mother—

ever yours faithfully

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [330]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday March 13, 1837

India House

Leigh Hunt

Hunt, Leigh

198.


TO LEIGH HUNT1

India House

Monday
 [
March 13, 1837

]

My dear Sir

I regret much that I was from home when you took the trouble to call—but
I hope to be indemnified another time & that our personal acquaintance
thus begun will henceforth grow & prosper.

I am just about to send your MS.2 to press with very great satisfaction
at our having got it, & still more so at our having enlisted you as a
contributor, I hope a frequent one. The remainder will be quite in time
tomorrow there being no probability that there will be any points
requiring discussion.

Ever truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wednesday March 15, 1837

India House

Leigh Hunt

Hunt, Leigh

199.


TO LEIGH HUNT1

India House

Wednesday
 [
March 15, 1837

]

My dear Sir

If my letter gave you pleasure I am sure yours gave as much to me
independently of the very great value to us of the MS.2 which
accompanied it & which it was delightful to have to read among so many
bad articles or (worse still) articles which required a world of trouble
to make them good.

It is part of our plan to have signatures—what shall yours be? your sign
manual?3 ☞

In answer to your P.S.—I believe in the practice of most reviews, &
certainly of ours, the book reviewed belongs to the reviewer, & we
should never think of deducting its price from our payment.

Ever truly yours

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [331]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wedy March 15, 1837

William Johnson Fox

Johnson Fox, William

200.


TO WILLIAM JOHNSON FOX1

Wedy
 [
March 15, 1837

]

Thanks—it2 is beautifully done, & will illuminate our number. I would
gladly, whenever possible, give a good many articles to T.S.3 for such
another.

Probably the Cromwell extracts4 with such comment as they may need, may
be added at the end without altering anything. At all events, the
alteration can be made in the proof.

Thanks once more—I feel them—& the more because I have given you so
little to thank me for—

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday March 30, 1837

Kensington

John Macrone

Macrone, John

201.


TO JOHN MACRONE1

Kensington

Thursday evg
 [
March 30 (?), 1837

]

My dear Sir

As you are acquainted with the nature of my connexion with the London &
Westminster Review, & are also, I believe, aware that Mr Falconer is
about to resign the editorship, I need not apologize for addressing
myself to you instead of to Mr. Falconer, to save time. The review will,
from a concurrence of very untoward circumstances, be delayed beyond the
proper day.2 Now it occurs to me that the best thing to be done in this
case is to put a bold face upon it, & to tell all the booksellers that
they need not wonder at not getting the review exactly to a day as it is
intended hereafter Edition: current; Page: [332] not to publish on a
fixed day, but to regulate the bringing out of the review with a view to
the timing of the articles which it contains. This you may safely say;
because it is the determination of the gentleman3 who is to succeed Mr
Falconer, that the review shall always be ready for publication by the
20th of the month so that it may be brought out at whatever may appear
the most advantageous moment between that & magazine-day.

I hope you will excuse my making this suggestion to you, but it seems to
me of great importance & it is at the suggestion of the gentleman who is
to be the future editor, that I make it. We are also, both of us,
anxious that the country copies should not wait for the next monthly
parcels, but should be sent off in separate parcels, the expense of
which the review will of course pay.

I think you will have reason to be much pleased with the new editor. I
am satisfied you will find him a most efficient man of business, & a man
of infinite resource for the management of a review.

Believe me

very truly yours

J. S. Mill

John Macrone Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday April 6, 1837

I.H.

Leigh Hunt

Hunt, Leigh

202.


TO LEIGH HUNT1

I.H.

Thursday
 [
April 6 (?), 1837

]

My dear Sir

Many thanks for all the kind & agreeable things in your note, which I
have not had time to acknowledge sooner.

You will have perceived that I had only cancelled a single sentence,2 &
that for reasons which I think you will assent to, the first time I have
an opportunity of stating them to you.

We have been thrown out this time by a concurrence of accident & I fear
mismanagement. Some of our most important articles were thought of too
late—others were accidentally delayed—& the holidays make printing
establishments unusually inefficient.

Edition: current; Page: [333]
We shall hereafter avoid I hope all such inconveniences—The present
managing editor is about to retire & we have got a most efficient man,
who understands the business in hand most perfectly, to supply his
place.3

Ever yours truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

26th April 1837

India House

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

203.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

India House

26th April 1837

My dear Mutterlein

You may believe how glad I was to read your long letter & to learn all
that it told me. Most of all I was delighted, & so were all to whom I
have told it, that something has been already done,2 & that a thing
which, once done, is done for all countries & not only for poor little
Malta. What you say of the feelings of the English to the Maltese3 is
all that one expected in kind but much worse in degree—it makes Canada
quite intelligible to one—a subject on which our ministers have been
dragging themselves & their supporters through the dirt, including
Strutt & some other apostate radicals.

I send you the review—the last number to be brought out by Falconer4—he
& I have all along differed completely as to the management & the
difference at last came to a crisis & he resigned. It is now in the
hands of a man5 as efficient as he was inefficient, a man who seems made
by nature to conduct the detail business of a review, & who (he is very
young) promises, I think to be fit for much better things too. He is the
author of the article on Shakespear’s life,6 in the October number. The
present number has, I think, less intrinsic merit than most of the
preceding, but is much more calculated for success. A propos of your
remark on Carlyle’s Edition: current; Page: [334] article Mirabeau:7 I
am not at all surprised that Mr Austin or that Lewis should dislike it,
but it has been the most popular article we ever had in the review & I
think has been extremely useful to us. Except Roebuck, Grote, & Senior,
I have met with nobody here, of any account, who disliked it: & those
three dislike everything, the style of which is not humdrum: for
instance, Grote thinks the style of Henry Taylor’s book8 affected, &
Senior thinks it execrable. Of course I do not mean that the same is the
case with Mr Austin or with Lewis; I know the contrary; but I think,
generally speaking, those who have disliked the article Mirabeau are
those who cannot endure any peculiarities of style. On the other hand we
have never had any article which has been so much admired by so many
people. I do not think with you that Carlyle’s usual peculiarities are
exceeded in it, I think it falls greatly short of the average degree of
them.

I have consulted Lord Langdale about the epitaph9—he thought mine a good
one if there was to be any but on the whole preferred to have
none—saying “I incline to think that a monumental inscription should
contain no more than is required for the identification of the man. If
the name does not live in history, we see what monumental inscriptions
come to—if the name does live, as your father’s will, the inscription
however short which identifies it, excites the interest & awakens the
recollections which are desired.” This I think is an instance of his
usual good sense & I have at length determined to abide by it. I do not
however think that it is a fault in an epitaph to be pretentious (if I
may coin such a word), provided it does not pretend to more than is
thought just by friends & admirers. People expect that an epitaph shall
contain what a man’s admirers think of him—not what is thought by all
the world.

The radicals as you will have seen have been unusual[ly] active, &
Roebuck & Charles Buller are now in ver[y] high reputation
everywhere—those two in particular, & th[e] party in general.10 It is
all owing to Molesworth, & to what he wrote & did during the three
months previous to the opening of parliament. You say he is too fond of
going to dinners—it may seem so at a distance, but to us who are here it
is plain that he did not Edition: current; Page: [335] go to one dinner
too many—he went only when a demonstration was needed, & has produced an
effect through the country which will be permanent. That, & its
consequences, have altered the whole aspect of politics here, as you
would feel if you could hear the things now said of radicalism & the
radicals, by people not at all partial to them. I have been driving them
these four years to what they have now at last done, & done most
successfully.

I am quite well now except the merely local ailment in my head, & so are
the boys & all the family. I have much more to say but have not time to
say it.

Yours affecty

J. S. Mill

Henry Taylor & some other people have been arranging for Carlyle to give
lectures on German literature11 next month & with considerable prospects
of success—there are about 100 tickets taken, many of them by people of
note—

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

28th April 1837

I.H.

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

204.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

I.H.

28th April
1837

My dear Mütterlein—I have written to you by Henry Reeve’s2 parcel, but I
have something to say which induces me to write again.

Would Mr Austin like to be the Professor of Moral Philosophy at Glasgow?
The chair is vacant, & it is worth £700 a year, but so long as old
Mylne3 lives (he is 83 years of age) it will only be worth £300. It is
in the gift of the Professors, & one of them, my friend Nichol, who is
an admirer of Mr Austin has written to me to ask if he would like it &
to say that he could perhaps carry Mr Austin’s election to the chair
with such testimonials as it would be easy to get. If Mr Austin
declines, he has nobody better than Bailey of Sheffield, & means to try
for him.

Pray answer this as soon as you are able

Your Söhnchen

Edition: current; Page: [336]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May, 1837

Harriet Grote

Grote, Harriet

205.


TO HARRIET GROTE1

May, 1837

What you say of W.2 accords with my expectations. I consider him, with
his crotchettiness, and his fussiness, and his go-between inclinations,
to be the evil genius of the Radical party. . . . He is “out of my
books,” as completely as Strutt and the rest of the pseudo-Radicals who
voted for the extinction of popular government in Canada.3

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wednesday May or June, 1837

I.H.

Edward Lytton Bulwer

Lytton Bulwer, Edward

206.


TO EDWARD LYTTON BULWER1

I.H.

Wednesday
 [
May or June (?), 1837

]

My dear Sir

I have read your article2 with great eagerness & delight—it is such as I
expected from you & if we could have one such article in every number I
should have no misgivings respecting our critical reputation.

I have hardly found a sentence in the article which has not my heartiest
concurrence except perhaps some part of what you say of Shelley,3 &
there I am not sure that there is any difference—for all that you say to
his disparagement, I allow to be true though not I think the whole
truth—it seems to me that much, though not most of Shelley’s poetry is
full of the truest passion, & it seems to me hardly fair to put Shelley
in the same genus as Gray when the imagery of the one however redundant
& occasionally farfetched is always true to nature, that of the other as
you say yourself drawn from books, & false—the one the exuberant
outpouring of a seething fancy, the other elaborately studied &
artificial.

But perhaps you think all this as well as I—if so, & only if so, would
not some little addition or qualification give a truer impression?

Edition: current; Page: [337]
I had not time the other evening to tell you how much I am delighted
with “Athens”4—the book is so good, that very few people will see how
good.

Ever yours,

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

19th June 1837

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

207.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

19th June 1837

My dear Guilbert

I have been so busy, such a mere mechanical drudge all the winter &
spring, that I have neither had time nor energy to take pen in hand for
any purpose which could possibly admit of postponement, & I was still in
this condition when I received your letter of the 26th of last month. I
have now, by seven months hard labour, acquired something of a respite &
though I have been made rather unwell by this disagreeable, strange,
irregular season, I have been able to find courage to write to you.—Do
not vex yourself about any delay in your article on the Army;2 even when
we have it we may not be able to publish it immediately, for we must
watch our opportunity & bring it out at the time when the public mind is
turning to that class of subjects & when consequently it is most likely
to be read. Of course the sooner we have it the better but I beg you by
no means to put your health to any hazard for the sake of finishing it
earlier—nor even to neglect any occupation which circumstances may
render more pressing.

I cannot account for your not having received the Review. It has been
regularly sent through M. Fillonneau, with the usual understanding that
all who were on the list were to have copies. Perhaps M. Paulin can
explain it. (Is he satisfied with the article on the Histoire
Parlementaire?)3 But at all events the matter shall be set right, for
the review is now under a new editor; printer, publisher & everything
else is changed, & it will not, I trust, be mismanaged in future.
Whoever is our agent, you & all our other friends shall have written
orders, on presenting which you will receive your copies.

Under the new management we have prospects of much greater pecuniary
Edition: current; Page: [338] success than before—that is we may hope to
pay our expenses, which we have never yet done.

The radicals, as you have seen, have been much more active this year
than ever before, & have shewn, in parliament, much more talent. They
are however much divided; some of them are for giving more, & others
less, support to the ministry. As for me I am with the extreme party;
though I would not always go so far as Roebuck, I entirely agree with
those who say that the whole conduct of the Whigs tends to amortir
l’esprit public, & that it would be a good thing for invigorati[ng]4 &
consolidating the reform party if the Tories were to come in. But the
country does not go with us in this & therefore it will not do for the
radicals to aid in turning out the ministry; by doing so they would
create so much hostility in their own party, that there would be no hope
of a real united reform party with the country at its back, for many
years. So we must linger on, each man doing for the present such good
work as lies nearer to his hand—

ever yours my dear Guilbert

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday June, 1837

Kensington

John Robertson

Robertson, John

208.


TO JOHN ROBERTSON1

Kensington

Friday night
 [
June, 1837

]

Dear Robertson

Pray read Clarkson’s article2 & say what you think of it. I am sure you
will agree with me that it is, in its present state, totally
inadmissible. I think it much worse on the whole than Atkinson’s,3
though better in some respects. I am anxious for your opinion as to
whether it is possible by any omissions & alterations to make it
tolerable. I am sure it will require many hours continued labour of a
ready writer who knows a good deal about the subject himself. There is
nothing good in the article that I can discover except an expression
here & there, & the evidence he extracts from the Report.

Edition: current; Page: [339]
There is the devil to pay on another score—the new printers have begun
with page 1 instead of page 285—& if Bulwer’s article is printed off,
that error is so far irremediable.4

These said new printers are dreadfully inaccurate—so were Clowes’s at
times, but generally not. They will do better when they know the
handwriting. Some of their blunders in my article were however very
unaccountable to me.

My article I am sorry to say reads damned bad—not so the extracts, which
are splendid.5

I have sent back one sheet, the only one I had, corrected, at nine this
evening & shall call tomorrow morning for another.

I have an offer of twelve pages on the immediately present state of
French politics, the marriage of the Duke of Orleans &c.6 written
republicanly by Thibaudeau one of the liveliest & wittiest writers now
in France, & translated by Leader7—to be ready by Wednesday morning. I
have not said yea or nay. Think of it & if you cannot come, send me word
to the I.H. what you have thought.

Yours

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

30th June 1837

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

209.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

30th June 1837

My dear Carlyle

I send you the review. The article on your book2 is I think producing a
good effect, although the opinions which have reached me concerning the
article either in print or orally are mostly unfavorable.

There has been a review of the book in Fraser,3 evidently by Heraud. He
labours a good deal to prove, that you are very like him, & therefore
Edition: current; Page: [340] very good; but that you want something of
being entirely like him, & therefore are not altogether perfect; &
towards the end he prophecies for you & other writers in Fraser
(apparently himself) present neglect & future undying fame. There is in
Heraud a placid disregard of contemporary opinion, which would be
greatness if he were not so quite sure of living for ever. But now he
reminds one of the dying penitent’s answer to his confessor who proposed
to him, as a motive for patience, the example of Christ: “Ah, mon père,
quand J.C. mourut le vendredi, il savait bien qu’il resusciterait le
dimanche.”

There are one or two good thoughts, well expressed, in the article too:
but on the whole it will do the book little good: for instead of resting
the justification of the unfamiliar, on familiar principles, he rests it
on principles ten times more remote from common apprehension than the
book itself, & has defended the book in an article ten times more
unintelligible than it, with none of the beauty & not more than a tenth
part of the truth.

Henry Taylor whom I met the other day has not read much of the book &
has not made much of it, but he says it makes a very strong impression
indeed upon some people, among whom he mentioned Frederic Elliot.4 He
says that Lockhart told him he found in every page something that
offended him most exceedingly but yet he could not lay the book down. I
hope Lockhart will review it himself & say so, though we thereby lose
Croker.5 Taylor did not know whether there would be a review or not. T.
says that your lectures6 have made a very favorable impression, except
upon two or three people who did not attend after the first two lectures
& had not sufficient common sense to see what ailed those.

Everybody is hurrying away to get reelected or elected. As for me I
shall be here till the middle of September, though I have very little to
do here at present. I have worked off my arrear of business at this
office, & the work does not now come in nearly so fast as I can do it.
It is the way of my work to go in that sort of manner—in fits—& I like
that well enough, as it gives me intervals of leisure. I am using this
interval to get on with my book—a book I have done little to since the
review began, & which you will think very little worth doing—a treatise
on Logic. I hope I do not overrate the value of anything I can do of
that kind but it so happens that this, whatever be its value, is the
only thing which I am sure I can do & do not believe can be so well done
by anybody else whom I know of. In regard to all things which are not
merely for the day, that seems to be the best rule for chusing one’s
work.—Further, I do it in order to deliver myself of various things
which I have in my head on the subject. As for its being Edition:
current; Page: [341] read, it will be so by fewer people than even
yours, but it may be of use to some of those few.

Write soon & tell me how you enjoy your repose—

ever faithfully

J. S. Mill.

too late for S & M’s7 parcel.

The Times says, your book “sometimes excites our admiration by its
original eloquence & powerful thinking, sometimes offends us beyond
endurance by its extravagant caprices of style & expression. The diction
is sometimes almost monstrous.”8

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Henry Mill

Mill, Henry

209A.


TO HENRY MILL (see page 743)

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

7th July 1837

India House

Leigh Hunt

Hunt, Leigh

210.


TO LEIGH HUNT1

India House

7th July 1837

My dear Sir

I fear you have not had your copy of the Review. We have adopted the
plan of not sending copies to our contributors but letting them send for
them—on the ground that it is less inconvenience to each of them to send
to one place, than to us to send to many. But as the reason of the
practice does not apply to contributors living so far off as you do,
neither is it fit that the practice should, & I will therefore take upon
myself individually to see you supplied.

I hope we shall have something from you in our next number2—does
anything occur to you? & most sincerely do I now wish that you had
written an article for us on Lamb, instead of Bulwer,3 who has done it
very little to my liking.

Believe me

Ever yours truly4

I wish all success to the old Repository in your hands.5

Edition: current; Page: [342]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 12, 1837

IH [India House]

John Robertson

Robertson, John

211.


TO JOHN ROBERTSON1

July 12

,
IH [India House]

, 1837.

Dear Robertson,

[. . .] I have had a letter from Tocqueville which shows that we can
scarcely have his book2 before our April number, and one from Nisard,
alluding to a previous letter, which I never received, coming into our
plans, and having no doubt of his being in time for this number. I send
you a letter to him.

I do not think I can write anything worth having about Whewell3 this
time. Blackie’s4 I do not think will do, for an article on Menzel5 is an
article on Goethe, of whom Menzel is the great literary enemy. Moore,6
if favorable, is not worth doing; if unfavorable, Peacock should do it,
and it should not be in the same number as Southey7 [. . . .]

If I had known you meant to write to Harriet Martineau, I should have
wished for a consultation first, as the manner of doing it is of
considerable interest to me personally. She and I are not upon terms,
and I know her too well to make it likely that we ever shall be. I am
therefore desirous, 1st, that she should not be identified with the
Review more than its interest requires; 2d, that all communications with
her should take place through another medium than mine; 3d, that
nevertheless she should not think, as she is exactly the person to
think, that her connection with the Review is in spite of me,—that I
would prevent it if I could, but am unable.

If I knew exactly how you have written to her, I should know how to
comport myself with a view to making the other impression. There is a
letter for you from her at Hooper’s:8 have you left any instructions
with Hooper about forwarding letters? I have read her book,9 and like it
less than I expected. I like all the feeling of it, but not the thought;
but I should Edition: current; Page: [343] think an article by her on
Miss Sedgwick’s writings,10 such as you suggest, would be interesting
and useful to us.

Besides the letter to Nisard I send you one to Guilbert; if he is not in
town he is at Saint-Germain, and you should go to him there. Those will
be the most useful letters to you. Both Guilbert and Nisard speak
English well; Guilbert excellently, and Nisard is married to an
Englishwoman. I do not know anybody else who is likely to be in town
except the d’Eichthals: Adolphe is too busy to be of any use to you, and
Gustave you can always, if you like, call upon and use my name; he is
the ex-St. Simonian author of a book on Greece11 (and the East
generally) which he wants reviewed, but which will scarcely do for us[.
. . .] I advanced £25 to Bisset12 on my own account, not for the Review.
I do not wish to have anything more to do with the Review in that
capacity[. . . .]

I saw Dickens yesterday; he reminds me of Carlyle’s picture of Camille
Desmoulins,13 and his “face of dingy blackguardism irradiated with
genius.” Such a phenomenon does not often appear in a lady’s
drawing-room.

Yours ever,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 28, 1837

John Robertson

Robertson, John

212.


TO JOHN ROBERTSON1

July 28, 1837

.

[. . . .]2 Guilbert’s offer, however, promises fair, but I have never
found that a Frenchman’s promise to do anything punctually could be
depended upon. They promise everything and do nothing. They are not men
of business. Guilbert is better, being half an Englishman. Do you,
however, decide.

The sheets of Mignet3 will be a catch. Those of Hugo not, because he is
exhausted and effete. Châles4 is a humbug, whom I showed up in a letter
Edition: current; Page: [344] intended for the National, but published
in the Monthly Repository,5 and the bare idea of his reviewing George
Sand is enough to make one split. I would not give a farthing for the
opinion of Galebert,6 or anybody connected with his review, about
writers, for they are mere milksops themselves; and Hugo’s opinions,
like most French literary men’s opinions of one another, are affairs of
coterie and puffery. I thought your Statistical Society article was for
the January.7 I of course defer to you about all questions of timing.
But I differ from you about geology not being called for. I think the
zoölogical speculations connected with geology are quite in season just
now, and Nichol, I am sure, would do it with originality and well,
judging from his articles for us, both of which were written when ill or
in a hurry.8 You may think him not a popular writer, but you will think
quite differently when you read his Architecture of the Heavens.9

The falling off to be guarded against in substantial merit and
originality does not arise from our having lost any of our writers, but
in our not using them. I do not understand the false position you speak
of, nor do I know what friends of ours we have attacked. Written, as you
see, in a great hurry, and just as one chatters in walking quick from
the India House to Hooper’s.

Ever truly,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday, August 6, 1837

India House

John Robertson

Robertson, John

213.


TO JOHN ROBERTSON1

India House

, Saturday,
August 6, 1837

.

Dear Robertson,

I entirely approve your intention of remaining at Boulogne as long as
possible, and I hope you will remain as long as what requires to be done
here can be done by me, of which you are the most proper judge.

None of the three articles you expect are at Hooper’s, nor any other
article except one on Poland by a Pole,2 which I have not looked at.
There Edition: current; Page: [345] are a few books, chiefly Spencer’s
Circassia3 (from Colburn) and a translation of the King of Bavaria’s
Poems.4 Hooper says he was mistaken about 1025 copies having been sold;
it was only 925. That is only 25 since you went away. . . . Nichol says
his article will be here next week. You do not know Nichol. He is one of
the three or four persons living for whom I would answer that whatever
they think and say they can do they can. He says: “I expect that the
article will direct scientific attention to some few moot points in a
mode not quite so limited as that of existing discussion regarding them.
At all events, I shall show general readers at what geology has
arrived.” I will write to him immediately about connecting it with the
geological transactions.5

As for me, I am so immersed in Logic and am getting on so triumphantly
with it that I loathe the idea of leaving off to write articles. I do
not think you are right about the elections. The Tories, where they have
gained, have gained impartially from the Whigs and Radicals, and so
where they have lost. The only exceptions are Middlesex and the City; in
both of which many Tories chose to split with Whigs for the express
purpose of turning out Hume and Grote.6 Whenever the Tories choose to do
this, of course the Radical candidates will, in the present state of
parties, be in great danger. The Radicals seem to have lost most only
because they have lost some of their most leading men, but those will
come in again for some other place very soon; and a great number of the
new members are very decided Radicals, though generally not intemperate
ones. Neither are the Tories who are turned out the extreme Tories. They
almost all belong to the hack official jobbing adventurer Tories, who
are seldom ultras, as Twiss,7 Bonham,8 Ross,9 and such like. On the
whole, this election will so increase the already great difficulties of
the Whigs that they must either propose the ballot and dissolve on it,
or contrive to divide the Tory party, and make a compromise with one
section of it. They stand much nearer to both goals than they ever did
before, and have, I think, got clean up to the parting of the two roads.
Either would be a decided improvement on the present aspect of affairs.
For the present politics are wonderfully dull; and for the first time
these ten years I have no wish to be in Parliament. If the offer
Edition: current; Page: [346] you speak of is made me, which I shall not
think at all probable until it is done, I shall not accept it unless I
find by inquiry here that I can hold it with my situation in this house.
For an object of importance I should not mind sacrificing my own
pleasures and comforts, and obliging all connected with me to alter
their style of living and go (as the vulgar phrase is) down in the
world; but I certainly would not do it in order to exchange the
speculative pursuits which I like, and in which I can do great things,
for the position of a Radical member of this coming Parliament.

Ever yours faithfully,

J. S. Mill.

I can do nothing about Hanover10 without you. Châles is the man I
mean.11 He writes in the Journal des Débats and is a humbug; his
reputation is, however, high.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

8th August 1837

India House

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

214.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

India House

8th August 1837

My dear Carlyle

The immediate object of my writing to you is to ask you whether you can
manage to give me (if it be still in existence) a letter which I wrote
to you in 18332 after my return from Paris, in which I said a great deal
about Carrel. I have to write something about him for the review,3 & it
would be of great service to me were I able to refer back to what I
wrote in the freshness of my impressions.

It is a great bore to me having to write anything just now, except my
book,4 which I am getting on with, fast & satisfactorily. But it cannot
be helped.

The book I think will be a good book; which is more than I would venture
to say of any other book which I could attempt to write just now. One
good thing that it will do is, it will let you & me see whether we
really differ, & if so, how far, without the fruitless attempt to become
intelligible Edition: current; Page: [347] to each other by spoken words
on a subject so complicated & on which so many of the premisses have to
be settled beforehand. Certainly we should, at present, differ much in
our language, but I question whether our opinions are so widely apart as
they may seem. You call Logic the art of telling others what you
believe. I call it, the art, not certainly of knowing things, but of
knowing whether you know them or not: not of finding out the truth, but
of deciding whether it is the truth that you have found out. Of course I
do not think that Logic suffices for this without any thing else. I
believe in spectacles, but I think eyes necessary too. Neither do I mean
by Logic, the Aristotelian way solely, or even mainly; nay, that I do
consider to be only a way of stating a process of thought, not itself a
process of thought at all. I do not think that I can explain myself any
farther in fewer words than my book will consist of. Thanks for your
promise of reading it, which I did not more than half expect, & did not
at all think myself entitled to claim.

I suppose you saw the three columns of the Times5 on your three volumes.
Mr Sterling I suppose wrote it, & no doubt sent it to you—at least that
is the belief I try to entertain whenever my conscience twits me that I
did not. In case you have not seen it, I can give you in few words a
summary of its contents: That the stile is nearly the worst possible,
everything else nearly the best possible. The writer does not seem to be
aware that this is something very like a contradiction in terms. But it
is well meant, & cannot but give you many readers & Fraser some buyers
who would not otherwise have been had.—However I fully sympathize in
your wish to forget the book entirely—I promise you I shall forget mine,
soon enough after it is published—nay probably before.

I am very glad you are resting yourself by doing nothing. I am resting
myself by doing something—something which is not mere every day
business, but allows me & requires me to exert my best (or some of my
best) faculties. In truth I have not, for years before, had a mind free
from occupation with pettinesses. That is the only true meaning of
leisure—choice of work. It is not good for everybody, nor for anybody at
all times: for me, just at present, it is good, & I am consequently
happier than I have ever been since I had it last. I get a great deal
into the country too, among trees & green fields, though with a very
small share of rivulets & altogether without the Solway tide waves you
speak of.

On the whole things go well with me, not the less so because I am as you
say of yourself “sadder” than I have ever been—

Ever affectionately

J. S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [348]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24 août 1837

Gustave D’eichthal

D’eichthal, Gustave

215.


TO GUSTAVE D’EICHTHAL1

24 août 1837

Soyez persuadé mon cher ami que si je ne vous ai pas écrit c’était
seulement par excès d’occupations: j’ai sur les mains l’India house, la
revue, et un traité de Logique que j’avais commencé il y a longtemps,
que j’ai repris dernièrement et qui s’avance rapidement vers sa fin. Par
suite de cette préoccupation j’ai ajourné de jour en jour la réponse à
vos lettres. Je les ai reçues, ainsi que trois exemplaires des Deux
Mondes,2 qui me sont parvenus successivement à de très courts
intervalles. J’ai placé un exemplaire à la revue d’Edinbourg, un autre
au British & Foreign Review. Pour en parler dans notre revue j’attends
une occasion quelconque qui permette de la rattacher à quelque intérêt
du moment: règle essentielle à observer chez nous, où les revues en
général ne font pas bien leurs affaires et surtout essentielle pour
nous, qui l’avons trop negligée et qui sommes forcés à présent de nous
populariser autant que possible.

Avez vous reçu la dernière livraison de la revue? Sinon, demandez-en un
exemplaire à M. Aristide Guilbert, Rue du Clos-Georgeot, No. 4. Si vous
l’avez reçu vous aurez vu que Carlyle vient de publier un ouvrage fort
remarquable sur la révolution française. Il se souvient toujours de vous
avec plaisir. Il demeure 5 Cheyne Row Chelsea; Mme Carlyle y est à
présent, son mari est pour le moment en Ecosse.

Je voudrais bien avoir le temps de vous écrire sur les questions
générales, et encore plus de causer avec vous. Mais cela ne se peut pas
pour le moment. Je dirai seulement que depuis bien des années je suis au
même point que vous sur le repos: comme le sont en général tous ceux qui
ont été formés à l’école poétique de Wordsworth et de Shelley. Mais
j’avais ajourné cela comme n’étant pas de notre temps, et je ne sais pas
si le commerce avec l’Orient nous y amenera—il me semble que nous n’y
arriverons que par les changements sociaux qui peuvent progressivement
arriver chez nous. Il y a des bornes très étroites à ce qu’un peuple ou
même à ce qu’une personne peut apprendre des autres: Si nous pourrions
apprendre cela en Orient, nous la pourrions en Italie—le dolce far
niente n’est autre que le Kilf.3 Je dis cela sans déroger à la valeur de
votre ouvrage qui me semble un morceau de haute philosophie sociale,
mais (chez nous au moins) en liant ces idées à la question d’Orient vous
devez nécessairement nuire à leur succès.

Edition: current; Page: [349]
Bien des amitiés à Adolphe—quand vous aurez un chemin de fer au Havre ou
à Dieppe, et nous à Brighton, je viendrai quelquefois passer le dimanche
avec vous—

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

29th August 1837

India House

Aristide Guilbert

Guilbert, Aristide

216.


TO ARISTIDE GUILBERT1

India House

29th August
1837

My dear Guilbert

It will be quite impossible to insert M. de Cormenin’s article2 in the
next number, because we shall have an article on Carrel,3 which will
fill all the space we can devote to French politics. In the January
number there will be room for it, & if M. de Cormenin will trust me with
it I should like much to read it. You are aware how highly I think of M.
de Cormenin as a thinker & as a political writer for France—but to say
the truth I do not think his mode of treating his subject at all
suitable to England. However since the article is already written, there
is no occasion to judge upon presumptions. Ever yours my dear
Guilbert—in great haste

J. S. Mill

Without hurrying you, we should like to have your article on the French
army soon.4

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday Sept., 1837

Leamington

John Robertson

Robertson, John

217.


TO JOHN ROBERTSON1

Leamington

Friday evening
 [
Sept. (?), 1837

]

Dear Robertson

I agree with you in thinking the Sedgwick2 quite unobjectionable, though
there is less in it than I expected, & the extracts given do not inspire
me with Edition: current; Page: [350] any admiration for the books
praised. I think your Theodore Hook3 a much better article, though I
have cancelled one or two portions of sentences positively (for various
reasons too long to be mentioned here) & proposed to you to cancel or
alter one or two more. There are one or two ideas which I think
questionable, but with those I have not meddled, nor do I propose to do
so. In reading the article this time it has struck me that there is a
fault in some of your best sentences, which there used to be very often
in mine, & perhaps is still, that of crowding too much into them, & in
doing that, falling into a Latinism of construction, which in our
non-inflected language, leaves it doubtful what substantives some of
your adjectives are intended for. In this article there is also I think,
(but not so often as I should have expected in an article written as you
said this was, invitâ Minervâ) the fault of using three or four words
which do not exactly fit, instead of one which does. In the few
instances where this fault appeared to me to amount to a serious one I
have tried to correct it, & I hope you will find, not at the sacrifice
of any portion of your meaning. In other respects I like the article.
The subject is I think viewed in the right light, & disposed of by
making a few points & those the important ones, & treating them in a
decided manner.

The Italian article4 came to me I suppose in a proof from which
corrections had already been made, but as I have made many more it will
require to be carefully gone over. The translation, for instance, of the
verses on Napoleon, required a great deal of correction. I doubt very
much the expediency of the deviation from the old plan of keeping the
same heading throughout a whole article: I think in our last number the
headings puzzled & displeased people, & though the modification you now
propose is not so objectionable, I think it is still rather so & I do
not see any sufficient advantage to be gained by it—but if you wish
decidedly to try the experiment I do not object, provided you will
follow the old plan as to my own particular articles, for I don’t like
people not to see at once what they are about.

I hope exceedingly that you will be able to finish your other article5
as it was begun, & for this number. If you cannot, it must lie over to
the next, for the subject is not pressing & it is much better to have it
later in time than inferior in quality in which case it will not do us
the good we expect from it. I shall be much disappointed however if we
are obliged to adopt either alternative & I will hope the contrary. Of
course you have carte Edition: current; Page: [351] blanche about
fill-up matter, as long as I see it at some stage or other. I would not
be particular about going to the extent of our 16 sheets when we have a
good number, & plenty of bills to make it look thick.

As to the order of the articles, I think Usiglio & Carrel6 should not
immediately follow one another, therefore if “Position of Parties”7 goes
first, Usiglio third, Carrel fifth, the only question is if Sedgwick
should be second & Hook fourth, or the reverse. I should have been glad
if Wheatstone8 could have gone in either place & Sedgwick or Hook been
left to follow Carrel: but I suppose that was not to be. You will make
it all right I have no doubt & I shd have said nothing about it if you
had not asked me.

I have seen all there is to see at Leamington, & there being nothing
that interests me in this dull part of England I am going to shift my
quarters, & in doing so shall pass through town, of which opportunity I
shall make all the use I can for the review. I expect to be at
Kensington on Monday evening & will call at Hooper’s some time in
Tuesday forenoon where if I do not find you I hope I shall find a packet
from you, & directions for finding you somewhere else.

I have written to Napier,9 most likely his terms are per article & may
not be higher than ours when the article is long which I hope this will
be. You will see that I have attended to your suggestions about the
political article & have altered, besides, some passages which were
rather declamatory. Pray attend carefully to the revise—I tremble for
it.

As we shall so soon meet I leave off—ever yours

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

28 September, 1837

Ross

John Robertson

Robertson, John

218.


TO JOHN ROBERTSON1

Ross

,
28 September, 1837

Dear Robertson,

I have read Harriet Martineau’s article2 with the greatest desire to do
it justice, and the result is more unfavorable to it than ever before. I
always thought the notion it presupposes of the Queen’s position an
incorrect one, Edition: current; Page: [352] and I now think that even
if that notion were correct she does not speak to the Queen in the right
tone or give her the right advice. It seems to me that if we occupy
ourselves with the Queen at all, we ought to make her believe that
people feel interested about her just at present from mere curiosity,
and not because they really believe she can do much; and that unless she
has the qualities of Elizabeth she will be nothing, but that she should
aspire to have these qualities, and that if she has she may be as great
a ruler as Elizabeth.

Instead of that, H.M. says to her that Elizabeth in these days could do
comparatively little for us, and that she must not aim at being like
her; and why? Because she has many wills besides her own to consult—as
if Elizabeth had not!—and a giant democracy to struggle with; yes, to
struggle with! (is that what we should teach her?) as if Elizabeth had
not Catholicism and Puritanism, and Philip and Catherine di Medici and
Mary! I think this paper altogether contrary to the character which we
are trying to give to the Review, namely, a character of dignity, and
besides of practicalness. It is most completely unpractical; it is what
a woman’s view of practical affairs is supposed to be, and what the view
of a person ignorant of life always is. She always treats the Queen like
a young person. Now the Queen cannot be young, except in ignorance of
the world, and kings and queens are that even at sixty. She always
treats the Queen as artless. She cannot be artless, as a person full of
anxieties, or who will be so, about doing her duty to her subjects. I am
convinced she is just a lively, spirited young lady, thinking only of
enjoying herself, and who never is nor ever will be conscious of any
difficulties or responsibilities,—no more than Marie Antoinette, who was
a much cleverer woman and had much more will and character than she is
ever likely to have. She is conscious, I dare say, of good intentions,
as every other young lady is; she is not conscious of wishing any harm
to any one, unless they have offended her, nor of intending to break any
one article of the Decalogue. That is the nature of the well-meanings of
a person like her, and if we wish to give her any higher feelings or
notions about her duties, we cannot go a worse way to work than H.M.
does. If she reads us, she will not recognise any one of her own
feelings in what the article says, and therefore will not mind us at
all; besides, the article is a ready-made apology to her for being and
for doing nothing.

This is a very small part indeed of what this last reading of the
article has made me think to its disadvantage. It seems to me childish,
and if we take away the prettiness and masculine structure of some of
the sentences it is what people may forgive and like well enough in a
woman, but not in a parcel of men. There is continual trying hard for
philosophy in the article, and not an opinion or observation that you
may not drive a coach Edition: current; Page: [353] and six through. I
could not have believed how much this was the case till I examined it
minutely, for I was imposed upon at first by the writing, which is in
the style of a better kind of thought, and yet just the writing one
would expect from Miss Mitford,3 or any other woman who has written
tragedies, and learnt to put good woman’s feelings into men’s words, and
to make small things look like great ones. It is not like a person who
knows what she is writing about, or who knows life in the world or the
feelings produced by particular circumstances, and it will give us an
air of attempting and not attaining, the sort of ignorance of courts
which most excites the ridicule of those who know them, especially when
exhibited in sententious, goody, small moralizing.

Altogether I cannot reconcile myself to its insertion in any shape, nor
can I think of any note to prefix to it which would not in my view have
a still worse effect, if possible, than inserting it just as it is,
though even Dilke,4 you see, thinks we ought to separate ourselves from
it to a certain extent; and Dilke’s opinion in favor of inserting it may
be influenced by a wish to do her a good turn which might serve his turn
in many ways, and this without any impeachment of his sincerity. I would
not tell H.M. all I think of the article, but I would tell her what is
true,—that I think it all very well from a woman to a woman, but not
such as should be addressed by a body of men who aim at having authority
to a woman and the public of that woman. We want now to give a character
to the Review, as Carrel gave one to the National; and I am sure, if you
attempt to scheme out to yourself the sort of article which with that
view it would suit us to write to and of the Queen, you would arrive at
an idea of one which this would not at all answer to. I dare not violate
my instinct of suitableness, which we must the more strive to keep up
the more we are exposed to swerve from it by our attempts to make the
Review acceptable to the public. If you are not convinced by my reasons,
consider it as a caprice which I cannot help. I hope you do not consider
my putting a negative upon any article on such grounds as inconsistent
with our conventions. . . .5 I will write to you from Chepstow to tell
you where next to write to me. I want to hear how you are getting on,
and whether your foot is recovered.

Ever yours,

J. S. Mill.

I will try to send you my article6 from Chepstow further improved.

Edition: current; Page: [354]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday Oct. 5, 1837

Brecon

John Robertson

Robertson, John

219.


TO JOHN ROBERTSON1

Brecon

Thursday
 [
Oct. 5, 1837

]

Dear Robertson—

I sent off my article from Chepstow yesterday by the Pembroke & Milford
Haven mail—& I hope it arrived safe. I got your letter the same morning.
I detest that vile Queen thing2 more than ever for being the cause of
the first real difference we have ever had about the review. But I
cannot see the force of what you say about our being committed. I am not
committed, nor are you in any way which you cannot get rid of by
throwing all upon me. You cannot be serious in what you say about Dilke:
asking his opinion was not undertaking to be bound by it, & we never
either of us looked upon it in that light: you will remember I am sure,
that if we had, I should not have consented to his being asked, for I
said over & over that I did not consider his opinion decisive, & that I
expected him to take the same view with you. We never thought of taking
his opinion but in conjunction with others. As for H.M. you have only to
say to her that it is necessary for the review to ménager me, & that I
have seen the article & decidedly object to it: you may say if it will
assist you, that you tried to overcome my objection & thought you had
succeeded, but were mistaken. This will relieve you entirely, at the
price only of admitting yourself to be under the restraint of
considerations of expediency from which no editor is or can be free. As
for me, I am willing, as in this case I am bound, to take entirely upon
myself the resentment of a very spiteful person, rather than admit the
article. The truth is, I feel that I never can have stronger objections
to any article, nor justified to myself by stronger reasons, & that to
let them be overruled would be to give up all power whatever over the
review, for a power which does not amount even to the right of
excluding, in an extreme case, is no power at all. You completely
misunderstood my meaning in what passed between us that evening: I never
considered anything as settled, & I expressly said, two or three times,
that I would take time to consider. I did think, towards the end of the
evening, that you were assuming rather too confidently, that the
compromise we proposed would be adopted, & I blame myself exceedingly
that I led you into mistake by a foolish repugnance to put myself on the
defensive, & weigh my words Edition: current; Page: [355] when I was
discussing confidentially with you. Until I had made up my mind to say
no decidedly, it was unpleasant to be constantly pulling up & drawing
in. We should never have been in this embarrassment if I had not been so
extremely averse to bring a matter about which you had so strong an
opinion, to a direct “collision” as they say in Parliament; one house
throwing out a bill which the other has passed. I caught eagerly at
every straw which offered in the shape of a compromise, & the one you
suggested, of sending the article forth as H.M.’s, & not as our own,
seemed to me the last chance of our settling the matter “without a
division.” But on reading the thing again I felt my objections to it so
much strengthened, & my idea of its counterbalancing good qualities so
much lowered, that nothing could reconcile me to its being inserted with
any note which did not express dissent from it, with the reasons—& you
must see how ridiculous that would make us. Putting it in an obscure
place only adds a fresh ridicule to the rest—no place but a conspicuous
one suits the subject—the first place or the last. I did not think that
anything relating to the review could have given me the worry &
annoyance this has, from first to last. It was in an evil hour we asked
her to write. But it was she who proposed the subject, I only said it
promised the best of several which she proposed. If it is but left out
of this number, we will leave the question open for next number if you
like. If we cannot settle it so I must come to town though that will be
a great bore to me.

I wrote to you on Tuesday from Chepstow telling you that Aberystwith is
the place to send to me. I shall wait there or thereabouts till I
receive your answer to this letter

Ever yours

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sunday Oct. 29, 1837

Farnborough

John Robertson

Robertson, John

220.


TO JOHN ROBERTSON1

Farnborough

Sunday
 [
Oct. 29(?), 1837

]

Dear Robertson

I do not think Garnier has any claim to be paid for the article on the
Tyrol, unless we use it, which will depend upon your view of its
suitableness Edition: current; Page: [356] to us.2 I see no objection
whatever, but no immediate demand. The article was not written in any
way at our suggestion, but was brought to me ready written—I took it
only for consideration, & gave him no reason direct or indirect to
believe that it was accepted, unless our keeping it so long without
returning it can be so considered—which it cannot, as it would have been
returned to him & a positive answer given to him at any time if he had
expressed any wish to that effect. So unless you think it will suit us
he has I conceive no claim on the review—but if he thinks he has, & can
make out any shadow of a case, pay him for it & charge it to me—& at any
rate if he is going away for any length of time or for good, & you think
he is in need of money, I shall be glad if you can find any pretext to
make him take any sum he may require not exceeding £25 or £30, on my
private account, though nominally it may be from the review.

As to the H.M. matter3 I have no objection to discussing it in any way
you think best, though if your feelings did not appear to be so much
involved in it I should say the way you propose was making very much of
a small matter. At all events I can say little about it until I know how
& why you consider your honour implicated or your self respect
endangered. To me these seem words greatly disproportioned to the
occasion which appears to me a very simple one—a mere question of
fact—Did I, or did I not, give you sufficient reason to think that I had
waived my objection to the insertion of the article? I say I did
not—you, I suppose, say I did—if so we have only for the future to take
care to understand one another better, & to settle every thing finally &
clearly between us two before we implicate ourselves with contributors—a
caution which it would have been well if I had observed with Bisset as
well as you with H.M. Unless indeed you understood our conventions to be
such that while they lasted I could not exercise any veto. [But]4 if you
understood that, then certainly [we] quite misunderstood each other: [I]
not only [did] not, but could not, so long as I was carrying on the
review for another person (who looked [to] me & not to you as
responsible for its maintaining a certain character & a certain general
spirit) give up all control over the contents. But it is of no use
saying any more about it till I hear from you

Ever yours

J. S. Mill.

Edition: current; Page: [357]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday Nov. 11, 1837

John Robertson

Robertson, John

221.


TO JOHN ROBERTSON1

Saturday
 [
Nov. 11, 1837

]2

Dear Robertson,

To my great satisfaction Carlyle consents to do at least the Scott,3 and
wishes to begin on Monday morning.

I should not like to baffle him in that, but in order to do it he wants
Volume I of the Scott; so, pray, if you can buy, beg, or borrow it
before that time, do. He has also a great wish to have the two books of
and about Colonel Crockett,4 and I think has a “month’s mind” to write
about them. So, pray, send those too, and if the Review does not find
its account therein I will pay for them.

Yours in haste,

J. S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday Nov. 18, 1837

India House

William Tait

Tait, William

222.


TO WILLIAM TAIT1

India House

Saturday
 [
Nov. 18, 1837

]

My dear Sir

I write to you in greate haste just after receiving your letter—to say
that before I can undertake what you propose, I must understand the
circumstances better. I always fancied that a Life of Bentham by Bowring
was to form part of the collected edition of his works:2 was I mistaken?
and next: This publication is in obedience to Mr Bentham’s will, & by
virtue of an engagement between you & his executors: how would they like
my intermeddling? & on the other hand, neither do I like intermeddling
Edition: current; Page: [358] with them, nor being in any way mixed up
with their proceedings as I like to avoid getting into a hornet’s nest.

Believe me
 Yours ever

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday Nov. 20, 1837

India House

William Tait

Tait, William

223.


TO WILLIAM TAIT1

India House

Monday
 [
Nov. 20, 1837

]

My dear Sir

I wrote you a short & hurried note on Saturday, immediately after
receiving your letter, in which I stated some difficulties about
undertaking what you proposed to me. I have since considered the subject
more fully & the result is that even independently of those
difficulties, I am obliged to decline your proposition. I have several
reasons for this, among which I will only mention, that the proper place
for me to speak about Mr Bentham is the Review; that I intend, & have
long intended, to write a very elaborate article, speaking my whole mind
about him, on the occasion of the appearance of your edition of his
works; & that I desire to reserve for that opportunity all I have to
say.2

Regretting my inability to oblige you, believe me

Yours ever truly

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday Nov. 20, 1837

India House

Leigh Hunt

Hunt, Leigh

224.


TO LEIGH HUNT1

India House

Monday
 [
Nov. 20, 1837

]

My dear Sir

I observed in a recent number of the M.R.2 a complaint made by you, in
your usual gentle & kindly manner, of some reviewer who had lately
Edition: current; Page: [359] spoken of Mr Fonblanque as having rescued
the journalism of the (radical) party from contempt, an expression which
by whomsoever used would be grossly unjust to several writers & to
yourself more than any, & which I will venture to say never could have
been used by any one not grossly ignorant of the history of radical
opinions. It did pass through my mind that the party complained of might
be myself, but feeling sure that I had made no such misstatement, I
dismissed the idea—however I have since been led to believe that I was
the person meant & I have searched through my article3 on Mr
Fonblanque’s late publication to ascertain what ground I had given for
the mistake & how much I have to apologize for: but I have not found
that I had anything to reproach myself with, beyond omitting an
opportunity which I might fairly, & indeed ought to, have used for
putting upon record my sense of your great merits as a political
journalist, & of what you have done & suffered in the cause, in these
very times the badness of which is dwelt upon in the article in
question. I am sure if you will do me the justice to refer again to the
article, you will not find it said, even by the most distant
implication, that the journalism of the party, as such, was an object of
contempt to anybody: what is said is, that radical opinions were an
object of contempt to almost all persons of station & consideration;
which I think you will allow they were, notwithstanding the exertions of
a few persons, whose merits as writers even those same classes were
constrained to allow: & it is no more than might have been said of
Christianity after it had produced several generations of heroes &
martyrs. It was not yourself only,4 & Hazlitt, & Cobbett; Godwin, &
Bentham, & my father, & various others, had laboured for radicalism with
more or less of acceptance, & had gained or were gaining reputation to
themselves individually, but the cause had not yet profited much by
them: it has since, & we are now benefitting by what was then done—

Believe me with best wishes for yourself & the M.R.

ever truly yours

J. S. Mill

Have they sent your copy of this number of the Review?

Edition: current; Page: [360]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24th November 1837

India House

George Cornewall Lewis

Cornewall Lewis, George

225.


TO GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS1

India House

24th November
1837

My dear Lewis

I was out of town at the end of last month, otherwise I should have
written to you in the packet containing Mrs. Austin’s copy of the
review.2 I hope you liked the number. The political article3 is I think
in complete accordance with the views which you expressed in your little
note to me which I wish had been a long letter. The article has had
great success & the review is rising both in sale & in influence. A
completely new tone must now however be taken, since the suicidal
declaration of the Whigs against the reform of the reform bill.4 I do
not yet know what the radical members will do, though I know what they
ought to do. They are in a great state of excitement. I hope it will not
all end in a whiff of smoke.

I am chiefly desirous to speak to you of your article, on Authority in
matters of Belief.5 It is the first thorough & elaborate discussion of
the subject that I have seen, & I think it admirable as an essay, nor is
there I think one word in it that I do not concur in. But I see an
insuperable difficulty in its appearing in our review. It seems to me
suited only for students, & not for the public. Such articles however
excellent are more than a dead weight, they are a positive injury to a
popular periodical; our review must by this time have been abandoned if
we had gone on publishing dissertations on abstract subjects, & on our
present system, by which for the first time we are beginning to gain a
footing with the public, neither my own article on Civilization nor that
on Political Economy6 would have been published. I am now convinced that
this is a salutary necessity; doctrines make their way best with the
public when they are introduced a propos of something in which the
public is feeling an immediate interest; & we are forced upon the most
effectual way of promoting Edition: current; Page: [361] our ends, by
the happy impossibility of attaining them at all in any other. If you
will publish your paper in a volume of Essays, the review shall do all
it can to attract notice to it—& the principles it inculcates are, as I
have long thought, so extremely needed at the present day, that I am
most eager to aid in promulgating them in any way which would give them
a chance of being read by any considerable number of readers.

I have not time to write to Mrs. Austin this month, but I will not fail
next month unless I have reason to suppose you are about to return. I
hear good news of them from Henry Taylor.

ever yours

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

29th November 1837

India House

John Hill Burton

Burton, John Hill

226.


TO JOHN HILL BURTON1

India House

29th November 1837

Sir

If it is proposed to reprint, along with the Rationale of Evidence,2 my
preface & notes, I should like much to see the proofs, as there are
various things in the notes which I regret having published. Otherwise I
have nothing to suggest.

Edition: current; Page: [362]
I should rather have suggested putting the “Introduction”3 after the
Rationale itself—as being a sort of summary or résumé of it, a kind of
Table Analytique, as I imagine it to be—& more dry & more abstruse than
the work itself, consequently rather calculated to repel readers from
it. But without having read the Introduction (except a small portion
which was printed in Mr. B.’s lifetime) I cannot presume to judge.

With thanks for the attention shewn me by your troubling to write to me
on the subject

believe me
 your obedt Servt

J. S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday Dec., 1837

John Robertson

Robertson, John

227.


TO JOHN ROBERTSON1

Friday
 evening
 [
Dec., 1837

]

Dear Robertson

I have gone carefully over the Caricatures2 & have cut out two or three
sentences that struck me as feeble or superfluous & transposed a few
more. On the whole I like it very much, though the Grose part3 is a
little in the way, as the matter explanatory of it is thrown into a
note, where I could have wished that it also had been relegated. However
I did not venture to do this without you, nor do I think it necessary to
detain the MS from press, whither I shall tomorrow morning convey it,
all except the last three or four pages which I keep to enable me to
understand better what follows.

At present I think the article might stand first in the No. but I wait
to see it as a whole.

I return Chorley4 with the first two pages cancelled & no other
alteration except taking out a word here & there—The article improves
upon Edition: current; Page: [363] acquaintance. I hardly agree with him
in the operatic & dressed out character he ascribes to Souvestre’s
writing, the passages from which seem to me to come from an article of
quite a superior order to Howitt. I wish you would compare the two &
tell me if you do not think so.

The Hoskins you sent is the wrong book: I want the Travels in Ethiopia,
not the visit to the Oasis.5 If you have not got it I will procure it
somehow—

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

21st December, 1837

Kensington

John Pringle Nichol

Pringle Nichol, John

228.


TO JOHN PRINGLE NICHOL1

Kensington

,

21st December, 1837

.

My dear Nichol,

First as to the “great subject”, I will read Peacock’s Algebra.2
Meanwhile, have you read a book termed Cours de Philosophie Positive by
Auguste Comte,3 the same Comte whose Traité de Politique Positive you
have among the earlier of the St. Simonian tracts (by-the-bye, I should
like soon to have these St. Simonian books4 again, one is always wanting
them)? This said book is, I think, one of the most profound books ever
written on the philosophy of the sciences; and that of the higher
branches of mathematics it appears to me to have created; the elementary
and purely metaphysical parts it leaves nearly as it found them. I shall
be much astonished if this book of Comte’s does not strike you more than
any logical speculations of our time. There are two enormous octavo
volumes out, and two more to come.

Do by all means send both your articles, and the sooner the better:
before the 1st of January if you can. If we are only able to take one
this time, it will probably suit us best to take the Double Stars,5
being a fresher subject. With regard to the Geological article, the
present editor, Mr. Robertson—a countryman of yours, and a man who has a
decided genius for managing a Review—says, “I would not insert an
article by an angel on Geology, unless it reviewed and estimated the
‘Geological Society’ ”;6 as he has a project for successively stirring
up all the learned Societies, by articles Edition: current; Page: [364]
which would excite a personal as well as scientific interest among
bodies of men whom our Review has scarcely yet reached, a thing which in
his opinion would do very much for our sale. Will you meditate on this
suggestion, and consider whether your article admits of being adapted to
it? You can send the articles under cover to Buller, 1, Queen Square
Place, Westminster; or Molesworth, 79, Eaton Square, with the words
Review written somewhere conspicuously (not on the outside).

The Review is at present in a transition state. Molesworth is tired of
spending money on it; and although there are hopes that this would not
be necessary much longer, he does not like to be identified, now, with
opinions which often differ from his. I do not choose to ask any new
person to spend money on it, as I am going to try it myself. Our last
number rose very decidedly in sale, and made a deep impression in many
new quarters; it brought Robertson and me into communication both with
the dissenters and the working-classes7—who are now courting us—and has
made me a sort of puissance among the Radical members, which I was not
before. Altogether it is a lever not to be let go, and I trust to vigour
and energy in the prosecution of our improved plans of management to
carry me through without sinking much money; especially if a few among
those of our friends who can afford it will help us for a time with
articles of the kind we want, to be paid for only in case of success,
and at the convenience of the Review. Our plans are (1) in our literary
articles to make freshness a primary object, never following on in the
wake of other publications when the public curiosity is already sated;
(2) always, if possible, to address a pre-existing curiosity; (3) in our
serious articles to make our abstract speculations (except on purely
scientific subjects) grow out of special occasions, and track the
principle chiefly through the application; (4) to make all large bodies
of people, of whatever kind, find something in our Review to interest
them in particular; (5) to make ourselves a rallying-point for every
section of the multifarious Radical party by thorough discussions, in a
catholic spirit, of the particular questions most interesting to them.
There are many other points, but it would be too long to enter into
them, and it has taken us nearly a year to work the system into shape,
and new points to be attended to are rising up every day.

You can be eminently useful to the Review by doing and by suggesting
things in the spirit of this plan—among other things, by looking out
for, and enabling us to give the earliest popular account of, the most
interesting scientific novelties. If we could get the sort of scientific
character which Playfair8 gave The Edinburgh it would have a great
effect on our sale.

Edition: current; Page: [365]
The Radical members ought to have done at once, after Lord J.R.’s
declaration,9 what you say. I urged it upon them, and raved and stormed
with no effect, but that of being thought an impracticable enthusiast.
Molesworth, Leader,10 Harvey11 and Wakley12 alone went with the things
proposed. M.’s address to the Leeds people13 was put forth on the
failure of our attempt to obtain a collective demonstration. But the
movement in the country has acted strongly upon them since, and I was
yesterday at a meeting at Molesworth’s of the above four, with Grote,
Warburton and a few other Radical members, together with Roebuck,
Rintoul, Fox and myself at which they showed a good deal of spirit, and
resolved to form a party, and quitting the Ministerial benches, take up
a separate position in the House. Grote in particular has got on
wonderfully; and I think something will come of it.

There is much to be said about Ireland. I myself have always been for a
good stout Despotism—for governing Ireland like India. But it cannot be
done. The spirit of Democracy has got too much head there, too
prematurely. I should much enjoy going there with you, but I have
demands on my vacations (short as they are) which tie me up very much as
to such journeys, and this year I believe I shall hardly get away for
more than short periods of time, nor for any long distances.

I am delighted with what you are doing about Canada. I do not know what
statistical materials there are, but Roebuck does. Talking to him by a
third party is not enough; write to him using my name—he knows yours
very well—tell him what you are about, and ask him to tell you what
information would be of use to you and can be got. I do not myself think
much information needful now; it has come to a fight, and right or wrong
originally, the question now is, will this country give men and money to
prevent a colony by force from separating when it has a mind to it?14

Edition: current; Page: [366]
Tell me all that you would suggest about publishing arrangements for the
Review. We have, on much consideration, abolished the system of
agencies, i.e. of sending out copies for sale or return—but having
lately received an application from Adam Black’s15 house to be our
agents, we thought their name so valuable to us that we made an
exception to our rule in their single instance. Tell me your opinion
fully on the whole thing.

You are interested, I know, about Henry.16 He is in excellent health,
bringing up his mathematics by attending De Morgan17 at University
College. I have carried him through the Aristotelian logic this year,
and he is now working at Hobbes.

Ever yours faithfully,

J. S. Mill.

1.
This new interest is by no means confined to the Western world. A
bibliography of John Stuart Mill, published in Keizai Ronshu, The
Economic Review of Kansai University (Osaka), VI, no. 7 (Nov., 1956),
lists, in addition to about 350 works about Mill in European languages,
over 180 in the Japanese language alone!

2.
As I am revising this Introduction for publication (January, 1962) I
learn that last autumn this house, visited by so many admirers of John
Stuart Mill, was torn down, the operations actually beginning while a
committee formed to assure its preservation and conversion into a museum
was holding its first meeting!

3.
The Mill-Taylor Collection, British Library of Political and Economic
Science (London School of Economics), vol. 53.

4.
Ibid., vol. 58.

5.
The manuscripts mentioned in the two following notes which are known to
derive from this sale bear a printed label inside the front cover which
states “De la bibliothèque de / John Stuart Mill / Vendue à Avignon /
les 21, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28 Mai 1905.” Some at least of the books are
reported to have been bought by the poet Paul Mariéton and to have been
left by him to the library at Avignon (see Jules Véran, “Le Souvenir de
Stuart Mill à Avignon,” Revue des deux mondes, septembre 1937), but
attempts by several persons to find them there have failed.

6.
This volume of manuscripts of various minor published works by Mill was
bought by Professor George Herbert Palmer of Harvard University and
given by him to the library of his University where it is now preserved
in the Houghton Library, classed as “MS Eng 1105.”

7.
See the article by Jules Véran cited in note 5 above, and, for the
evidence showing that the manuscript is not by Mill, J. C. Rees, Mill
and His Early Critics (Leicester: University College, 1956).

8.
There was also a story current in London twenty years ago that some of
Mill’s books had been given at some time to Morley College (a
workingmen’s college in the South of London); but though the library of
that institution escaped when the main building was destroyed by bombs,
no such books can be traced now, and unless they were among a quantity
of books stored in the destroyed main building the story is probably
incorrect. On the whole it seems that all the books, except “a box”
returned to Mary Taylor, stored in the Pantechnicon in 1905, were given
to Somerville College, which still has the original list.

9.
In a letter by Hugh Elliot to Lord Courtney, dated May 8, 1910. MS at
London School of Economics.

10.
Mrs. Mary Colman, who died on January 15, 1913.

11.
A letter by Sir Frederick R. Chapman to Professor J. M. McCrimmon, now
of the University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, dated July 26, 1935. I
wish to thank Professor McCrimmon for letting me have the text of this
letter and permitting me to reprint it. The episode is briefly discussed
on p. vi of Professor McCrimmon’s doctoral dissertation in Northwestern
University Library.

12.
See the annotated catalogues of this and the second sale in the British
Museum Library.

13.
Cf. the reference to Balard in Mill’s letter to Auguste Comte dated
August 12, 1842—Letter 367 in the present collection.

1.
Addressed: Jeremy Bentham Esq. / Queen Square Place / Westminster. The
holograph of this letter (Brit. Mus. Add. MSS 33,544, f. 621) is
believed to be the earliest extant in the handwriting of John Stuart
Mill.

Jeremy Bentham (1748 NS-1832). The intimate connection between James
Mill and the great Utilitarian philosopher began about 1808, when JSM
was two years old. In 1810 Bentham, in order to maintain a closer
collaboration with the elder Mill, gave him as a residence the house
once John Milton’s, which Bentham owned and which adjoined Bentham’s
home known as Queen Square Place. A few months’ trial of the house
proved it to be so little habitable that Mill was obliged to move his
family. Until 1814 they lived at Newington Green, when Bentham at last
secured Mill as a neighbour by leasing No. 1 Queen Square and renting it
to him at a reduced rate. Bentham, who had also been a child prodigy,
interested himself in JSM’s education. Beginning in 1809 the Mill family
often paid extended summer visits to Bentham at his summer homes, first
at Barrow Green House, Oxted, and later at Ford Abbey. (See Letters 2
and 3.) Shortly before JSM wrote this letter his father had evidently
mentioned to Bentham his forebodings of what his own untimely death
might mean to his son’s education. Bentham, in a letter to James Mill
dated July 25, 1812, promised, “if you will appoint me Guardian of Mr.
John Stewart [sic] Mill, I will in the event of his father’s being
disposed of elsewhere, take him to Q.S.P. [Queen Square Place] and there
or elsewhere, by whipping or otherwise, do what soever . . . necessary
and proper, for teaching him to make all proper distinctions, such as
between the Devil and the Holy Ghost, and how to make Codes and
Encyclopedias and whatsoever else may be proper to be made, so long as I
remain an inhabitant of this vale of tears . . .” (MS at Yale). A
portion of James Mill’s acceptance of the offer, printed in Bain, James
Mill, pp. 119-20, expresses the hope that “we may perhaps leave him
[JSM] a successor worthy of both of us.”

2.
A note on the verso in another (probably Bentham’s) hand says 29 July
1812, but Tuesday of that week fell on July 28.

3.
Unidentified.

4.
Nathaniel Hooke, The Roman History, from the Building of Rome to the
Ruin of the Commonwealth (4 vols., London, 1738-71, and later editions).
By a happy coincidence JSM’s essay based on Hooke’s history has been
preserved. A friend of the family copied it out in a manuscript now in
the possession of the British Museum (Add. MSS 33,230). The six-year-old
JSM did more, however, than merely recapitulate uncritically Hooke’s
history, as this footnote reveals: “Plutarch (vi[vide] p. 273, 301)
calls this man Publicola. But Hooke (vi p. 255) and Dionysius
Halicarnassus (chronology of the Consuls (pp. 766-7) calls him
Poplicola. It is always spelt Ποπλικολας (Poplicola) in Greek not
Πυβλικολας (Publicola). Therefore that is the reason of its being
Poplicola in Dionysius not Publicola, as in Plutarch. Livy also calls
him Poplicola. I know not the reason of its being Poplicola in Hooke and
Livy. It is also spelt Ποπλιος (Poplius) in Greek, not Πυβλιος
(Publius). It must doubtless be a mistake in Langhorne’s Plutarch.”

5.
Substituted for “going over,” which has been crossed out.

1.
Published in Bain, JSM, pp. 4-5. MS not located. The portion in brackets
is Bain’s summary. Bain says, “The event which gave rise to the letter
was the migration of the whole family (in July) to Bentham’s newly
acquired residence, Ford Abbey, in Somersetshire.” The first paragraph
would seem to suggest a somewhat earlier date than Bain gives. On July
30 James Mill wrote Francis Place from Ford Abbey: “Mrs. Mill & the
children arrived in safety on Monday evening. . . . John has had a
pretty sharp indisposition for the last two days; occasioned by
something in disorder in the digestive system, which a sudden change in
times & modes of dieting has probably occasioned. Today he is better;
but he has had so much fever, as to be already weakened” (Brit. Mus.
Add. MSS 37,949, f. 18).

2.
This was the first year of Bentham’s occupancy of Ford Abbey. The Mill
family spent substantial portions of the following three years with him
there. For other accounts of the building, see Bain, James Mill, pp.
129-36; Works of Jeremy Bentham, ed. J. Bowring (Edinburgh and London,
1838-43), X, 478-80; and C. M. Atkinson, Jeremy Bentham (London, 1905),
p. 163.

3.
Joseph Hume (1777-1855), radical MP 1818-55, was a lifelong friend of
James Mill from the time of their schooldays at Montrose Academy in
Scotland.

4.
John Herbert Koe (1783-1860), barrister, and later judge of county
courts, had been for some time an amanuensis of Bentham.

5.
Paul Vasilievitch Tchitchagof (or Chichagov) (1767-1849), Russian
admiral, was a friend of Bentham and his brother, Sir Samuel, who had
spent a number of years in Russia.

6.
Wilhelmina Forbes Mill (1808-1861), JSM’s eldest sister.

1.
MS at LSE. Addressed: Mrs. Burrow. Published in Packe, p. 35.

Mrs. Burrow, JSM’s maternal grandmother, was of a Yorkshire family.
After the death of her husband she continued to administer his private
asylum for the insane at Hoxton.

2.
James Bentham Mill (1814-1862), JSM’s brother.

3.
Harriet Isabella Mill (1812-ca. 1897).

4.
Clara Esther Mill (1810-1886).

5.
Jane Stuart Mill (1816?-1883).

1.
Published in Bain, JSM, pp. 6-9. MS not located. A copy of the first
three paragraphs, in an unidentified hand, is at Johns Hopkins. On June
17, 1820, Jeremy Bentham in a letter to David Ricardo discussing the
importance of securing James Mill’s assistance in establishing a
“Chrestomathic” school in Bentham’s garden, cited this “letter, which I
believe you [Ricardo] saw, and which though I have never told him [James
Mill], I intend to trumpet forth in print” as proof of James Mill’s
skill as an educator. “The letter in question is one written by John
Mill in answer to one from my Brother to me, concerning the progress
made by him in his studies.” (The Works and Correspondence of David
Ricardo, ed. Piero Sraffa [11 vols., Cambridge, 1951-55], VIII, 198.)
There is no evidence that the letter was printed before Bain published
it. Bain records that the letter was given to J. A. Roebuck in 1827 by
JeremyBentham’s amanuensis, and that it was endorsed in Bentham’s
handwriting:

1819
John Mill
July
to
Acton
30
S B
place
J Ms and Sisters
Studies since 1814
15 years old
24 May 1821

Sir Samuel Bentham (1757-1831), younger brother of Jeremy, naval
architect and engineer, rose to the rank of brigadier general in the
service of Russia; in England, was Inspector General of Navy Works,
1795-1807, and Commissioner of the Navy, 1807-12. After retirement he
bought an estate in the south of France. This letter may have served to
pave the way for Sir Samuel’s invitation to JSM to come to France for an
extended residence in 1820-21. Its account of his studies should be
compared with that in his Autobiography.

2.
Seven years later JSM and the friends associated with him in the study
club that met at George Grote’s home in Threadneedle Street reprinted Du
Trieu’s work (see Autobiog., p. 85): Philippus Du Trieu, Manuductio ad
Logicam; sive Dialectica Studiosae Juventuti ad Logicam Praeparandae. Ab
Editione Oxoniensi anni 1662 Recusa. Londini, typis B. M’Millan, 1826. A
copy of this rare reprint is at the University of Chicago; another is at
Somerville College, Oxford.

3.
JSM’s first instruction in the subject was given to him by his father
during their walks (Autobiog., p. 19): “He expounded each day a portion
of the subject, and I gave him next day a written account of it, which
he made me rewrite over and over again until it was clear, precise, and
tolerably complete. . . . The written outline of it which resulted from
my daily compte rendu served him afterwards as notes from which to write
his Elements of Political Economy.”

4.
David Ricardo, Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (London,
1817); James Mill played a major part in the production of this work,
for it was undertaken by his reluctant friend only after Mill’s
persistent insistence.

Ricardo seems to have been genuinely interested in JSM’s development,
invited the boy to his home, and on the very day (Sept. 5, 1823) when he
was stricken with his fatal illness addressed to James Mill an extended
criticism of a paper by JSM on the measure of value (Works of David
Ricardo, IX, 385-87).

5.
For an account of this experience and of the impression made by JSM at
the College, see his father’s letter to Ricardo, Oct. 26, 1818 (Works of
David Ricardo, VII, 313-14). Ricardo in reply commented on JSM’s retired
education and noted the boy’s “need of that collision which is obtained
only in society, and by which a knowledge of the world and its manners
is best acquired” (ibid., p. 326).

6.
That James Mill had talked with his friends about moving his family to
France as early as the autumn of 1814 may be seen in a letter from
Edward Wakefield to Francis Place, Nov. 27, 1814 (Brit. Mus. Add. MSS
35,152, ff. 114-15). On Sept. 6, 1815, James Mill wrote to Francis Place
to encourage the latter to join him in moving to the Continent: “I
foresee nothing there which would make it uncomfortable for us to reside
as soon as we please. Assure yourself that the French people will soon
be very quiet & contented slaves, & the despotism of the Bourbons a
quiet, gentle despotism. There I may live cheap—my children will acquire
a familiarity with the language & with the manners & character of a new
people. When they have enough of this we shall remove into Germany, till
the same effects are accomplished, & after that if we please, we may go
to Italy. We shall then return accomplished people, and, men & women of
us, I hope, able to do something for the cause of mankind. We shall, at
any rate, have plenty of knowledge; the habit of living upon little; & a
passion for the improvement of the condition of mankind” (Brit. Mus.
Add. MSS 35,152, ff. 160-64).

7.
He was appointed on May 12, 1819, as Assistant to the Examiner of India
Correspondence at a salary of £800. Rising by fairly rapid steps, he
became head of the office, with the rank of Examiner, on Dec. 1, 1830.
JSM was appointed a junior clerk in the office on May 21, 1823.

8.
George Bentham (1800-1884), son of Sir Samuel, became one of the most
distinguished of nineteenth-century botanists.

1.
Addressed: A / Madame Austin. MS at King’s.

Sarah Austin, née Taylor (1793-1867), translator and miscellaneous
writer. She married John Austin (1790-1859), later known as a writer on
jurisprudence, in 1819. Their first home was in Queen Square, in close
proximity to the homes of Jeremy Bentham and James Mill. JSM quickly
grew fond of the Austins, and they were close friends for many years.
JSM studied German with Mrs. Austin, and in 1821-22 Roman law with her
husband. As a young man JSM often greeted her in his letters as “Dear
Mütterlein,” but in later life he criticized her severely (The Early
Draft of John Stuart Mill’s Autobiography, ed. Jack Stillinger [Urbana,
1961], pp. 147-48).

2.
JSM was the guest of Sir Samuel Bentham and family from June, 1820, to
June, 1821, first at Sir Samuel’s château in the valley of the Garonne,
then at an apartment in Toulouse. In the fall, after an extended tour of
the Pyrenees, the Benthams took him to a new estate which they had
purchased near Montpellier. For about six months JSM attended courses in
the Faculté des Sciences in the local university. A manuscript
letter-journal addressed to his father and covering approximately the
first six months of his stay in France is in the British Museum (Add.
MSS 31,909). Professor Anna Jean Mill has recently published most of
this journal as well as portions of a contemporary notebook of JSM which
is in her possession: John Mill’s Boyhood Visit to France (Toronto,
1960).

3.
One M. Gergonne, “a very accomplished representative of the eighteenth
century metaphysics” (JSM, Autobiog., chap. ii). Identified by Professor
Mill as Joseph Diez Gergonne (1771-1859), professor of astronomy and
Dean of the Academy at Montpellier. An exercise book containing JSM’s
notes on Gergonne’s lectures on logic is at LSE. Professor Mill prints
the text of the notes on the 19th lecture (John Mill’s Boyhood Visit to
France, pp. 110-15). Another notebook, entitled by JSM, “Traite de
Logique / redigé d’après le cours de Philosophie / de M. Gergonne /
Doyen de la Faculté des Sciences / de l’Academie de Montpellier / avec
des Notes / par J. Mill,” is in the Pierpont Morgan Library.

4.
Professor Mill identifies him as Jean Michel Provençal.

1.
Original not located. Text from copy contained in unpublished letter of
Jeremy Bentham to Sir Samuel Bentham, in Brit. Mus., Add. MSS 33,545, f.
516.

2.
Jean Baptiste Say (1767-1832), prominent French economist. In 1814 Say
had visited England and through James Mill had been introduced to
Ricardo and Bentham. JSM was a guest in Say’s home for a time in 1820.
(See Works of David Ricardo, VI, xxv.)

3.
Joseph Lowe, a Scottish friend of James Mill and a writer on statistical
subjects, who had emigrated to Caen in 1814.

1.
Published in Bain, JSM, pp. 27-28. MS not located. The portions in
brackets are Bain’s summary.

2.
According to Bain, the letter was undated, but written while on a visit
to Norwich with the Austins. The approximate date, however, can be
inferred from the reference to the composition of the defence of
Pericles here and in the succeeding letter.

3.
In his Autobiog. (pp. 50-51) JSM records that after he wrote his first
argumentative essay in the summer of 1822 his father recommended that
his next exercise in composition should be of the oratorical kind:
“Availing myself of my familiarity with Greek history and ideas and with
the Athenian orators, I wrote two speeches, one an accusation, the other
a defence of Pericles, on a supposed impeachment for not marching out to
fight the Lacedemonians on their invasion of Attica.”

4.
A mis-spelling of the name of Sir Thomas Branthwayt Beevor (1798-1879),
a Norfolk squire who became a supporter of William Cobbett.

5.
See Letter 8, n. 1.

6.
Presumably Nathaniel Palmer (1779-1854), solicitor. The Examiner for
Jan. 20 and May 19, 1822, in reports of Norfolk County meetings on Jan.
12 and May 11, 1822, respectively, summarized portions of the remarks by
Mr. N. Palmer of Yarmouth, attacking the Tory ministry.

7.
Rev. Thomas Madge (1786-1870), co-pastor of Octagon Chapel (Unitarian),
Norwich, 1811-25; minister of Essex Street Chapel, Strand, London,
1825-60.

1.
MS in the possession of Mr. E. F. Buxton, Fairbridge, Tonhill, Kent, in
1944.

George Grote (1794-1871), banker, MP (1832-41), and historian of Greece,
was introduced to James Mill by David Ricardo in 1819and soon became an
intimate of the Bentham-Mill circle. He and his wife Harriet (née Lewin)
frequently entertained many of the Benthamite group in their home over
the banking establishment in Threadneedle Street. Except for some later
periods of estrangement from Mrs. Grote, JSM was a lifelong associate of
the couple.

2.
The Utilitarian Society, the first of the study and discussion groups
with which JSM was associated (Autobiog., p. 56). The Society at first
consisted of only three members, Richard Doane, W. G. Prescott, and JSM.
Later members included Eyton Tooke, William Ellis, George J. Graham, and
J. A. Roebuck.

3.
Identification uncertain. Possibly Alfred Say, son of the French
economist, J. B. Say.

4.
Richard Doane, then an amanuensis to Jeremy Bentham. It was he who
secured permission for the Society to meet in Bentham’s house. Doane was
called to the bar of the Inner Temple in 1830, and practised in the
courts until his death on Feb. 8, 1848.

5.
Elements of Political Economy (London, 1821).

6.
William George Prescott (1800-1865), then junior partner in the banking
firm of Grote, Prescott, & Co.

7.
The reference is obscure, but may be to his lost “reply to Paley’s
Natural Theology” (Early Draft, ed. Stillinger, p. 79). Bentham and his
friends often denominated Christianity as Jug (shortened form of
Juggernaut).

8.
Possibly the plans for the Society included the establishment of such a
review, but the reference is more probably to the long-projected
Benthamite organ which eventually materialized in Jan., 1824, as the
Westminster Review.

9.
See preceding letter, n. 3.

10.
Probably Giovanni Berchet, Italian poet and patriot then a refugee in
England, rather than Ambrogio Berchet, likewise an Italian refugee. See
M. C. W. Wicks, The Italian Exiles in London, 1816-1848 (Manchester,
1937).

11.
Santorre Annibale de Rossi de Pomarolo, Count of Santarosa (1783-1825),
Italian patriot, who had arrived in London in early Oct., 1822, after
having been denied further refuge in France. Santarosa was an especial
favourite of Sarah Austin. See ibid., and Gordon Waterfield, Lucie Duff
Gordon (London, 1937), p. 36.

1.
Addressed: Edwin Chadwick Esq / 9 Lyon’s Inn. Postmark: 8 MORN 8 / 19 FE
/ 1827. MS at UCL.

Edwin (later Sir Edwin) Chadwick (1800-1890), sanitary reformer. At this
time, a law student and journalist; secretary to Jeremy Bentham,
1831-32; member of various Poor Law, factory, and sanitary commissions.
A lifelong friend and correspondent of JSM.

2.
George John Graham (1801-1888), a member of JSM’s Utilitarian Society;
in 1838 became Registrar General of Births and Deaths.

1.
Addressed: Edwin Chadwick Esq. / 9 Lyon’s Inn. Postmark: 2.A.NOON / MR26
/ 1827 and T.P. / Lombard St. Paper watermarked 1818. MS at UCL.

2.
The proprietor of the Morning Herald, for whom Chadwick had worked as a
reporter.

3.
Edward Taylor (1784-1863), after having failed in business, was at this
time embarking upon a career in music, in which he achieved distinction.
From 1837 to 1863 he was Gresham Professor of Music, Gresham College,
London. His performance on March 28, 1827, at Covent Garden was
favourably reviewed in the Morning Chronicle on March 29. JSM had
probably become acquainted with the Taylor family of Norwich through
John Austin and his wife Sarah (Taylor) Austin.

4.
Corner torn off.

1.
Addressed: Edwin Chadwick Esq. MS at UCL. Published in S. E. Finer, The
Life and Times of Sir Edwin Chadwick (London, 1952), p. 11, but dated
1824. The date is established by the event recorded in the second
paragraph. The Times on April 12, 1827, p. 3, reported the attempted
suicide of one Mary Ann Jones, who had been “cohabiting with a young law
student of Lyon’s Inn.”

2.
John Ramsay McCulloch (1789-1864), economist.

3.
Thomas Frederick Elliot (1808-1880), nephew of the first Earl of Minto,
and later Permanent Assistant Under-Secretary for the Colonies, 1849-68.

1.
Addressed: Edwin Chadwick Esq. / 9 Lyon’s Inn. MS at UCL.

2.
Horace Grant (1800-1859), a colleague of JSM in the Examiner’s office at
the India House, 1826-45.

1.
MS at Yale. Draft of letter on sheet used first to cover letter of
another person addressed to “J. Bentham Esq. / 2 Queen Square Place /
Westminster” and then to cover a note addressed “John S. Mill Esq.” It
is endorsed in JSM’s hand “Notes from Mr. Bentham respecting the
publication of my name as editor of his Rationale of Evidence” and has a
label attached, “Notes from Mr. Bentham 1827 to 1830. No. 1.” Published
in part in Packe, p. 73.

Yale also has three letters by Bentham on this matter, to one of which
this is evidently an answer.

Jeremy Bentham

Bentham, Jeremy

18 Apr. 1827

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Q.S.P.
18 Apr. 1827

Dear John

It is matter of no small surprise to me to see the title page without
your name to it. Nothing could be more clearly understood between us
than that it should be there. I do not say that the word title page was
used on that occasion—but such was the meaning. If what you have done
has been written under a different impression, so much the worse for
me—and if the book be good for any thing, for the [world?] at large.

J.B.

J. S. Mill Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24 / Apr. 1827

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Q.S.P.
24 / Apr. 1827

My dear John

Your name is of far too great importance to the work to be omitted in
the title page to it.

J.B.

J. S. Mill Esq.

My substituted title I suppose you have. / If you have not you will let
me know.

2.
Bentham accepted JSM’s reluctantly given consent:

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24 Apr. / 1827

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Q.S.P.
24 Apr. / 1827

Dear John

Amen.

If you know not what that means send to the Booksellers for a Hebrew
Dictionary.

J.B.

J. S. Mill Esq.

P.S. Name at the end of the Preface

3.
JSM had begun in late 1824 or early 1825 preparing the Rationale of
Judicial Evidence for publication. “Mr. Bentham had begun the treatise
three times, at considerable intervals, each time in a different manner,
and each time without reference to the preceding. . . . These three
masses of manuscript it was my business to condense into a single
treatise.” (Autobiog., p. 80.) He had also to make Bentham’s involved
style readable, and to supply “any lacunae which he had left.” The work
was published in 1827 in five volumes, with a Preface signed John S.
Mill. For JSM’s later attitude to this work, see Letter 226, esp. n. 2.

4.
Page torn.

5.
The word “added” is crossed out but the word substituted for it, which
may have been “appended,” is mostly torn away.

1.
Addressed: Edwin Chadwick Esq. / 9 Lyon’s Inn. Paper watermarked 1825.
MS at UCL.

2.
William Eyton Tooke (1808-1830), son of the economist Thomas Tooke
(1774-1858) and one of JSM’s closest friends. His suicide in 1830 (see
Letter 29) deeply affected JSM.

1.
Watermark: 18[25?]. Paper appears identical with that of preceding
letter. MS at UCL.

1.
Addressed: Arthur Aylmer Esq / 41 Great Russel [sic] Street /
Bloomsbury. Postmarks: ??? / ??? / 1827; 2ANOON2 / 27NO / 1827; ?ANOON?
/ 28[?]NO / 1827; and ??? / 27 NO / ??? On outside in another hand:
“Turn Over” “Gone away not known where / T Redbourn / R T [?] Summers
[?]” MS at LSE; a page of JSM’s “Speech on the Church” (published in
Autobiography by JSM, with an Appendix of Hitherto Unpublished Speeches,
ed. Harold J. Laski [London, 1924], pp. 310-25) is written on verso.
Actually a form letter in another hand; JSM filled in “September,” his
signature and address, and wrote the address on the outside.

Aylmer has not been identified.

Early Draft, ed. Stillinger (pp. 112-15) contains a somewhat fuller
account of the founding and early years of the London Debating Society
than does Autobiog.

2.
Ten shillings.

1.
Addressed: Edwin Chadwick Esq. / 9 Lyon’s Inn. Postmark: 2A. NOON / DE
22 182[7?]. MS at UCL.

2.
John Arthur Roebuck (1801-1879), politician. At this time a law student,
he had first been introduced to JSM at the India House by Thomas Love
Peacock about 1824. For some years Roebuck, George John Graham, and JSM
(the “Trijackia” they called themselves) were very close friends. The
cause of the ultimate break between JSM and Roebuck in the 1830’s was
probably Roebuck’s disapproval of JSM’s attachment to Mrs. John Taylor.

1.
Addressed: W. H. Ferrell Esq / 22 Hatton Garden. Postmarks: 12 NOON 12 /
14 JA / 1828 and 10FNOON10 / JA 15 / 1828. On outside in another hand:
“Gone away not known where—G [?]. Ellis / E. Midzoth” [?] obscured by
postmark. MS at LSE; the last page of JSM’s “Speech on the Church” is
written across the outside of the letter; across the letter itself is
written: “write to Bowring.” Like Letters 16, 21, and 23, this is a form
letter; JSM filled in the amount of arrears (“£1”), his signature and
address, and wrote the address on the outside.

Ferrell has not been identified.

1.
Addressed: A Monsieur / Monsieur Comte / Rue Richer / à Paris / France.
Postmarks: Angleterre, and Janvier / 28 / 1828. MS at LSE.

François Charles Louis Comte (1782-1837), liberal political writer,
son-in-law of the economist J. B. Say.

2.
Published as “Scott’s Life of Napoleon,” WR, IX (April, 1828), 251-313.

3.
Histoire de la Garde nationale de Paris . . . (Paris, 1827).

4.
MS torn.

5.
F. A. M. Mignet, Histoire de la Révolution française de 1789 à 1814
(Paris, 1824; London, 1826). JSM had reviewed it with high praise in WR,
V (April, 1826), 385-98.

6.
François Emmanuel, vicomte de Toulongeon, Histoire de France depuis la
Révolution de 1789 . . . (Paris, 1801-10).

1.
Addressed: John Bowring Esq. / 4 Highbury Park. Postmark: EVEN. 4 / MAR
10 / 1828. MS at LSE. Published with one omission in Packe, p. 65.

John Bowring (1792-1872), linguist, writer, and later statesman, had
been editor of the Westminster Review since its inception in 1824. He
was a close associate of Jeremy Bentham and became his literary
executor.

2.
George Bentham published An Outline of a New System of Logic in 1827.

3.
Jeremy Bentham, George’s uncle.

4.
Richard Whately (1787-1863), then Principal of St. Alban’s Hall, Oxford,
and later (1831) made Archbishop of Dublin, had published his Elements
of Logic in 1826.

5.
No such review by JSM appeared in the Westminster.

1.
Addressed: Benjamin Keen Esq. / 1 Pump Court / Temple. Postmarks: 7.
NIGHT.7/23.AP/1828 and 10.F.NOON.10/AP.25/1828. Endorsed: [Neither
direction nor signature is legible] / T. Forth. MS at LSE; written on
the verso of a page of the debating speech published by Laski as “Notes
of my Speech against Sterling” (Autobiog. ed. Harold J. Laski, pp.
300-309). A form letter in another hand, except for details filled in by
JSM, as in Letters 16 and 18.

Keen has not been identified.

1.
Addressed: A Monsieur / Monsieur Comte. MS at LSE.

2.
See Letter 19, n. 2.

3.
Possibly Félix Bodin (1795-1837), journalist and historian.

4.
Victor Jacquemont (1801-1832), naturalist and traveller. Presumably JSM
met him in London, where he consulted with British authorities and the
East India Company before sailing for India in the summer of 1828.

1.
Addressed: Archibald Thomson Esq. / 17 Mitre Court Buildings / Temple.
Postmarks: ?? ??? ?? / 26 NO / 1828 and ??VEN / NO 27 / 1828 and T.P. /
BdWay We?r. Endorsed: Gone abroad. [Two illegible signatures]. MS at
LSE; written on the verso of a page of the debating speech published as
“Notes of my Speech against Sterling” (Autobiog., ed. Harold J. Laski,
pp. 300-309). A form letter in another hand, except for details filled
in by JSM, as in Letters 16, 18, and 21.

Neither Thomson has been identified.

1.
Addressed: A Monsieur / M. Gustave d’Eichthal / à Paris. Draft
(incomplete) at LSE. MS at Arsenal. Published, with minor errors, in
Cosmopolis, VI, 22-25, and in D’Eichthal Corresp.

Gustave d’Eichthal (1804-1886), son of a rich Jewish banking family,
first became acquainted with the writings of Henri Saint-Simon through
his mathematics teacher, Auguste Comte. D’Eichthal on a visit to England
first saw JSM on May 30, 1828, when he accompanied Eyton Tooke to a
meeting of the London Debating Society at which JSM spoke. D’Eichthal
became a close friend of JSM, his chief contact with the
Saint-Simonians, and a lifelong correspondent.

2.
Adolphe d’Eichthal, younger brother of Gustave.

3.
The first report of the council of the recently established University
had been made on Oct. 30, 1826. Other early reports and statements by
the Council are listed in H. H. Bellot, University College, London,
1826-1926 (London, 1929), App. I, pp. 429-30.

4.
Leonard Horner (1785-1864), geologist and educator, was Warden of London
University, 1827-31.

5.
D’Eichthal’s projected book on England was never completed. His son,
Eugène d’Eichthal, later published some of the notes he had taken for
the book: “Condition de la classe ouvrière en Angleterre (1828),” in
Revue historique, LXXIX (May, 1902), 63-95.

6.
This was a division on the first reading of the Catholic Emancipation
bill in the early morning hours of Saturday, March 6. Final passage of
the bill in the House of Commons came on March 30, and in the House of
Lords on April 10; royal assent was granted on April 13, 1829.

7.
Ernest Augustus, Duke of Cumberland (1771-1851), fifth son of George
III, had long been strongly opposed to any relaxation of the Catholic
penal laws.

8.
John Scott, first Earl of Eldon (1751-1838), jurist, was twice Lord
Chancellor.

9.
John Singleton Copley, Baron Lyndhurst (1772-1863), had succeeded Eldon
as Lord Chancellor in 1827.

10.
Sir Robert Peel (1788-1850), long an opponent of Catholic Emancipation,
but convinced that the country was determined to have it, in March 1829
introduced the bill for granting the measure.

11.
Henry Addington, first Viscount Sidmouth (1757-1844), Tory politician.

1.
Published in Elliot, I, 1-3. MS at King’s. The date has been pencilled
in in a different hand. Paper bears 1827watermark.

John Sterling (1806-1844), son of Edward Sterling (1773-1847), the
“Thunderer” of The Times, though a writer of some merit, is best known
as the subject of Thomas Carlyle’s finest biography. After leaving
Cambridge in 1827, he was associated with his college friend, Frederick
Denison Maurice, in the editing of the Athenæum, July-Dec., 1828.
Disciples of S. T. Coleridge, he and Maurice joined the London Debating
Society “as a second Liberal and even Radical party, on totally
different grounds from Benthamism and vehemently opposed to it” (JSM,
Autobiog., p. 90). In two debates devoted to discussing the respective
merits of Wordsworth and Byron, JSM allied himself for the first time
with Sterling and the Coleridge-Wordsworthians. (See Karl Britton, “J.
S. Mill: A Debating Speech on Wordsworth, 1829,” Cambridge Review, LXXIX
[March 8, 1958], 418-23.) This was the beginning of the intimate
friendship with Sterling, to whom JSM later said he had been more
attached than he had ever been to any other man (Autobiog., p. 108).
Sterling likewise testified to the value of the friendship: in a letter
to his son, July 29, 1844, he wrote, “My intimacy with him [JSM] has
been one of the great fortunes of my life,—though hardly—I suppose were
ever two creatures more unlike than he & I” (Tuell, John Sterling, p.
69).

The occasion of this letter was Sterling’s resignation from the London
Debating Society. In the first draft of his Autobiography (see Early
Draft, ed. Stillinger, p. 133) JSM attributed Sterling’s resignation to
an especially sharp exchange between the two of them in a debate
involving their political philosophy. The resignation was followed,
however, by the development of an even closer personal friendship than
had previously existed. The earliest extant letter of Sterling to JSM,
March 31, 1830 (King’s), is concerned with seeking JSM’s advice on
assisting the Spanish rebels.

2.
This seems to be the only reference in an extant letter to JSM’s
soul-crisis, which had its onset in the winter of 1826-27 and which is
discussed in Autobiog., chap. v. Similar later disturbances, however,
are mentioned in letters to Carlyle, e.g. Letter 72.

3.
The thought of the quotation is characteristically Ciceronian, though it
has not been possible to find in Cicero’s writings a statement worded
precisely in JSM’s phrasing. Cf. Cicero, De Amicitia, iv, 15; De
Officiis, I, xvi, 51; and Oratio Pro Cnæo Plancio, ii, 5.

4.
Cf. Idem velle atque nolle, ea demum firma amicitia est (“An identity of
likes and dislikes is after all the only basis of friendship”), Sallust,
Bellum Catilinae, xx, 15. Cf. also this passage: “A question was
started, how far people who disagree in a capital point can live in
friendship together. Johnson said they might. Goldsmith said they could
not, as they had not the same idem velle atque idem nolle—the same
likings and the same aversions.” (James Boswell, Life of Samuel Johnson,
ed. J. W. Croker [London, 1839], III, 218.)

1.
Addressed: A Monsieur / M. Gustave d’Eichthal. MS at Arsenal. Published
in part in Cosmopolis, VI, 25-28, and in D’Eichthal Corresp., pp. 7-12.

2.
Eyton Tooke also corresponded with D’Eichthal; some of his letters are
in D’Eichthal Corresp.

3.
See Letter 24, n. 6.

4.
An extensive debate on the subject had taken place in the House of
Commons on April 13 and 14.

5.
English policy was in opposition to the reactionary King Miguel I, who
had usurped the throne of Portugal. His young niece Maria, the
legitimate Queen, was at this time in England. The Methuen Treaty had
been in force since 1703. By it and a similar arrangement with Spain,
Portuguese and Spanish wines had long been admitted into England at a
much lower duty than French wines.

6.
England and France were both deeply concerned in the Russo-Turkish War
of 1828-29, and later this year both participated in a settlement of it
which also guaranteed the independence of Greece.

7.
See Letter 24, n. 5.

8.
Achille Léonce Victor Charles, duc de Broglie (1785-1870), liberal
statesman.

9.
The Society, which Thomas Love Peacock nicknamed the “Steam Intellect
Society,” had been founded in 1826 under the leadership of Henry
Brougham to publish in inexpensive editions works on science, history,
economics, ethics, and philosophy. For a good brief account of the
Society’s activities, see R. K. Webb, The British Working Class Reader,
1790-1848 (London, 1955), pp. 66-73.

10.
Claude Henri de Rouvroy, comte de Saint-Simon (1760-1825), founder of
the school of French socialist thought which was to be the subject of
many of JSM’s letters during the next three years. For studies of his
connections with the movement, see Emery Neff, Carlyle and Mill (New
York, 1926); Richard K. P. Pankhurst, The Saint Simonians, Mill and
Carlyle (London, [1957]); and the unpublished Columbia University
doctoral dissertation by Dwight N. Lindley, “The Saint-Simonians,
Carlyle, and Mill” (1958), available from University Microfilms, Ann
Arbor, Mich. The best modern study of Saint-Simon is Frank E. Manuel’s
The New World of Henri Saint-Simon (Cambridge, Mass., 1956).

11.
Auguste Comte (1798-1857), pioneer sociologist and founder of
positivism, with whom JSM conducted an extensive correspondence between
1841 and 1847 (see Letters 334 ff.), though the two never met. In 1828
D’Eichthal had sent JSM a copy of Système de politique positive, which
Comte had written while still a disciple of Saint-Simon and which formed
the Troisième cahier du Catéchisme des Industriels (1823).

12.
The question had been discussed in the House of Commons on May 7, and on
May 14 Lord Darnley presented a petition in the House of Lords for the
extension of the English Poor Laws to Ireland in a modified form.

1.
Addressed: A Monsieur / M. Gustave d’Eichthal / à Paris. MS at Arsenal.
Published, with minor errors, in Cosmopolis, VI, 28-32, and in
D’Eichthal Corresp., pp. 13-21.

2.
A periodical (Oct., 1825-Dec., 1826) established after the death of
Saint-Simon by his disciples, edited for the first six months as a
weekly by a M. Cerclet and thereafter as a monthly by Barthélemy Prosper
Enfantin.

3.
By various writers, including Saint-Simon, Léon Halévy, Dr. Joseph
Bailly, and Charles Duveyrier, Paris, 1825.

4.
Evidently Comte’s Système de politique positive. See Letter 26, n. 11.

5.
This passage should be read in the light of Macaulay’s slashing
criticism of James Mill in three successive numbers (March, June, and
Oct., 1829) of the Edinburgh Review, a criticism which is also reflected
in JSM’s Logic, VI, vii and viii. See also Autobiog., pp. 110-13.

6.
The closest approximation to this criticism of Condillac that the
present editor has been able to find is in the third lecture of Victor
Cousin’s Cours de l’histoire de la philosophie: Histoire de la
philosophie du XVIIIe siècle (2 vols., Paris, 1829).

7.
See Letter 24, n. 5.

8.
Victor Lanjuinais (1802-1869), economist and liberal politician.

1.
Addressed: A Monsieur / M. Gustave d’Eichthal / à Paris. MS at Arsenal.
Published, with errors and omissions, in Cosmopolis, VI, 32-38, and in
D’Eichthal Corresp., pp. 22-34. D’Eichthal’s answer appears in the
latter volume, pp. 39-68.

2.
See preceding letter, n. 8.

3.
Nothing came of this projected newspaper.

4.
See preceding letter, n. 2.

5.
Dugald Stewart (1753-1828), Scottish philosopher. His Elements of the
Philosophy of the Human Mind appeared in three volumes between 1792 and
1827.

1.
Addressed: A Monsieur / Monsieur Gustave d’Eichthal / Place des
Victoires No 5 / à Paris. Postmarks: Fevrier/15/1830/ and F/11-4. MS at
Arsenal. Published, with minor errors and omissions, in Cosmopolis, VI,
348-55, and in D’Eichthal Corresp., pp. 117-30. The latter work also
includes the last letter of Eyton Tooke to D’Eichthal (pp. 90-110) and
D’Eichthal’s letter of Feb. 3 to JSM on Tooke’s death (pp. 111-16).

2.
Eyton Tooke committed suicide on Jan. 27, 1830. For a notice of the
inquest, see Examiner, Jan. 31, 1830, p. 76. Henry Solly in These Eighty
Years (London, 1893), I, 134-38, attributes Tooke’s derangement to what
Tooke mistakenly thought was an unrequited love for Solly’s sister. See
also, however, Letter 117.

3.
Thomas Tooke, the father of Eyton.

4.
In D’Eichthal’s letter of Feb. 3, 1830, to JSM. See n. 1 above.

5.
Evidently Tooke’s letter of Jan. 19, 1830. See n. 1.

6.
D’Eichthal’s letter of Nov. 23, 1829 (D’Eichthal Corresp., pp. 39-68)
rather than his letter of Dec. 1, 1829 (ibid., pp. 69-89).

7.
Robert Owen (1771-1858), wealthy manufacturer and pioneer socialist,
sponsor of various communal experiments in both England and America,
author of A New View of Society (1813-14). For JSM’s account of his and
his friends’ debates with Owenites in 1825, see Autobiog., pp. 86-88.

1.
MS at Arsenal.

2.
William Ellery Channing (1780-1842), Unitarian clergyman and writer. One
may conclude from Tooke’s remarks in his last letter to D’Eichthal, Jan.
19, 1830 (D’Eichthal Corresp., p. 106), that the pamphlet must have been
the reprint of a Christian Examiner article of Channing’s: Remarks on
the Disposition which now prevails to form Associations, and to
accomplish all objects by organized masses (London: Edward Rainford,
1830). Collected editions of Channing’s works usually reprint it with
the title: “Remarks on Associations.” It contains interesting
anticipations of some of JSM’s views in On Liberty, particularly on the
values of individuality and the dangers of the tyranny of society.

3.
William Burns, author of The New Era of Christianity; or, its influence
on the moral regeneration of society (London, 1831). See Pankhurst, p.
43.

1.
MS at Kew.

For earlier evidence of what became JSM’s lifelong interest in botany
see John Mill’s Boyhood Visit to France, ed. Anna Jean Mill. Over the
years he contributed many notes to the Phytologist (see MacMinn,
Bibliog.). A number of his notebooks containing botanical observations
are in the Mill-Taylor Collection of LSE.

Henry (later Sir Henry) Cole (1808-1882), official and editor, was later
a member of many commissions dealing with public exhibitions. He first
became acquainted with JSM in the London Debating Society and in the
summer of 1832 accompanied him on a walking tour.

2.
Sir William Jackson Hooker (1785-1865), botanist and director of Kew
Gardens.

3.
The British Flora (London, 1830).

4.
John Ray (1627-1705), sometimes called the father of natural history in
England.

5.
William Curtis (1746-1799), botanist and entomologist. An edition in
five volumes of his Flora Londinensis, enlarged by G. Graves and W. J.
Hooker, is dated London, 1777-1828.

1.
Addressed: Mrs John Austin / 26 Park Road. Sealed by a red seal, bearing
the letters JSM. MS in the possession of Mr. Gordon Waterfield.

2.
When the University of London opened in 1828, John Austin, who had been
appointed in 1827 to the chair of jurisprudence and the law of nations,
was unable because of ill health to lecture in the first session. He
began his lectures in the fall of 1829 to a large class of able
students. Though an eloquent, profound, and original lecturer, he did
not continue to attract students, because of his passion for accuracy
and elaboration. In Nov., 1830, so few students registered that he
postponed beginning the course until Jan., 1831, when eight students
enrolled. He persevered for two more years but gave up lecturing after
June, 1833, though he did not resign his chair untilJan., 1835. See
Bellot, University College, pp. 96-102. Eventually JSM contributed part
of his notes on Austin’s lectures to fill a lacuna in the MS when they
were published in full.

3.
Thomas Brown (1778-1820), professor of moral philosophy at Edinburgh and
a highly popular lecturer. The reference here is to his Lectures on the
Philosophy of the Human Mind (4 vols., Edinburgh, 1820).

4.
Sir William Blackstone (1723-1780), judge, first professor of English
law at Oxford, author of the famous and influential Commentaries on the
Laws of England (4 vols., Oxford, 1765-69).

JSM is here in the Benthamite tradition in criticizing Blackstone;
Bentham’s first sizable book, A Fragment on Government (1776), was an
attack on the Commentaries.

1.
Published in part in Bain, JSM, pp. 41-42. MS not located. The portion
in brackets is Bain’s summary.

JSM seems to have arrived in Paris during the week of Aug. 8; he
remained until the first week of Sept. The Revolution had arisen swiftly
after the publication on July 26 of reactionary ordinances which
violated the Charter of 1815 by suppressing the liberty of the press,
dissolving the recently elected chambers, and proclaiming a new
electoral law. By July 30 the Revolution was in effect completed when
Charles X revoked the new ordinances. On July 31 the Duke of Orleans,
Louis Philippe, was proclaimed Lieutenant General of the kingdom, and on
Aug. 2 Charles abdicated. Louis Philippe was formally offered the throne
on Aug. 7, and took the oath of office as King of the French on Aug. 9.

2.
Probably Jean Baptiste Say rather than his son Horace Emile Say
(1794-1860), also an economist.

3.
André Marie Jean Jacques Dupin (1783-1865), called Dupin aîné, a
cautious participant in the overthrow of Charles X, was too much
attached to the cause of Louis Philippe to suit the republicans.

4.
Jacques Charles Dupont (de l’Eure) (1767-1855), liberal statesman,
member of the Chamber of Deputies from 1817 to 1848. He was appointed
Minister of Justice by the new government, but after struggling in vain
against the reactionary tendencies of the new dynasty, resigned his post
before the end of the year.

5.
Louis Adolphe Thiers (1797-1877), historian and statesman, then
virtually at the beginning of his long political career, which
culminated in the Presidency, 1871-73. In Jan., 1830, with Armand Carrel
and François Mignet he had founded the National newspaper, which
supported the liberal opposition to Charles X’s government. He favoured
constitutional monarchy rather than a republic, however, and played a
major role in publicizing and advancing the claims of Louis Philippe to
the throne.

6.
Aide-toi, le ciel t’aidera, a political society formed during the
Restoration to combat reaction and foster liberal ideas. Among its
members were Barrot, Béranger, Carrel, Duchâtel, Guizot, Lafayette
father and son, and J. B. Say. See also Letter 36.

1.
Published, but with no identification of authorship, in the Examiner,
Aug. 29, 1830, p. 547, as one of three letters on the “State of the
Public Mind and of Affairs at Paris.” A prefatory note was appended: “We
have been favoured with copies of the following letters from two
gentlemen, whose knowledge, ability, and exalted principles, induce us
to attach great value to all their opinions and statements. The
importance of the subject matters treated in the letters, and the close
insight they give us of the state of affairs at Paris, have induced us
to insert them entire, though we thus somewhat transgress the space
usually allotted for political disquisition.”

The two gentlemen were undoubtedly John Arthur Roebuck and JSM. Evidence
for this identification may be found in the present editor’s article,
“JSM: Letters on the French Revolution of 1830,” Victorian Studies, I
(Dec., 1957), 137-54. The MS has not been located.

2.
Louis Gaspard Amédée Girod (de l’Ain) (1781-1847), Orleanist politician,
under the new government Prefect of Police in Paris from Aug. 1 to Nov.,
1830. His speech to the workers referred to was made on Aug. 16.

3.
Jacques Laffitte (1767-1844), financier and statesman. His house in
Paris had been virtual headquarters of the moderates who gained control
of the Revolution. Although one of the leaders in the movement to place
the Duke of Orleans on the throne, he was within a year bitterly
regretting that action. On Nov. 3, 1830, he became President of the
Council of Ministers but in March, 1831, he was ignominiously ousted.

4.
The aged Lafayette (he was seventy-three), who assumed command of the
National Guard, was the one leader of the liberal forces who by his
tremendous prestige and popularity might have been able to establish a
republic. Though his sympathies were republican, he was gradually
persuaded to accept as then safer for France what he hoped would be a
“popular throne, in the name of the national sovereignty, surrounded by
republican institutions.” His public acceptance of Louis Philippe on the
balcony of the Hotel de Ville on July 31 ended the hopes of the
republicans and clinched the throne for Louis Philippe. In the following
Dec., Lafayette, having served his purpose for the King, was ousted from
the command of the National Guard. His son, Georges Washington Motier de
Lafayette (1779-1849), a member of the Chamber of Deputies, had been
away from Paris during the “Three Days” of the Revolution, but returned
on Aug. 1.

5.
Benjamin Constant de Rebecque (1767-1830), influential writer and
liberal politician. Lafayette had written him on July 26: “A terrific
game is being played here. Our heads are at stake. Bring yours along.”
Although in failing health, Constant drove at once to Paris and
participated in the deliberations of the leading deputies. In August he
was appointed President of the Legislative Committee of the Council of
State. Louis Philippe gave him 200,000 francs to pay his debts.

6.
Casimir Périer (1772-1832), financier and statesman, a moderate liberal
who had at first tried to mediate between the liberals and the throne,
had been a member of the provisory commission of five during the
Revolution, and had only reluctantly accepted Charles X’s dethronement
and Louis Philippe’s elevation. He succeeded Laffitte as head of the
ministry in March, 1831.

7.
Letter 36 not 35.

1.
Printed, like the preceding letter (see n. 1), in the Examiner, Aug. 29,
1830, pp. 547-48. MS not located.

2.
Count François Horace Bastien Sebastiani (1772-1851), Minister of the
Navy in the new government, and later Minister of Foreign Affairs. Like
Périer, he had been reluctant to make the break with King Charles.

3.
Count Etienne Maurice Gérard (1773-1855) had been one of Napoleon’s
favourite generals and was long an opponent of the Bourbons. He
co-operated closely with Lafayette during the Three Days. Despite JSM’s
statement he seems not to have been made a marshal until the following
year.

4.
François Pierre Guillaume Guizot (1787-1874), historian and statesman.
Though a former president of the Society Aide-toi and a leader of the
liberal opposition to the government of Charles X, he sought a middle
way between absolutism and democracy. On July 27 he had been called upon
to draft the protest of the deputies against the ordinances which had
provoked the Revolution. He has been called the champion of “a monarchy
limited by a limited number of bourgeois.” From Aug. to Nov., 1830, he
was Minister of the Interior in the new government and thereafter held
various posts; from Oct., 1840, to the fall of Louis Philippe in the
Revolution of 1848, he was the master spirit of the government. JSM
later came to regard Guizot as a great thinker and writer (see Letters
282 and 304).

5.
Baron Joseph Dominique Louis (1755-1837) held the portfolio of finance
until Nov., 1830.

1.
Addressed:James Mill Esq. / East India House / London / Angleterre / .
Postmarks: 28 / AOUT / 1830 and AU 31 / 1830. MS in the Charles A. Brown
Collection in the University of Rochester Library, Rochester, N.Y. First
published in Victorian Studies, I (Dec., 1957), 137-54.

2.
Charles Marie Tanneguy, comte Duchâtel (1803-1867), one of the founders
of the Globe, later held various ministerial posts.

3.
Sir Robert John Wilmot-Horton (1784-1841) had published in four series
An Inquiry into the Causes and Remedies of Pauperism (London, 1830), the
third series of which contained a correspondence with Duchâtel.

4.
George Grote had been in Paris in the spring of 1830 and had been
introduced to the Lafayette circle. On July 29 he opened a credit with
his banker at Paris (Jacques Laffitte) for £500 for the use of the
committee directing the revolutionary cause at the Hôtel de Ville (see
Mrs. Grote, The Personal Life of George Grote [London, 1873], pp.
63-65).

5.
Camille Hyacinth Odilon Barrot (1791-1873), liberal politician, had
joined the National Guard and taken active part in the Revolution. He
served also on the committee appointed to usher the deposed King out of
the country.

6.
The reactionary ministry of Jean Baptiste Seraphin Joseph, comte de
Villèle (1773-1854), lasted from 1822 to 1827.

7.
Pierre François Audry de Puyraveau (1773-1852), industrialist and
politician, who actively supported Lafayette in the Revolution. On July
28 he contributed muskets to the revolting workers.

8.
Following a dinner on Aug. 16 at the London Tavern to honour the people
of Paris for their part in the Revolution, Beevor and James Paul Cobbett
(1803-1881), son of William Cobbett (1763-1835), the well-known radical
writer and politician, were sent to Paris as “Ambassadors of the
Reformers of England” to present an “Address to the brave people of
Paris.” The presentation was made on Aug. 23 at the Hôtel de Ville with
Lafayette and a deputation of the National Guard in attendance (see The
Times, Aug. 27, 1830, p. 2). Beevor’s and James Cobbett’s speeches were
later printed in Cobbett’s Weekly Political Register, Sept. 11, 1830,
pp. 342-45. Cobbett radicals and Benthamite radicals were always
scornful of each other.

9.
John Bowring on Aug. 28 also made a presentation of English addresses to
the people of Paris at the Hôtel de Ville in the presence of Lafayette
and the Prefect of Paris. Bowring, however, represented a different
group of English reformers from Cobbett’s followers. Bowring bore an
address from a dinner on Aug. 17 (one night after Cobbett’s dinner) at
the London Tavern, at which were present such men as Henry Warburton,
MP, Joseph Hume, MP, George Grote, and James Silk Buckingham. The Times
reported this dinner at length on Aug. 18, p. 5. Bowring, though an
intimate of Jeremy Bentham, was never highly regarded by either James or
John Mill.

10.
James Murray (d. 1835), Foreign Director of The Times.

1.
MS at Kew.

2.
Sir James Edward Smith (1759-1828), founder of the Linnean Society and
author of English Botany (36 vols., 1790-1814), and English Flora (4
vols., 1824-28).

1.
MS at Kew.

2.
See Letter 31.

3.
JSM’s acquaintance with this area dated back at least to the summer of
1822, when his father took a summer residence at Dorking, where, Bain
notes (James Mill, p. 204), “the family stayed six months in the year;
he remaining there throughout his six weeks’ holiday, and going down
from Friday to Monday, during the rest of the time. To the end of his
life, he [James Mill] kept up this arrangement, shifting his quarters
from year to year; but finally settling in the small rural village of
Mickleham, on the Dorking road, not far from Leatherhead and Epsom.”

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / Gustave d’Eichthal. Published in Cosmopolis, VI,
355-56, and in D’Eichthal Corresp., pp. 147-48. MS at Arsenal.

2.
Members of the Saint-Simonian hierarchy of seventy-eight persons
organized in Paris by Le Père Enfantin in 1831. They were listed in the
division of labour “Sans fonctions.” Cf. H. R. D’Allemagne, Les
Saints-Simoniens, 1827-37 (Paris, 1930), p. 106.

3.
Charles Duveyrier (1803-1866), one of the leading writers among the
Saint-Simonians. Early the following year he visited London with
D’Eichthal to promote the Saint-Simonian cause in England. See Letter
47, n. 1.

4.
Three of the series of five essays under this title had thus far
appeared, in the Examiner for Jan. 9, Jan. 23, and Feb. 6. The whole
series has been republished in The Spirit of the Age, ed. F. A. Hayek
(Chicago, 1942).

5.
Saint Amand Bazard (1791-1832) and Barthélemy Prosper Enfantin
(1796-1864), at this time pères suprèmes of the Saint-Simonian order.
Later this year Bazard resigned because of his violent disagreement with
Enfantin’s advanced views on the relation of the sexes.

6.
Beginning on Jan. 18, 1831, its title had become Le Globe: Journal de la
Doctrine de Saint-Simon.

1.
MS in the possession of Mr. Gordon Waterfield.

2.
Financial difficulties and internal dissension had caused much trouble
in the session of 1830-31 of the recently founded London University. On
March 26, 1831, the Warden, Leonard Horner, had resigned as of the end
of the term. For the best account of this period in the history of the
University, see chap. vi of H. H. Bellot, University College, London,
1826-1926 (London, 1929).

3.
Probably John, later first Baron Romilly (1802-1874), who, though not a
member of the Council of the University, was appointed in April, 1831,
member of a committee to consider the future management of the
University. See ibid., p. 209.

4.
James Mill and William Tooke (1777-1863), later president of the Society
of Arts, were members of the first Council of the University.

5.
This was a matter of some concern for John Austin, since his receipts
from students’ fees were small. See Letter 32. An endowment of his chair
of £200 per annum for three years was raised later in 1831. Cf. Bellot,
University College, p. 99, and Letter 43, the penultimate paragraph.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / Gustave d’Eichthal / à Paris. MS at Arsenal.

2.
Lindley, p. 195, points out that apparently only two contemporaneous
translations of Saint-Simonian books into English were made: one a
translation by Thomas Carlyle of Saint-Simon’s Nouveau Christianisme
which Carlyle never published; the other a translation of the same work
by James E. Smith, a Universalist minister and Owenite, published in
1834 by B. D. Cousins with the title New Christianity.

3.
Unidentified.

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle / 4 Ampton St. / Mecklenburg Sqe. By
permission of the Harvard College Library.

2.
The letter is undated, but JSM and Adolphe d’Eichthal called on Carlyle
on Monday, Oct. 10, 1831. See Two Notebooks of Thomas Carlyle, ed. C. E.
Norton (New York, 1898), p. 205. The National Library of Scotland has an
unpublished letter by Carlyle, dated the previous Wednesday night (Oct.
5), inviting JSM to meet Mrs. Carlyle, recently arrived from Scotland,
for coffee at half-past six on Friday evening. JSM had met Carlyle for
the first time on Sept. 2, 1831.

3.
The Baron d’Eichthal, with whom Dr. John Carlyle spent nearly a year in
Munich, 1827-28.

1.
MS at King’s. Published with minor variants in Elliot.

2.
Sterling had arrived at St. Vincent in the West Indies in the early
summer of 1831 to take up duties as superintendent of a sugar
plantation, Colonarie, an estate belonging to the Coningham family, and
the chief source of his mother’s income. See Tuell, John Sterling, p.
111.

3.
For an account of the hurricane of Aug. 11, 1831, see Sterling’s letter
tohis mother of Aug. 28, 1831, printed in Thomas Carlyle, Life of John
Sterling (London, 1851), chap. xii, pp. 102-10.

4.
On the second reading, Oct. 8, 1831.

5.
The Examiner for Oct. 9 (p. 650) reported: “About the Reverend Bench
‘there can be no mistake.’ Only one Bishop, Dr. Maltby, voted as
present, with the proxy of the venerable Bishop of Norwich. Twelve
Bishops present, and nine Proxies, were against the Bill.”

6.
Samuel Taylor Coleridge, On the Constitution of the Church and State,
according to the idea of each; with aids towards a right judgment on the
late Catholic Bill (London, 1830).

7.
Edward Maltby (1770-1859), then Bishop of Chichester, later, 1836-56,
Bishop of Durham, voted for the Reform Bill. See n. 5 above.

8.
Sir William Francis Patrick Napier (1785-1860), later General, historian
of the Peninsular War. The King on Oct. 9 in indignation at Napier’s
speech sent Earl Grey a copy of the Globe for Oct. 7 which contained a
report of it. The King favoured dismissal of Napier from the army, but
Grey dissuaded His Majesty from such a step. See Charles Grey, 2d Earl
Grey, The Reform Act, 1832; the Correspondence of the late Earl Grey
with His Majesty King William IV . . . , ed. Henry Earl Grey (2 vols.,
London, 1867), I, 368.

9.
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, baron de l’Aulne (1727-1781), statesman and
economist, Comptroller General (1774-76) under Louis XVI.

10.
Frederick Denison Maurice (1805-1872), liberal divine; for JSM’s
assessment of him, see Autobiog., chap. v.

11.
Henry Drummond (1786-1860), politician and joint founder of the
Irvingite Church, built a church at Albury; in 1834 visited Scotland as
an apostle and was ordained as angel for Scotland.

12.
Rev. Hugh M’Neil (1795-1879), rector at Albury, closely associated with
the Irvingites at this time; later (1868-75), Dean of Ripon.

13.
Rev. Edward Irving (1792-1834), founder of the Irvingite or Catholic
Apostolic Church, friend of Carlyle. He and his followers specialized in
prophecy and the gift of tongues.

14.
This project arose from the discussions of the study group that met at
Grote’s house in Threadneedle Street. (See JSM, Autobiog., pp. 83-86.)
The plan for a joint publication with Graham did not materialize. JSM’s
essays appeared years later under the title Essays on Some Unsettled
Questions of Political Economy (1844). See Letters 86, 424, 425, 427.

15.
S. T. Coleridge, The Friend. A literary, moral, and political weekly
paper, 28 nos. (Penrith, 1809-10); collected edition, with alterations
and additions (3 vols., London, 1818). The preface to the latter
edition, after describing the general introduction, concludes, “three
several collections of essays, in some degree miscellaneous and called
Landing-Places . . . complete the work.”

16.
He did not publish his Logic until 1843.

17.
See Letter 39, n. 4.

18.
No article of his seems to have appeared in the Jurist until Feb., 1833:
“Corporation and Church Property,” reprinted in his Dissertations, I,
28-67, with the title “The Right and Wrong of State Interference with
Corporation and Church Property.”

19.
His MS journal of this holiday, “Tour of the Lakes,” extending from July
19 to Aug. 15, 1831, is in the Bodleian Library. Anna J. Mill has
published excerpts: “John Stuart Mill’s Visit to Wordsworth, 1831,”
Modern Language Rev., XLIV (1949), 341-50.

20.
JSM had met Southey at a breakfast party given by Henry Taylor on Nov.
14, 1830. Others in the party included Edward Strutt, Charles Villiers,
Thomas Frederick Elliot, and Charles Greville. See The Greville Memoirs,
ed. Lytton Strachey and Roger Fulford (8 vols., London, 1938), II,
57-58. JSM had breakfast with Wordsworth and the same group on Feb. 27,
1831 (ibid., p. 122). Anna J. Mill, “JSM’s Visit to Wordsworth,” thinks
that JSM may have met Wordsworth even earlier at Henry Taylor’s.

21.
John Gibson Lockhart (1794-1854), son-in-law and biographer of Sir
Walter Scott.

22.
Robert Southey, Sir Thomas More; or, Colloquies on the Progress and
Prospects of Society (2 vols., London, 1829).

23.
The following sentence has been crossed out in the MS: “I should only
regret the women, whose proper sphere is that of the private virtues.”

24.
See Letter 42, n. 2.

25.
Carlyle in his Life of John Sterling, Part I, chap. xii, and Part II,
chap. ii, says that though he had learned of Sterling from JSM and the
Austins in 1831 he first met him in Feb., 1835.

26.
Cf. Coleridge, The Friend (London, 1818), I, 158-63, and Aids to
Reflection (London, 1825), pp. 101-3.

27.
Sartor Resartus. Carlyle eventually had to “slit [it] up into strips,
and send it forth in the Periodical way” (Letters of Thomas Carlyle,
1826-1836, ed. C. E. Norton [London, 1889], p. 368). It first appeared
in Fraser’s from Nov., 1833, to Aug., 1834.

28.
The essays in JSM’s “The Spirit of the Age” series.

29.
Albany Fonblanque (1793-1872), radical journalist, editor of the
Examiner, 1830-47.

30.
James (later Sir James) Stephen (1789-1859), Colonial Under-Secretary,
father of Leslie and Fitzjames Stephen. In the last week of Sept., 1831,
Stephen had accompanied JSM, Henry Taylor, and Frederick Elliot on a
visit to Coleridge at Highgate (see Correspondence of Henry Taylor, ed.
Edward Dowden [London, 1888], p. 39).

31.
James Mill had moved his family from Queen Square to Vicarage Place,
Church Street, Kensington, in the spring of 1831.

32.
A large building erected in the Strand in the year of this letter for
the activities of dissenting religious and charitable societies. With a
hall seating five thousand, it was for many years the meeting place for
various large dissenting religious groups.

33.
See Letter 40, n. 5.

34.
Probably John Wilson, a London friend of JSM, later an assistant factory
commissioner and an editor of the Globe newspaper.

35.
Charles Buller (1806-1848), liberal politician; pupil of Carlyle,
1822-25; MP for West Looe, Cornwall, 1830-31; MP for Liskeard, 1832-48;
secretary to Governor General of Canada, 1838; Judge-Advocate General,
1846.

36.
Both Sterling and Mill had associated themselves as early as 1830 with
the Colonization Society, of which the moving spirit was Edward Gibbon
Wakefield. The plan for the colonization of South Australia was on
outgrowth of the Society’s work.

37.
Edward Gibbon Wakefield (1796-1862), colonial statesman. Wakefield had
abducted an heiress in 1826; he was imprisoned from 1826 to 1829 and his
marriage cancelled by Parliament.

38.
Facts relating to the Punishment of Death in the Metropolis (London,
1831).

39.
Sir Robert John Wilmot-Horton. A controversy stirred up by him had
resulted in the temporary dissolution of the Colonization Society. Two
extant letters by Sterling to JSM relate to this controversy: see Tuell,
John Sterling, pp. 95-97.

1.
MS at Arsenal. Published in Cosmopolis, VI, 356-58, and D’Eichthal
Corresp., pp. 149-52. The slightly variant version of it published by
Elliot, I, 19-21, is based upon a copy made by D’Eichthal on May 14,
1870, and sent to JSM; this copy is now at Johns Hopkins.

2.
Significant dates in the history of the French Revolution: Aug. 10,
1792, the uprising of the Jacobins which led to the establishment of the
revolutionary Commune of Paris, the subsequent September massacres and
the overthrow of the monarchy; June 20, 1789, the Oath of the Tennis
Court, whereby the deputies of the new National Assembly swore that they
would not separate until they had established a constitution for France;
Nov. 9, 1799 (18 Brumaire), beginning of the coup d’état which placed
Napoleon Bonaparte in power.

1.
MS at Arsenal. Published in Cosmopolis, VI, 358-61, and in D’Eichthal
Corresp., pp. 153-59.

2.
Presumably François Barthélemy Arlès-Du Four (1797-1872), a leader of
the Saint-Simonians at Lyon, later a successful industrialist.
Originally, his name was Arlès.

3.
A review of Doctrine de Saint Simon., Exposition (2nd ed., Paris, 1830),
QR, XLV (July, 1831), 407-50.

4.
Thomas Hyde Villiers (1801-1832), politician and close friend of JSM,
who wrote a brief eulogy of him upon his untimely death. See Letter 64,
n. 18.

5.
George William Frederick Villiers (1800-1870), later fourth Earl of
Clarendon and fourth Baron Hyde, diplomat and foreign minister.

6.
Edward George Earle Lytton Bulwer, later Bulwer-Lytton, and subsequently
first Baron Lytton (1803-1873), novelist and politician.

7.
Edward Sterling, father of JSM’s friend John Sterling.

8.
Thomas Perronet Thompson (1783-1869), general, politician, and writer,
especially on economics, and from 1829 to 1836 proprietor and editor of
the Westminster Review. Some months after this letter, Thompson attacked
the Saint-Simonians: “Saint-Simonism,” WR, XVI (April, 1832), 279-321.

9.
John Wilson (1785-1854), the “Christopher North” of Blackwood’s Magazine
and professor of moral philosophy at Edinburgh University.

10.
Joseph Blanco White (1775-1841), theological writer. For some of JSM’s
later correspondence with him see Letters 121, 122, and others.

11.
William Empson (1791-1852), later editor of the Edinburgh Review,
1847-52.

12.
See Letter 49, n. 1.

13.
Thomas Arnold (1795-1842), educator and historian, father of Matthew
Arnold.

1.
MS at Arsenal.

D’Eichthal and Duveyrier were in London at this time as missionaries for
the Saint-Simonian cause.

2.
Unidentified, except that he is listed as one who, along with JSM and
others, made some corrections in a speech delivered by Duveyrier in
London about this time. See H. R. D’Allemagne, Les Saint-Simoniens,
1827-37 (Paris, 1930), p. 155.

3.
Unidentified.

4.
The London Institution, for the advancement of literature and the
diffusion of useful knowledge, founded in 1805. See A Catalogue of the
Library of the London Institution (4 vols., London, 1835-43).

5.
See preceding letter, n. 8.

1.
Addressed: G. d’Eichthal Esq. / 38 Great Coram Street / Brunswick
Square. Postmark: EVE / JA 28 [?] / 1832 [?] / Leadenhall St. MS at
Arsenal. Published in part in Cosmopolis, VI, p. 355, and in D’Eichthal
Corresp., p. 146, but dated in both as of Jan., 1831. The postmark is
not easily decipherable but other evidence establishes Jan. 28, 1832, as
the correct date for this letter and Jan. 30 for the next letter. There
is no evidence that D’Eichthal and Duveyrier were in London in Jan.,
1831; for evidence that they were there in Jan., 1832, however, see Two
Notebooks of Thomas Carlyle, ed. C. E. Norton (New York, 1898), p. 248,
and Lindley, p. 8, n. 11. Furthermore, the “tomorrow’s Examiner” was
clearly the number for Sunday, Jan. 29, 1832, in which JSM published (p.
73) a few paragraphs favourable to the Saint-Simonians.

2.
André Louis Augustin Marchais (1800-1857), politician. He had been a
founder of the Society Aide-toi, many of whose members JSM had met in
Paris in Aug., 1830.

3.
Either Ferdinand Charles Léon, comte de Lasteyrie-Dusaillant
(1810-1879), politician and archaeologist, or his father, Charles
Philibert, comte de Lasteyrie-Dusaillant (1759-1849), industrialist,
philanthropist, publicist, and writer on agriculture.

4.
Michel Chevalier (1806-1879), economist, editor of the Globe; later,
author of Lettres sur l’Amérique du Nord (Paris, 1836). Strictly
speaking, only Bazard and Enfantin were accorded the title Père in the
Saint-Simonian hierarchy.

1.
MS at Arsenal.

2.
See preceding letter, n. 1.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / Upper Clapton. MS at King’s. Published, with
minor errors, in Garnett, pp. 100-101.

William Johnson Fox (1786-1864), preacher, writer, and politician. After
serving for a time as co-editor of the Unitarian magazine, the Monthly
Repository, Fox in 1831 purchased it and soon converted it into a
liberal, secular periodical. For a study of JSM’s relations with Fox and
the Monthly Repository, see Mineka, The Dissidence of Dissent, pp.
271-83. Before the time of this letter JSM through Fox had become
acquainted with the latter’s parishioner, Mrs. John Taylor (years later,
JSM’s wife), who also wrote for the Monthly Repository (see ibid., p.
423).

2.
The first result of this carefully guarded promise of help appeared in
the Oct. number (pp. 649-59) for 1832: an essay “On Genius,” with the
signature which JSM at first adopted in the Monthly Repository of
“Antiquus,” but afterwards discarded for “A.” The only reprint of the
essay is in Four Dialogues of Plato, trans. J. S. Mill, ed. Ruth
Borchardt (London, 1946), pp. 28-40.

1.
Addressed: John Sterling Esq. / St Vincent’s. Postmark: N / MY24 / 1832.
MS at King’s. Published, with minor variants, in Elliot, I, 21-26. In
reply to an unpublished brief letter by Sterling of early 1832, received
by JSM in early March; MS at King’s.

2.
Letter 43.

3.
On June 7 the Reform Bill became law.

4.
Cf. Coleridge: “A sadder and a wiser man / He rose the morrow morn”
(Rime of the Ancient Mariner).

5.
Richard Chenevix Trench (1807-1886), later (1863) Archbishop of Dublin,
had become acquainted with Sterling at Cambridge, where both were
members of the “Apostles”; he had taken part in the expedition of
Torrijos to Spain in 1830.

6.
Sterling had written: “I have gathered some of the common little shells
here for your young friends. Perhaps you remember our labours on their
behalf along the shore at Looe.” This must have occurred during their
visit to Cornwall together in the summer of 1829, when they first became
close friends (see Tuell, John Sterling, p. 70).

7.
General José Maria Torrijos (1791-1831), Spanish patriot, was captured
while attempting a liberating invasion of his native country, and was
executed Dec. 11, 1831. Sterling’s cousin, Robert Boyd, was among those
who shared the fate of Torrijos. For Sterling’s connections with the
Torrijos affair, see Carlyle, Life of John Sterling, Part I, chaps. ix,
x, xiii. Sterling’s letter had been written immediately after receiving
news of the death of Torrijos: “I thought I had made up my mind—but this
horrible fate of such a man and one whom I have known as well as you and
I know each other—has overpowered me completely.”

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle Esq / Craigenputtock / Dumfries / N.B.[?].
Postmarks: FREE / 29MY29 / 1832; and DUMFRIES / 31 MAY 1832. Franked by
E. Strutt. MS at NLS. Published, with minor errors and omissions, in
Elliot, I, 26-32. Carlyle and his wife, after spending the winter of
1831-32 in London, had left London for Scotland on March 25. His first
letter to JSM after the return to Craigenputtock, dated May 18, 1832, is
published in A. Carlyle, pp. 4-7, as is his answer of June 16, pp. 8-11.

2.
From the autumn of 1830 through 1834 JSM contributed almost every week.
See MacMinn, Bibliog., pp. 11-42. Most of his writings were unsigned but
Carlyle was often able to recognize JSM’s style.

3.
William Glen (d. 1852), a native of the Craigenputtock region, had met
Carlyle through Dr. John Carlyle. He had recently come to London to
study law. Though gifted and well educated, he soon gave evidence of the
mental disturbance which ended his career.

4.
Probably William Fraser (ca. 1805-1852), editor of the short-lived
Foreign Review (1828-30), rather than James Fraser (d. 1841), publisher
of Fraser’s Magazine.

6.
“Corn Law Rhymes,” ER, LV (July, 1832), 338-61. See n. 10 below.

6.
“Corn Law Rhymes,” ER, LV (July, 1832), 338-61. See n. 10 below.

7.
“Goethe’s Works,” FQR, X (Aug., 1832), 1-44.

8.
Henry Taylor (1800-1886), poet, dramatist, and member of the Colonial
Office. Cf. Letter 43, n. 20 and 30.

9.
No such article seems to have been published; in his review of the
poetry of the servant-girl Mary Colling, however, Southey praised the
genius of the Corn Law Rhymer but condemned his poetry “for the spirit
of ferocious jacobinism which it breathes” (QR, XLVII [March, 1832],
92).

10.
JSM was mistaken both as to the name and the occupation of the Corn Law
Rhymer. He was Ebenezer Elliott (1781-1849), proprietor of his own
business in the iron trade at Sheffield.

11.
The article has been identified as by W. J. Fox: “The Poor and Their
Poetry,” MR, VI (1832), 189-201.

12.
“Goethe,” Examiner, April 8, 1832, p. 235.

13.
“Death of Goethe,” New Monthly Mag., XXXIV (June, 1832), 507-12.

14.
A review article in two parts: “An Outline of Sematology, or An Essay
toward Establishing a New Theory of Grammar, Logic, and Rhetoric,”
Examiner, March 25, 1832, pp. 194-95, and April 1, 1832, pp. 211-12.

15.
“Use and Abuse of Political Terms,” Tait’s, I (May, 1832), 164-72. See
also Letter 95. Tait’s Edinburgh Magazine, a literary and politically
radical monthly, continued publication until 1861.

16.
“Remarks on the Use and Abuse of some Political Terms. By George
Cornewall Lewis . . . ,” Examiner, April 22, 1832, pp. 259-60.

Lewis (1806-1863), statesman and author, later (1852-55) editor of the
Edinburgh Review.

17.
Lucius Cary, second Viscount Falkland (1610?-1643).

18.
John Wilson Croker (1780-1857), politician and essayist, a leading
contributor to the Quarterly Review.

19.
Dr. Samuel Johnson.

20.
Henry Philpotts (1778-1869), Bishop of Exeter, defender of the Peterloo
massacre of 1819 and opponent of the Reform Bill.

21.
See Letter 32, n. 2.

22.
“Letters of a German Prince” [Pückler-Muskau], FQR, IX (May, 1832),
290-312.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / M. Gustave d’Eichthal / Rue Monsigny / No. 6/ à
Paris. Postmarks: 3/JUIN / 1832; [illegible] 32; and ANGLETERRE.
Published in part in Cosmopolis, VI, 361-63, and in D’Eichthal Corresp.,
pp. 160-63. MS at Arsenal.

2.
The Globe had ceased publication with the number of April 20, 1832. See
preceding letter.

3.
JSM’s journal of his walking tour with Henry Cole, July 19 to Aug. 6,
1832, through Hampshire, West Sussex, the Isle of Wight, and ending in
the New Forest, is at Mount Holyoke College.

4.
(Henri?) Cavel and (Michel?) Delaporte were assistant editors of the
Globe. Henri Lagarmitte (1807-1834), journalist, was listed among the
members of the third grade of Saint-Simonians (see D’Allemagne, Les
Saint-Simoniens, pp. 118, 266, and 271).

5.
John Black (1783-1855), journalist, editor of the Morning Chronicle,
1817-43. For JSM’s tribute to Black, see Autobiog., chap. iv.

6.
“Saint Simonianism—Parting Address to the Public,” signed Enfantin,
Morning Chronicle, April 27, 1832, p. 1; reprinted in Pankhurst, pp.
84-87.

7.
For April 18, 1832, p. 433. The letter was published in English as an
article entitled “Comparison of the Tendencies of French and English
Intellect,” MR, NS VIII (Nov., 1833), 800-804. See Hill Shine, “JSM and
an Open Letter on the Saint-Simonian Society in 1832,” Journal of the
History of Ideas, VI (Jan., 1945), 102-8.

8.
Etienne Desprat, according to Pankhurst (p. 72), a former member of the
Spanish Cortes, who had been delegated to represent the Saint-Simonians
in England until the return of D’Eichthal and Duveyrier.

9.
These letters have not been located.

1.
Addressed: M. Gustave d’Eichthal. MS at Arsenal.

2.
See Letter 46, n. 4.

3.
Unidentified.

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle Esq / Craigenputtock / Dumfries. Postmarks:
FREE / 19 JY 19 / 1832, and DUMFRIES / 21 JUL 1832. Franked by E.
Strutt. MS at NLS. Published, with minor variants, in Elliot, I, 32-36.
Answer by Carlyle is dated Aug. 28, 1832, published in A. Carlyle, pp.
11-16.

2.
Of June 16, 1832. Published in A. Carlyle, pp. 8-11.

3.
See Letter 51, n. 7.

4.
See Letter 51, n. 13.

5.
Goethe had died on March 22; baron Georges Cuvier, the celebrated French
naturalist, on May 13; and Jeremy Bentham on June 6.

6.
Sir James Mackintosh (1765-1832), philosopher and historian. In 1835
James Mill published his critical Fragment on Mackintosh.

7.
Sir William Grant (1752-1832), Master of the Rolls, advocate of reform
of criminal law.

8.
Maximilien Lamarque (1770-1832), French general and orator.

9.
John Clerk, Lord Eldin (1757-1832).

10.
Charles Butler (1750-1832), prominent Roman Catholic lawyer and writer.

11.
Sir Walter Scott died Sept. 21, 1832.

12.
For a list of Mill’s contributions to the Examiner in this period, see
MacMinn, Bibliog., pp. 18, 21-22. The two articles entitled “Pledges”
appeared in the numbers of July 1 and 15, pp. 417-18, 449-51. JSM years
later confessed that the articles had been ill-timed and that they had
cost the Examiner two hundred subscribers (The Early Draft of John
Stuart Mill’s Autobiography, ed. Jack Stillinger [Urbana, 1961], p. 144,
n. 424).

13.
See Letter 52, n. 3.

14.
See Letter 51, n. 5.

15.
Dr. John Carlyle (1801-1879), physician, and translator of Dante.

16.
This postscript appears in the margin of the last page.

1.
MS at LSE. No salutation or signature. Published in Hayek, p. 38, and,
translated, in Packe, p. 139, but dated as of late July, 1832. The
approximate date has been inferred from the reference to the New Forest
in the last paragraph. Since the walking tour of JSM had begun on July
19 and concluded in the New Forest on Aug. 6 (see Letter 52, n. 3), the
Aug. date seems more likely.

JSM’s acquaintance with Mrs. John Taylor had begun in 1830, probably in
July, in the Taylor home at a dinner party at which W. J. Fox, J. A.
Roebuck, and Harriet Martineau were also present. Friendship between JSM
and Mrs. Taylor developed into love, but at the time of this letter she
had evidently tried to break off the relationship, telling him that they
must not meet again.

1.
Addressed: John Taylor Esq. / 4 Christopher Street / Finsbury Square.
Postmark: SP 1 1832. MS at Yale. Published in Hayek, pp. 38-39.

John Taylor (1796-1849), wholesale druggist, husband of Harriet Taylor,
with whom JSM had fallen in love. Taylor was actively interested in the
Radical cause.

2.
Jules Bastide (1800-1879), publicist and politician, had fled to England
after being condemned to death for the part he had taken in riots in
Paris on June 5 at the time of the funeral of General Lamarque. He was
in exile in England for two years.

3.
Hippolyte Dussard (1798-1876), economist. As Hayek points out, JSM had
probably met him and Bastide in Paris in 1830.

4.
The Examiner for Sept. 2, 1832, p. 568, reports the meeting of
Wednesday, Aug. 29, of the National Political Union, to discuss the
condition of Ireland. Major Revell presided, a Mr. Murphy made a fiery
attack on Henry Brougham for the government’s Irish policy, and the
meeting passed a resolution of sympathy “with the People of Ireland in
their efforts to throw off the galling and oppressive imposts of Tithes
and Church-cess.”

5.
Part covered by seal.

1.
MS in the possession of Mr. Gordon Waterfield.

2.
Evidently the illness of John Austin; see next letter.

3.
“Austin’s Lectures on Jurisprudence,” Tait’s, II (Dec., 1832), 343-48. A
review of John Austin’s The Province of Jurisprudence Determined
(London, 1832).

1.
Addressed (in another hand): Thos. Carlyle Esq / Craigenputtock
/Dumfries. Postmarks: FREE / 17 SE 17 / 1832, and DUMFRIES / 19 SEP
1832. Franked by T. Hyde Villiers. MS at NLS. Carlyle’s answer of Oct.
16 is in A. Carlyle, pp. 16-23.

2.
Of Aug. 28. Published in A. Carlyle, pp. 11-16.

3.
See Letter 43, n. 18.

4.
See preceding letter, n. 3.

5.
Macvey Napier (1776-1847), editor of the Edinburgh Review, 1829-47;
earlier, editor of the supplement to the sixth edition of the
Encyclopædia Britannica (to which James Mill contributed).

6.
“On Genius,” MR, VI (Oct., 1832), 649-59.

7.
See Letter 49, n. 1.

8.
The New Monthly Magazine.

9.
See Letter 51, notes 6 and 7.

10.
Characteristics of Goethe, From the German of Falk, von Müller, . . .
(London, 1833).

11.
Carlyle in his letter of Aug. 28, indirectly quoting his brother: “Did
he [Glen] not write something about Fanny Kemble? I said: Aut Glennus
aut Diabolus.” Frances Anne Kemble (1809-1893) was then at the height of
her fame as an actress.

12.
An untitled article, Examiner, Sept. 9, 1832, p. 585.

13.
Emile Barrault (1799-1868), publicist, travelled in the East, 1833-35,
to propagate the new faith.

14.
Olinde Rodrigues (1794-1851), economist and financier, early follower of
Saint-Simon, remained a faithful Saint-Simonian until, like Bazard, he
quarrelled with Enfantin over Enfantin’s dogma on women.

15.
Even after the breakup of the Saint-Simonian establishment at
Ménilmontant, a group of disciples travelled to Constantinople and the
East pour chercher la femme-Messie.

16.
In the Saint-Simonian hierarchy, in the “Degré des femmes,” she had held
the position of “Chef de service,” and was in charge of the department
for the conversion of women. Her testimony in the trial—a letter to the
court—is in D’Allemagne, Les Saint-Simoniens, p. 300.

17.
Marie Jérôme Henri Fournel (1799-1876), engineer, had given up his
position as director of the works at Le Creusot to join the movement. He
later wrote a biography of Saint-Simon.

18.
Carlyle had requested “Dumont’s Mirabeau and Babbage’s two Books.” The
first of these would have been Etienne Dumont, Recollections of Mirabeau
(London, 1832). One of the two books by Charles Babbage must have been
his On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, which reached three
editions in the year of its publication, 1832. The other book was
probably Babbage’s Reflections on the Decline of Science in England and
on Some of its Causes (London, 1830).

19.
The bookseller’s, who arranged for transportation of packages of books.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 1 Stamford Grove / Upper Clapton. Postmarks:
7 NIGHT 7 / OC 18 / 1832, and 8 MORN 8 / OC 19 / 1832. The MS for the
portion of the letter published by Garnett, pp. 101-2, is now at King’s;
the MS of the hitherto unpublished portion is at Yale.

2.
The MS at King’s ends here.

1.
By permission of the Harvard College Library. The letter bears no
identification of the recipient. The identification seems warranted,
however, by internal evidence, even though Letter 67 seems to indicate
that by Feb., 1833, JSM had still not met Adams.

William Bridges Adams (1797-1872), at this time under the pseudonym
Junius Redivivus a prolific Radical writer and from 1832 to 1836 one of
the chief contributors to W. J. Fox’s Monthly Repository. (See Mineka,
The Dissidence of Dissent.) His first wife was Elizabeth Place, daughter
of Francis Place (see n. 7 below); his second, Sarah Flower, whom he
married in 1834, was the ward of W. J. Fox and also a contributor to the
Repository. In later life Adams was a successful inventor, known
especially for the invention of the fish joint for railway rails.

2.
A Preface to The Producing Man’s Companion; An Essay on the Present
State of Society, Moral, Political, and Physical, in England, published
in 1833. This was a revised, second edition of The Rights of Morality
[with same subtitle], 1832. JSM reviewed Junius Redivivus’ writings in
both MR (April, 1833), pp. 262-70, and Tait’s (June, 1833), pp. 347-54.

3.
Oct. 20, the date of this letter, fell on a Saturday.

4.
All his writings were signed Junius Redivivus.

5.
Thomas Moore (1779-1852), the poet, and biographer of Byron.

6.
Thomas Campbell (1777-1844), poet best known for his The Pleasures of
Hope (1799) and Gertrude of Wyoming (1809).

7.
Francis Place (1771-1854), London tailor, friend of Bentham and James
Mill, was behind the scenes a very important leader in reform movements
for at least a quarter of a century. For the best account of his
activities see Graham Wallas, The Life of Francis Place (London, 1918).

1.
Addressed: Thos. Carlyle Esq / Craigenputtock / Dumfries. Postmarks:
FREE / 23OC23 / 1832, and DUMFRIES / 2[?]OC1832. Franked by T. Hyde
Villiers. MS at NLS. Carlyle’s answer of Nov. 19 is in A. Carlyle, pp.
23-30.

2.
Of Oct. 16. Published in A. Carlyle, pp. 16-23.

3.
See Letter 58, n. 12. Of the Saint-Simonians, JSM remarks: “Of their
doctrines we still think . . . that there is, out of all reckoning, more
truth and substance in them than in any other of the numerous Utopian
systems which are afloat. We agree in but few of their conclusions, yet
we see an undeniable and permanent value in many of their premises. . .
.”

4.
Untitled article, Examiner, Oct. 21, 1832, pp. 680-81. MacMinn,
Bibliog., pp. 22-23, lists the succeeding notices of French affairs.

5.
Of Fonblanque, editor of the Examiner, Carlyle had said in his previous
letter (A. Carlyle, p. 18) that it was remarkable that “a man of his
sharp faculties [and] keen genial nature” could bear to continue as
editor of a political paper, and asked: “Is it your prediction that he
will abide to the last by Politics?”

6.
A quotation from Carlyle’s previous letter of his wish for himself (A.
Carlyle, p. 22).

7.
Histoire de la Révolution française (10 vols., Paris, 1823-27).

8.
The Monthly Repository.

9.
“I never could make much of Unitarians; from the great Channing
downwards there is a certain mechanical metallic deadness at the heart
of all of them; rhetorical clangour enough, but no fruit for me.
Unluckily too they seem a sort of Halfmen. . . .” (A. Carlyle, p. 20.)

10.
MR, VI (1832), 660-67.

11.
Henry Crabb Robinson (1775-1867), diarist and enthusiast for German
literature, contributed a series of nine articles on Goethe to the
Monthly Repository in 1832-33.

12.
Thomas Noon Talfourd (1795-1854), later dramatist and biographer of
Charles Lamb.

13.
“The Late William Hazlitt,” Oct. 14, pp. 661-62; Oct. 21, p. 678; and
Nov. 2, pp. 708-9. The final instalment, not published at the time of
this letter, was signed T.N.T.

14.
Wallenstein, A Drama in Two Parts (London, 1800).

15.
Instructions to my Daughter for playing on the Enharmonic Guitar
(London, 1829). Thompson reviewed his own book in WR, XVI (April, 1832),
429-79. See L. G. Johnson, General T. Perronet Thompson (London, 1957),
p. 158.

16.
See Letter 58, n. 8.

17.
In his campaign to become MP for Bath; he was elected in Dec.

18.
“Jean Jacques Rousseau,” Tait’s, I (June, 1832), 338-56, and II (Oct.,
1832), 39-49.

19.
Elected to Parliament for Liskeard that autumn, Buller held the seat
until his death in 1848.

20.
Part of MS of JSM’s “Journal of Cornwall Trip, Oct. 3-9, 1832” was in
the possession of the late Isaac Foot, Pencrebar, Callington, Cornwall.
A photostat of this and the rest of the MS are at LSE.

21.
See Letter 51, n. 4.

22.
See Letter 45, n. 8.

23.
FQR, XI (April, 1833), 261-315.

24.
It did not appear until the Jan., 1833, FQR, XI, 89-127.

25.
“The Tale” by Goethe (trans. and commentary by Carlyle), Fraser’s, VI
(Oct., 1832), 257-78.

This postscript is written at the top of the first page of the letter.

26.
This sentence is written in the margin of the last page.

1.
Addressed: William Tait Esq. / Bookseller / Edinburgh. Postmarks: A / NO
7 / 1832, and NOV / ???9A / 1832. MS at LSE.

William Tait (1793-1864) had begun earlier that year the publication of
the magazine bearing his name.

2.
“The Currency Juggle,” Tait’s, II (Jan., 1833), 461-67, reprinted in
Dissertations, I, 68-81.

3.
Page torn.

4.
See Letter 65.

5.
This postscript appears at the top of the first page.

1.
MS in New York Public Library.

2.
See preceding letter, n. 2.

1.
Addressed: Thos Carlyle Esq / care of Messs Bell & Bradfute / Edinburgh.
Postmarks: FREE / 27 DEC 27 / 1832, and DEC / 29 / 1832. Franked by J.
A. Roebuck. MS at NLS. Carlyle’s answer of Jan. 12, 1833, is in A.
Carlyle, pp. 30-36.

2.
Dated Nov. 19. Published in A. Carlyle, pp. 23-30.

3.
The English in France. By the Author of “The English in Italy” [C. H.
Phipps, Marquis of Normanby] (London, 1828).

4.
See Letter 61, n. 23, 24.

5.
John George Cochrane (1781-1852), editor of the Foreign Quarterly
Review, 1827-35.

6.
Thomas Peregrine Courtenay (1782-1841), politician and pamphleteer. For
identification of his contributions, see Eileen M. Curran, “The Foreign
Quarterly Review, 1827-1846” (unpublished dissertation, Cornell
University, 1958), p. 373.

7.
“French and English Journals,” Examiner, Dec. 2, 1832, pp. 772-73.

8.
“On the Necessity of Uniting the Question of Corn Laws with that of
Tithes,” Examiner, Dec. 23, 1832, pp. 817-18.

9.
“Necessity of Revising the Present System of Taxation,” ibid., Jan. 13,
1833, pp. 19-20.

10.
See Letter 62, n. 2.

11.
“What is Poetry?” MR, VII (Jan., 1833), 60-70.

12.
Probably Le Procès en Cours d’Assises, 27 et 28 août 1832 (Paris, 1832).

13.
Jules Lechevalier (1800-1850), economist and journalist.

14.
Abel Louis Etienne Transon (1805-1876), engineer and a leading
Saint-Simonian.

15.
François Marie Charles Fourier (1772-1837), founder of the socialist
system which bears his name.

16.
“Doctrine d’Association de M. Charles Fourier,” Revue encyclopédique,
LIII (Feb., 1832), 271-300. See Letter 91. JSM’s later and
better-informed opinion of Fourier (see Principles of Political Economy,
II, i, 4) was much more favourable.

17.
See Letter 58, n. 18.

18.
JSM published a brief eulogy of him in the Examiner, Dec. 9, 1832, p.
792.

19.
The Ballot was incorporated with the Examiner, beginning with the number
of Dec. 2, 1832.

20.
James Henry Leigh Hunt (1784-1859), essayist and poet, friend of Keats,
Shelley, and Byron.

21.
Edward Moxon (1801-1858), publisher of some of the greatest
nineteenth-century poets, including Wordsworth, Tennyson, and Browning.

22.
“The Working of the Reform Act,” Examiner, Jan. 6, 1833, pp. 4-5.

23.
Well-known Edinburgh firm of booksellers.

24.
Written in the margin of the last page.

1.
Addressed: Rev. J. P. Nichol, Academy, Montrose. Published in part in
Knight. The originals of these letters have not been located.

John Pringle Nichol (1804-1859), astronomer, as a young man was deeply
interested in political economy; in 1833 James Mill and Nassau Senior
thought well enough of his work therein to recommend him for the chair
of political economy vacated by the death of J. B. Say at the Collège de
France, Paris. See Letter 71.

2.
These cannot now be identified with certainty.

3.
Presumably a deletion by Knight.

4.
At Northwater Bridge, where James Mill’s father was a shoemaker.

1.
Addressed: William Tait Esq / Bookseller / Edinburgh. Franked by G.
Grote. Postmarks: [???], 23 JA 23, 1833 and JAN / 25 / 1833. MS at NLS.
No salutation or date; perhaps a fragment.

2.
JSM’s review did not appear until the June number. See Letter 60, n. 2.

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle Esq / Carlton Street / Stockbridge /
Edinburgh. Postmarks: FREE / 4FE4 / 1833, and FEB / 6 / 1833. Franked by
J. A. Roebuck. MS at NLS. In reply to Carlyle’s letter of Jan. 12, 1833,
A. Carlyle, pp. 30-36; answered by Carlyle, Feb. 22, ibid., pp. 37-41.

2.
Carlyle had identified him as Thomas Holcroft, “A Son of the Dramatist
[Thomas] Holcroft’s, brother-in-law to a Mr. Badams a very old friend of
mine.” Thomas Holcroft, Jr. (d. 1852) was a London journalist (see
Gentleman’s Magazine, NS, XXXVII [April, 1852], 425).

3.
Dr. John Badams (d. 1833), a Birmingham manufacturer who had been
trained as a doctor. Carlyle had met him through Edward Irving in 1824
and had spent six weeks at his home in Birmingham that summer.

4.
St. A. Berville and J. F. Barrière, Collection des mémoires relatifs à
la révolution française (68 vols., Paris, 1820-28).

5.
Paris, 1823.

6.
Mémoires de René Levasseur (de la Sarthe) ex-conventionnel . . . (4
vols., Paris, 1829-31).

7.
Le Vieux Cordelier, journal politique, rédigé en l’an II, par Camille
Desmoulins . . . 1825. In Berville-Barrière Collection.

8.
An edition was included in the Berville-Barrière Collection.

9.
See Letter 61, n. 7.

10.
L. B. Picard, Le Gil Blas de la révolution (5 vols., Paris, 1824).

11.
G. C. A. Pigault-Le Brun (1753-1835), novelist and playwright.

12.
Carlyle had commented on Thiers’ ethics: “He will prove to you that the
power to have done a thing almost (if not altogether) gave you the right
to do it: every hero of his turns out to be perfectly justified in doing
whatsoever—he has succeeded in doing” (A. Carlyle, p. 34).

13.
[H. A. Cavé and A. Dittmer], Les Soirées de Neuilly, esquisses
dramatiques et historiques, publiées par M. de Fongeray (Paris, 1827).

14.
See Letter 64, n. 3.

15.
Paris; ou le livre des cent-et-un (15 vols., Paris, 1831-34).

16.
Writing barely legible. Probably Stéphane Mony [until 1832,
Mony-Flachat] (1810-1884), engineer and politician.

17.
Covered by seal.

18.
See Letter 60.

19.
Harriet Martineau (1802-1876), had leaped into instant fame in Feb.,
1832, with the publication of the first tale of her Illustrations of
Political Economy.

20.
Henry Brougham, Baron Brougham and Vaux (1778-1868), then Lord
Chancellor.

21.
Page torn.

22.
“Necessity of Revising the Present System of Taxation,” Examiner, Jan.
13, 1833, pp. 19-20; and “Errors and Truths on a Property Tax,” ibid.,
Jan. 27, 1833, pp. 51-52.

23.
See Letter 64, n. 22.

24.
“Internal Reforms in the Commons,” Examiner, Feb. 3, 1833, pp. 67-68.

25.
See Letter 64, par. 2, and Carlyle’s reply of Jan 12, 1833.

26.
L. A. Fauvelet de Bourrienne, Mémoire . . . sur Napoléon (10 vols.,
Paris, 1829).

27.
This paragraph is written at the side of the letter.

1.
MS at LSE.

2.
See Letter 60, n. 2.

3.
His article, “Corporation and Church Property,” Jurist, IV (Feb., 1833),
1-26, which was reprinted as a separate pamphlet by S. Sweet, Stevens
and Son, and A. Maxwell, Oxford. A copy is in the library of Somerville
College, Oxford.

4.
See Letter 65, n. 1.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 1 Stamford Grove / Upper Clapton. Postmarks:
[???]4 / MR 1 / 1833 /, and Leadenhall St. MS at King’s. Excerpts
published in Garnett, pp. 104 and 114.

2.
“Writings of Junius Redivivus,” MR, VII (April, 1833), 262-70.

3.
[W. J. Fox], “A Victim” [John Wesley’s sister], MR, VII (March, 1833),
164-77.

4.
“On the Factory System,” MR, VII (March, 1833), 145-53. Of uncertain
authorship, but possibly by Fox.

5.
[W. J. Fox], “The Poetical Works of Leigh Hunt,” MR, VII (March, 1833),
178-84.

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle Esq. / 18 Carlton Street / Stockbridge /
Edinburgh. Postmarks: FREE / 11 [? ? ?] 11 / 183[3], and MAR / H 13 A /
1833. Franked by E. Strutt. MS at NLS. Published, with minor errors, in
Elliot, I, 37-42. In reply to Carlyle’s letter of Feb. 22, 1833, A.
Carlyle, pp. 37-41; answered by Carlyle, March 21, 1833, A. Carlyle, pp.
42-45.

2.
“Write to me, I pray you, with more and more heartiness; show me your
feelings as well as your thoughts; and let us in all ways, while so much
is permitted us, help one another as we can” (A. Carlyle, p. 37).

3.
“National Education,” Tait’s, II (March, 1833), 755-65.

4.
“The Reformed Parliament,” ibid., pp. 685-88.

5.
Page torn. This is Elliot’s reading.

6.
See Letters 60, n. 2, and 66, n. 2.

7.
See Letter 67, n. 6.

8.
“Critical Illustrations of Lord Byron’s Poetry,” Fraser’s, VII (March,
1833), 303-17. Carlyle subsequently guessed that it was by John A.
Heraud (1799-1887), poet and dramatist. Miriam M. H. Thrall in
Rebellious Fraser’s (New York, 1934), p. 267, attributes the article to
Heraud and comments on its Carlylian tone and ideas.

9.
Carlyle had written: “A series of Revolution Portraits (engravings)
which I dug out lately, gave me great satisfaction: under each head
stands, in a miniature compartment, the main scene he figured in: it is
a valuable work, if genuine” (A. Carlyle, p. 40).

10.
Rowland Detrosier (1800?-1834), who had been secretary to the London
Political Union, had been introduced to Carlyle by JSM the previous
year.

11.
This is written at the top of the first page.

12.
Written in the margin of the last page.

1.
Addressed: William Tait Esq / Bookseller / Edinburgh. Postmarks: SUN /
MR 31 / 1833, and FREE / A 2 / 1833. Franked by G. Grote. MS at NLS.

2.
John Pringle Nichol.

3.
See Letter 65, n. 1.

4.
Nassau William Senior (1790-1864), economist.

5.
Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord, Prince de Bénévent (1754-1838),
French statesman, at this time ambassador to England.

6.
See Letters 60, n. 2, and 66.

7.
Page torn.

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle Esq / 4 Great King St / Edinburgh. Postmarks:
FREE / 13 AP 13 / 1833, and APR / C 15 A / 1833. Franked by G. Grote. MS
at NLS. Published in part in Elliot, I, 42-46. In reply to Carlyle’s
letter of March 21, 1833, A. Carlyle, pp. 42-45; answered by Carlyle,
April 18, 1833, A. Carlyle, pp. 45-52.

2.
See Letter 60, n. 2.

3.
See Letter 68, n. 3.

4.
See Letter 64, n. 11.

5.
Achille Roche (1801-1834), revolutionary journalist. Roche was fined and
jailed in 1830 for writing Vol. II by himself. See Letter 67, n. 6.

6.
This and the next two titles are identified in the notes to Letter 67.

7.
[Joachim Vilate], Causes secrètes de la révolution du 9 au 10 thermidor
an II . . . (Paris, [2 vols., 1795]). Also in Berville-Barrière
Collection, in Le Vieux Cordelier volume.

8.
Emile Barrault.

9.
Published anonymously (3 vols., London, 1833).

10.
John Charles Spencer, Viscount Althorp and later third Earl Spencer
(1782-1845), Whig political leader.

11.
Thomas De Quincey (1785-1859), author of The Confessions of an English
Opium Eater. In his reply of April 18 Carlyle described De Quincey as
“bankrupt in purse, and as nearly as possible in mind. . . . one of the
most irreclaimable Tories now extant” (in A. Carlyle, p. 48). Years
later JSM reviewed favourably De Quincey’s Logic of Political Economy in
WR, XLIII (June, 1845), 318-31.

12.
“Remarks on Bentham’s Philosophy,” published anonymously as an Appendix
in E. L. Bulwer’s England and the English (Paris, 1833), pp. 468-89. See
Letter 82.

13.
Sir Archibald Alison, History of Europe during the French Revolution (10
vols., Edinburgh, 1833-42). JSM criticized the first two volumes
severely in MR, VII (July-Aug., 1833) 507-11, 513-16. The second
instalment of the review he reprinted in Dissertations, I, 82-88.

14.
This postscript is written at the top of the first page.

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle Esq / Craigenputtoch / Dumfries / N.B.
Postmarks: FREE / 18 MY 18 / 1833, and DUMFRIES / 20 MAY 1833. Franked
by G. Grote. MS at NLS. Published, with minor errors and omissions, in
Elliot, I, 47-51. In reply to Carlyle’s letters of April 18 and May 1,
1833, A. Carlyle, pp. 45-54; answered by Carlyle, June 13, 1833, A.
Carlyle, 54-60.

2.
The Carlyles had returned from Edinburgh to Craigenputtock in early May.

3.
See Letter 61, n. 23.

4.
One of Carlyle’s favourite symbols for conventional respectability. At
the trial of John Thurtell in 1824 a witness testified that he had
thought the accused murderer respectable because he kept a gig.

5.
No such article seems to have appeared in the Examiner from May to July.

6.
See preceding letter, n. 13.

7.
Macaulay’s review of Dumont’s Recollections of Mirabeau in ER, LV (July,
1832), 552-76.

8.
Carlyle had written: “Yesterday in some newspaper I saw a sentence
quoted from the Monthly Repository about Books and Men, which was
curiously emblematic of my own late thoughts. If it was not you that
wrote it (which I fear) then there must be another Mystic in England,
whose acquaintance I should gladly make.” (A. Carlyle, p. 53.)

9.
Extracts from the Information Received by His Majesty’s Commissioners as
to the Administration and Operation of the Poor Laws (London, 1833).

10.
JSM’s signature is not to be seen on this letter.

11.
This paragraph is written at the top of the first page.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 1 Stamford Grove / Upper Clapton. Dated 19
May but postmarked 7 NIGHT 7 / MY 18, and CORNHILL. MS at King’s.
Largely published in Garnett, pp. 103-4, 110.

2.
[Robert Browning], Pauline; a Fragment of a Confession (London, 1833).

3.
The Examiner would have none of it, and an enlarged version of it for
Tait’s was forestalled by a contemptuous brief notice (see Letter 83).
JSM’s liberally annotated review copy with a summary criticism written
in the flyleaves, which Browning read on Oct. 30, 1833, is now in the
Forster Collection of the Victoria and Albert Museum. Hayek, pp. 43-44,
prints the criticism. It is commonly thought to have had crucial
influence in turning Browning away from “confessional” to dramatic
poetry. See W. C. DeVane, A Browning Handbook (2nd ed., New York, 1955),
pp. 45-47.

4.
Fox had become interested in Browning through his protégés Eliza and
Sarah Flower, friends of the young poet from childhood. He reviewed both
of Browning’s first two publications enthusiastically. See Mineka, The
Dissidence of Dissent, pp. 191-92, 308-13.

5.
Archibald (later Sir Archibald) Alison (1792-1867), Tory historian. See
Letters 72 and 73.

6.
Evidently referring to the protest of orthodox Unitarians over the
changes Fox was making in the Monthly Repository, until 1832 the
official Unitarian organ. In April, 1833, the Rev. Lant Carpenter of
Bristol wrote to Fox protesting against the changes, but chiefly against
the unorthodox views being advanced in the magazine on marriage and
divorce. See Mineka, The Dissidence of Dissent, pp. 255-57.

7.
Kent Terrace, home of Mrs. John Taylor, with whom by this time JSM was
deeply involved.

8.
No such work was published. This may have been a project of the
unsuccessful Society for the Diffusion of Moral and Political Knowledge
with which Fox was associated (see Letter 79, n. 7).

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 1 Stamford Grove / Upper Clapton. Postmark:
7 NIGHT / MY 20 / 1833. MS at LSE.

2.
See Letter 72, n. 13.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / Upper Clapton. MS at King’s. The date is
established by the reference to JSM’s review of Alison.

2.
See Letter 72, n. 13.

3.
Probably William Bridges Adams (“Junius Redivivus”),whose article “On
the Ministerial Plan for the Abolition of Negro Slavery,” appeared in
MR, VII (July, 1833), 453-74.

4.
Probably Henry Taylor (see Letter 51), though JSM also knew James
Stephen, then counsel to the Colonial Office, later Under-Secretary for
Colonies, who prepared the bill for abolishing the slave trade, 1833.
See also Letter 80, n. 2.

5.
See Letter 74, n. 2 and 3.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 1 Stamford Grove / Upper Clapton. Postmarks:
8 MORN [???] / JY [???], and 7 NIGHT 7 / JY [???] / 1833. MS at King’s.
Published in part in Garnett, pp. 104-5.

2.
“Cause” against the existing system of taxation. An article, “Complaints
& Proposals regarding Taxation,” in the Edinburgh Review, complained of
the gross injustice of having progressive house and window taxes. JSM
rejected the claim of injustice in his “On the Defence of the House and
Window Tax in the Edinburgh Review,” MR, VII (Aug., 1833), 575-82.

3.
The pseudonym of Charles Reece Pemberton (1790-1840), a frequent
contributor to the Monthly Repository, which was at this time running
serially his Autobiography of Pel. Verjuice. See Mineka, The Dissidence
of Dissent, pp. 345-48, 420-21.

4.
“On Female Education & Occupations,” MR, VII (July, 1833), 489-98. The
author has not been identified.

1.
Addressed: Thos. Carlyle Esq / Craigenputtoch / Dumfries. Postmarks:
FREE / 6 JY 6 / 1833, and DUMFRIES / 8 JL 1833. Franked by G. Grote. MS
at NLS. Published, with some omissions, in Elliot, I, 52-56. In reply to
Carlyle’s of June 13, 1833, A. Carlyle, pp. 54-60; answered by Carlyle,
July 18, 1833, A. Carlyle, pp. 60-64.

2.
Dr. John Carlyle.

3.
See Letter 64, n. 11.

4.
The ill-fated review of Browning’s Pauline. See Letter 74.

5.
See Letter 73 and Carlyle’s reply (in A. Carlyle, p. 60).

6.
This postscript is written at the top of the first page.

1.
Published by Knight, pp. 663-65. MS not located.

2.
See Letter 65, n. 1.

3.
Charles Comte.

4.
Comte Pellegrino Rossi (1787-1848), economist and statesman. He was
elected to the chair of political economy at the Collège de France in
Aug., 1833.

5.
Pierre Etienne Dumont (1759-1829), Swiss publicist and jurist,
translator and editor of Bentham.

6.
“The Budget,” Tait’s, III (May, 1833), 137-40.

7.
Francis Place, J. A. Roebuck, and Joseph Hume led the movement late in
1831 to establish such a society to publish tracts. A year later the
plan was altered to project a “Penny Political and Moral Magazine,” but
the project collapsed when the ministry refused to repeal the stamp
taxes on newspapers (see R. K. Webb, The British Working Class Reader
[London, 1955], pp. 93-94). In 1834 Henry Brougham and Charles Knight
(1791-1873) founded a short-lived Society for the Diffusion of Political
Knowledge.

8.
Henry Warburton (1784?-1858), radical MP 1826-41, 1843-57.

9.
Sir William Clay (1791-1869), liberal Whig MP 1832-57.

10.
Thomas Gisborne (1794-1852), Whig MP 1830-31, 1832-37, 1839-41, 1843-52,
vigorous supporter of free trade.

11.
See Letter 68, n. 3.

12.
“The Ministerial Measure Respecting the Bank,” Examiner, July 7, 1833,
pp. 417-18.

13.
See Letter 77.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / M. John Sterling / chez Madame Barton / 4 Cölnthor
/ Bonn. MS at King’s. Published in part in Elliot, I, 56-57.

2.
Henry Taylor was in the Colonial Office. On June 10, 1833, Sterling
wrote to JSM: “If you can learn anything as to the Govt. plans for the
education of the slaves & will let me know you will do me a great
service. I think I might be of some use in that matter & if you should
see Taylor—whom I do not like to trouble with a letter on the subject—I
wish you would ask him whether there is any probability of a Commission
to enquire on the subject—& if he thinks I should stand any chance of
being appointed to it—for if so I would certainly apply immediately.
England seems to be going as an American would say ‘all to immortal
smash’.” (Unpublished letter, MS at King’s.)

3.
Lord John Russell (1792-1878), one of the Whig leaders in the struggle
for the Reform Bill.

4.
Sterling had written from Bonn in his letter of June 10: “If
circumstances permitted which they do not, I should like after reading
Kant to spend some time at Munich near Schelling who since the death of
Hegel of Berlin is I believe the only philosopher of marked & original
genius in Germany. His views if I may rely on what I hear present a very
remarkable conformity to those of Coleridge, for he too maintains that
the Christian Mysteries are the highest Truths of Reason & that it is
either necessary to assume or possible to prove every one of them a
priori. Schleiermacher is I believe the head of a different school—& one
I believe very popular among the learned here—They say he considers
Philosophy and Religion altogether apart from each other & makes the
latter an affair of sentiment and moral expediency. I incline strongly
to Schelling’s view—but unhappily he has published nothing important for
many years & his earlier doctrines were very different from the present
ones.”

1.
MS at NLS. Published in Elliot, I, 57.

2.
JSM’s first impressions of Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803-1882) were not
especially favourable (see Letters 82 and 87). The introduction led to
the lifelong friendship and correspondence of Emerson and Carlyle.

1.
No address, since included in Buller’s letter. MS at NLS. Published,
with minor errors and omissions, in Elliot, I, 57-62. In reply to
Carlyle’s of July 18, 1833, in A. Carlyle, pp. 60-64; answered by
Carlyle, Sept. 10, 1833, A. Carlyle, pp. 65-68.

2.
Henry Bickersteth, later Baron Langdale (1783-1851), Master of the
Rolls; close friend of Bentham and James Mill.

3.
See Letter 58, n. 10.

4.
John Ramsay McCulloch.

5.
A History of Greece (12 vols., London, 1846-56).

6.
Statement of the Question of Parliamentary Reform: With a Reply to the
Objections of the Edinburgh Review No. 61 (London, 1821).

7.
Essentials of Parliamentary Reform (London, 1831).

8.
Aug. 4, 1833, p. 488. Roebuck’s speech had been delivered on July 30 in
the House of Commons.

9.
Rowland Detrosier.

10.
Letter 81.

11.
“Municipal Institutions,” Examiner, Aug. 11, 1833, pp. 497-98.

12.
See Letter 72, n. 13.

13.
Report of the Central Board of H.M. Commissioners Appointed to Collect
Information as to the Employment of Children in Factories, Parliamentary
Papers, 1833, XX.

14.
See Letter 58, n. 18.

15.
Letter 72, n. 12.

16.
“Count Cagliostro,” Fraser’s, VIII (July-Aug., 1833), 19-28, 132-55.

17.
Sir William Hamilton (1788-1856), philosopher, whose position JSM years
later attacked in An Examination of Sir W. Hamilton’s Philosophy
(London, 1865). The reference is to Carlyle’s letter of July 18 (A.
Carlyle, p. 61); in reply, Carlyle says, Oct. 28: “Sir William was not
the ‘old schoolman’ I once spoke of; that Redivivus was another
considerably inferior character . . . a ganz ausgestorbener Mann. He
lectured on Logic, and thought Logic was to be the salvation of the
world.” (A. Carlyle, p. 78.)

1.
Addressed: William Tait Esq. / care of Messrs Simpkin & Marshall. MS at
NLS.

2.
Review of Browning’s Pauline. See Letter 74.

3.
“Besides the above poems . . . we have Paulina [sic], A Fragment of a
Confession; a piece of pure bewilderment” (Tait’s, III [Aug., 1833],
668).

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle Esq / Craigenputtoch / Dumfries / N.B.
Postmarks: [???] / 5 SE / 1833, and [???] MFRIES / [???] SEP 1833. MS at
NLS. Published in part in Elliot, I, 62-65. Carlyle’s answer of Sept.
24, 1833, is in A. Carlyle, pp. 68-75.

2.
The cause was the crisis that had been reached in the relationship of
JSM with Mrs. John Taylor. Taylor agreed to an experimental separation
for six months from his wife, who left for Paris in Sept. JSM followed
on Oct. 10 and stayed until about Nov. 20. See Hayek, p. 49. See also
Letter 89.

3.
See Letter 67, n. 7.

4.
See Letter 72, n. 7.

5.
Sartor Resartus, which Carlyle, despairing of securing a publisher, had
offered to James Fraser for serial publication. It appeared in Fraser’s
Magazine from Nov.,1833, to Aug., 1834. JSM had evidently read it in
manuscript.

6.
Œuvres complètes de Voltaire (66 vols., Paris, 1819-25), Vol. L, pp.
135, 141, 321, 337, 359, 362, 363, 389, 393, 533-38.

7.
This postscript is written at the top of the first page.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 1 Stamford Grove / Upper Clapton. Postmark:
T. P. / Cornhill; To be Delivere[d] by 10 Sund Mor / 7 NIGHT / SP. 7 /
1883. MS at King’s. Excerpts published in Garnett, pp. 105, 106.

2.
Robert Blakey, History of Moral Science (2 vols., London, 1833). JSM’s
review in MR, VII (Oct., 1833), 661-69.

3.
“The Two Kinds of Poetry,” MR, VII (Oct., 1833), 714-24, reprinted with
his “What is Poetry?” (MR, VII [Jan., 1833], 60-70) in Dissertations
under title “Thoughts on Poetry and its Varieties.” JSM did not publish
a review of Tennyson until nearly two years later, London Review, I
(July, 1835), 402-24.

4.
Mrs. Taylor.

5.
Page torn where square brackets appear in this sentence.

6.
She was soon to go to Paris to begin the trial separation from her
husband. See preceding letter, n. 2.

1.
Addressed: W. Tait Esq. / Prince’s Street / Edinbro’. Postmarks: FREE /
SE 25 / 1833, and SEP / C 27A / 1833. Franked by J. A. Roebuck. MS at
LSE.

2.
These were eventually published in 1844 as Essays on Some Unsettled
Questions of Political Economy. For the origin of these essays, see
Letter 43, n. 14.

3.
This essay was later published, LWR, XXVI (Oct., 1836), 1-29, under the
title “On the Definition of Political Economy; and on the Method of
Philosophical Investigation in that Science,” and was later reprinted in
the Essays cited above with the title “On the Definition of Political
Economy; and On the Method of Investigation Proper to It.”

4.
“Dialogues of Three Templars on Political Economy,” London Mag., IX
(April-May, 1824), 341-55, 427-28, 547-66.

5.
See Letter 79.

6.
A never-completed project possibly arising from his review of George
Cornewall Lewis’ Use and Abuse of Political Terms; see Letter 51, n. 15.

7.
This postscript is written at the top of the page.

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle Esq / Craigenputtock / Dumfries. Postmarks:
FREE / 7 OC 7 / 1833, and DUMFRIES / 9 OCT 1833. Franked by G. Grote. MS
at NLS. Published, with minor errors and omissions, in Elliot, I, pp.
65-71. Reply to Carlyle’s of Sept. 10 and Sept. 24, 1833, A. Carlyle,
pp. 65-75; answered by Carlyle, Oct. 28, 1833, A. Carlyle, 75-82.

2.
See Letter 85, n. 2.

3.
Ibid., n. 3.

4.
For titles and pagination of the seven articles in the series see
MacMinn, Bibliog., pp. 34-35.

5.
Connop Thirlwall (1797-1875), historian and clergyman, published three
papers in this volume on Schleiermacher and Socrates, all signed C.T.:
“Schleiermacher on the Worth of Socrates as a Philosopher (From the
Berlin Transactions of 1815),” Philological Museum, II (1833), 538-55;
“Schleiermacher’s Introduction to his Translation of Plato’s Apology of
Socrates,” ibid., pp. 556-61; and “Socrates, Schleiermacher and
Delbrueck,” ibid., pp. 562-87.

6.
Carlyle had written in his letter of Sept. 24, 1833: “How different,
above all, is that honey-mouthed, tear-stained, soup-kitchen Jesus
Christ of our poor shovel-hatted modern Christians from the
stern-visaged Christ of the Gospels, proclaiming aloud in the
market-place (with such a total contempt of the social
respectabilities): ‘Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!’
Descend from your gigs, ye wretched scoundrels, for the hour is come!”
(A. Carlyle, p. 70.)

7.
Emerson had presented JSM’s letter of introduction on Aug. 25 and had
stayed twenty-four hours at Craigenputtock. See Carlyle’s letter of
Sept. 10, A. Carlyle, p. 66.

8.
Effingham Wilson (1783-1868), best known as the publisher of Tennyson’s
first volume and of Browning’s Paracelsus.

9.
England and the English.

10.
This postscript is written at the top of the first page.

1.
MS at King’s. One excerpt is published in Garnett, p. 110, but dated
June, 1833. The dating of Oct. 10 is drawn from the reference to the
impending departure for Paris “probably at the end of this week” in his
Oct. 5 letter to Carlyle (the preceding letter).

2.
He remained in Paris until about Nov. 20.

3.
This is the copy now in the Forster Collection of the Victoria and
Albert Museum.

4.
But Browning did see the copy. See Letter 74, n. 3.

5.
Eventually published in the Monthly Repository under the title “Notes on
Some of the More Popular Dialogues of Plato”: 1. “The Protagoras,” VIII
(1834), 89-99, 203-11; 2. “The Phaedrus,” VIII, 404-20, 633-46; 3. “The
Gorgias,” VIII, 691-710, 802-15, 829-42; 4. “The Apology of Socrates,”
IX (1835), 112-21, 169-78. Reprinted in Four Dialogues of Plato, trans.
JSM, ed. Ruth Borchardt (London, 1946). Never published were five
further translations with notes (the Charmides, Euthyphron, Laches,
Lysis, and Parmenides), the MSS of which are in the New York Public
Library.

6.
Ebenezer Elliott, the Corn Law Rhymer, did contribute to the Monthly
Repository, but not any drama.

7.
Charles Fox, publisher of the Monthly Repository.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 1 Stamford Grove / Upper Clapton / London /
Angleterre. Postmarks: FPO / NO 7 / 1833, and 10.F. Noon [???] / NO 7 /
1833. MS at Yale. Published, with minor errors, in Hayek, pp. 49-54.

2.
JSM and Mrs. Taylor. See Letter 84, n. 2.

3.
Page torn.

4.
Edward Hardy.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 1 Stamford Grove / Upper Clapton. Postmark:
[???] / [???] 22[?] / 1833. MS at Yale. Published in part in Hayek, pp.
54-55.

2.
See Letter 88, n. 5.

3.
Brother of Mrs. Taylor.

1.
Addressed: Thos. Carlyle Esq / Craigenputtoch / Dumfries / N.B.
Postmarks: 26NO26 / 1833, and DUMFRIES / 28 NOV 1833. Franked by Chas.
Buller, Jr. MS at Carlyle House, London. Published, with errors and
omissions, in Elliot, I, 71-81. In reply to Carlyle’s of Oct. 28, 1833,
A. Carlyle, pp. 75-82; answer by Carlyle, Dec. 17, 1833, A. Carlyle, pp.
82-88. On Aug. 8, 1837, JSM wrote Carlyle to ask for the return of this
letter, for the purpose indicated below in n. 18.

2.
Charles Comte.

3.
Charles Tanneguy, comte Duchâtel.

4.
C. J. F. Hénault, Abrégé chronologique de l’histoire de France (Paris,
1744; and many later editions).

5.
The famous “affair of the diamond necklace”; Carlyle’s article, “The
Diamond Necklace,” was not published until 1837.

6.
Probably Baron Antoine Darnay (d. 1837), who had served under Prince
Eugène Beauharnais in Italy and had been “directeur général du royaume
d’Italie.”

7.
Pierre Simon Ballanche (1776-1847), mystical philosopher. His Œuvres
complètes (6 vols., Paris, 1830-32).

8.
Pierre Jean de Béranger (1780-1857).

9.
Michel Théodore Leclercq, Proverbes dramatiques (4 vols., Paris,
1823-26, and various later editions).

10.
Mémoires inédites de l’Abbé Morellet . . . (2 vols., Paris, 1821).

11.
See Letter 82.

12.
Prosper Enfantin.

13.
Pierre Leroux (1798-1871), philosopher, journalist, and politician.

14.
Jean Reynaud (1806-1863), philosopher.

15.
Armand Carrel (1800-1836), journalist.

16.
Godefroi Cavaignac (1801-1845), politician.

17.
In the column headed “Foreign Intelligence: France,” Examiner, April 24,
1831, pp. 266-67. Not listed in JSM’s bibliography of his writings.

18.
Most of what follows was reproduced by JSM in his essay on Armand
Carrel, LWR, XXVIII (Oct., 1837), 66-111, reprinted in Dissertations, I,
237-308. The article also includes a tribute to Cavaignac.

19.
Paris révolutionnaire, 4 vols., 1833-34 (reprinted, 1848). The
introduction by Cavaignac was entitled “La Force révolutionnaire.”

20.
Victor Cousin (1792-1867), philosopher and educational reformer.

21.
FQR, XII (Oct., 1833), 455-95.

22.
Reviews of Harriet Martineau’s A Tale of the Tyne in Examiner, Oct. 27,
1833, pp. 676-78; and of Col. Charles Napier’s The Colonies in ibid.,
Nov. 24, 1833, pp. 740-41.

This postscript is written at the top of the first page.

1.
Excerpts published in Garnett, pp. 151-52. MS not located.

2.
Edward Strutt, later Baron Belper (1801-1880), then MP for Derby.

3.
This was an early stage in the plans for the London Review, which was
first published in 1835 with JSM as the real though not official editor.

1.
Published in J. Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, M. Victor Cousin, Sa Vie et Sa
Correspondance (3 vols., Paris, 1895), I, 394-95. MS not located.

2.
See Letter 82, n. 8. Roebuck frequently quoted Cousin in his speech.

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle / Craigenputtoch / Dumfries / N.B. Postmarks:
FREE / 24 DE 24 / 1833, and DUMFRIES / 26 DEC 1833. Franked by J. A.
Roebuck. MS at NLS. Published, with omissions, in Elliot, I, 81-86. In
reply to Carlyle’s of Dec. 17, 1833, A. Carlyle, pp. 82-88; answered by
Carlyle, Jan. 20, 1834, A. Carlyle, pp. 90-96.

2.
Abraham Hayward (1801-1884), miscellaneous writer; strongly Tory in his
views and in later life a bitter critic of JSM.

3.
Edwin Chadwick had been serving as sub-editor since 1830.

4.
These discussions led to the founding of the London Review the following
year. See Letters 96 and 104.

5.
Sir William Molesworth (1810-1855), politician, who in the following
year supplied the money to establish the London Review.

6.
A wealthy mill-owning family of Leeds, active in Reform politics,
including: John Marshall (b. 1765), MP for York 1826-30; John Marshall
(1797-1836), MP for Leeds 1832-35; and William Marshall (1796-1872), MP
for various constituencies 1826-68.

7.
See Letter 91, n. 5. For Carlyle’s description of the two volumes JSM
refers to, see footnote to chap. ii of “The Diamond Necklace.”

8.
See Letter 91, n. 4.

9.
See Letter 58, n. 18.

10.
P. A. C. de Beaumarchais (1732-1799), the celebrated dramatist.

11.
This postscript is written at the top of the first page.

12.
Probably JSM’s review in Examiner, Feb. 2, 1834, pp. 68-69, of St.
Simonism in London (London, 1833), by Fontana and Prati.

13.
This second postscript is written (upside down) at the very top of the
first page.

1.
Addressed: Thos. Carlyle Esq. / Craigenputtoch / Dumfries. Postmarks: EX
/ 14 JA 14 / 1834; C+ / 14 JA 14 / 1834; and DUMFRIES / 16 JAN 1834.
Franked by Charles Buller. MS at NLS. Published, with omissions, in
Elliot, I, 87-93. In reply to Carlyle’s of Dec. 17 and 24, 1833, A.
Carlyle, pp. 82-90; answered by Carlyle, Jan. 20, 1834, A. Carlyle, pp.
90-96.

2.
Of Dec. 17, 1833.

3.
See Letter 51, n. 15.

4.
From Carlyle’s letter (see A. Carlyle, p. 84); cf. also Sartor Resartus,
Bk. II, chap. 9.

5.
“The good of the species . . . I leave, with the most perfect trust, to
God Almighty, the All-governing who does comprehend it; believing withal
. . . that no good thing I can perform, or make myself capable of
performing, can be lost to my Brothers, but will prove in reality all
and the utmost that I was capable of doing for them.” Carlyle’s letter
of Dec. 17, 1833, A. Carlyle, p. 85.

6.
In Letter 87.

7.
See Letter 91, n. 4 and 5.

8.
“The Monthly Repository for December,” Examiner, Dec. 15, 1833, pp.
788-89; “The Monthly Repository for January,” ibid., Jan. 12, 1834, p.
21.

9.
See Letter 91, n. 22.

10.
Abbé G. H. R. de Montgaillard, Histoire de France . . . (9 vols., Paris,
1827).

11.
L. P. de Bachaumont, Mémoires secrets . . . (36 vols., London, 1777-89).

12.
Since Carlyle had inquired (Dec. 17, 1833) whether JSM had “his
[Beaumarchais’] Mémoires,” probably a reference to the section of that
work which deals with L. V. Goezman (1730-1794).

1.
Published by Knight, pp. 661-63. MS not located. The indicated deletion
in the letter is by Knight.

2.
Knight dates this letter as 1833, but internal evidence, notably the
discussion of the projected Review, clearly points to 1834 as the
correct year. See also n. 3.

3.
Roebuck’s phrase did not specifically refer to Isaac Watts’ hymns but to
a work called “The Second Catechism, without Proofs,” published by the
Sunday School Union. See “Children’s Books,” Tait’s, IV (Dec., 1833),
285-86.

4.
Probably John Heywood Hawkins (1803-1877), MP for Newport, Isle of
Wight, 1832-41.

5.
Dr. Thomas Southwood Smith (1788-1861), sanitary reformer, active
Benthamite and Unitarian.

6.
See Letters 86 and 102.

7.
No such article seems to have appeared in the Foreign Quarterly Review.

8.
Probably a reference to this sentence: “We [Tait’s Magazine] had the
most gifted political writers of the day with us, and a publisher who,
for activity and industry, has not been surpassed . . . ” (Tait’s, IV
[Jan., 1834], 494).

1.
MS at LSE.

2.
[Thomas De Quincey], “Mrs. Hannah More,” Tait’s, IV (Dec., 1833),
293-321.

3.
Tait’s, NS I (Feb., 1834), 54-59. Author not identified.

4.
“London Sights—The Streets,” Tait’s, pp. 38-44.

1.
MS at King’s. Excerpt published by Hayek, pp. 92-93, but dated as of
“about April 1834.”

2.
For his series, “Notes on the Newspapers,” in MR, VIII, March-Sept.,
1834. The first four of the notes are dated Feb. 5, 6, 7, and 12. For
paging, see MacMinn, Bibliog., p. 38.

3.
Comte Adolphe Narcisse Thibaudeau (1795-1856), administrator, friend of
Lafayette, Carrel, and Cavaignac, writer of English correspondence
signed O. in the National.

4.
[W. B. Adams], “Coriolanus No Aristocrat,” MR, VIII (Jan.-April, 1834),
41-54, 129-39, 190-202, 292-99.

5.
The group probably included Eliza and Sarah Flower, Mrs. Taylor, Fox,
and JSM.

6.
Mrs. Taylor.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 1 Stamford Grove / Upper Clapton. Postmarks:
T. P / Leadenhall St, and 7 NIGHT 7 / FE. 22 / 1834. MS at King’s.
Published in part in Garnett, pp. 153-54.

2.
The note on “The Ministerial Resolutions on the Irish Tithe,” dated Feb.
21, did not appear in the March Repository but headed the “Notes on the
Newspapers” in the April number (VIII, 233-34).

3.
“Attendance in the House,” MR, VIII (March, 1834), 167-69.

4.
“Mr. O’Connell’s Bill for the Liberty of the Press,” ibid., pp. 173-76.
Daniel O’Connell (1775-1847), the famous Irish politician, had proposed
that in cases of private libel, truth should be a justification. JSM saw
“insuperable objections” to permitting the details of private conduct to
be subjected to judicial investigation whenever any accuser wished. See
Mineka, The Dissidence of Dissent, p. 274 n.

5.
A feature of the Repository for 1834 was the publication each month of a
“Song of the Month,” music by Eliza Flower.

6.
JSM praised the songs in his notice “Songs of the Months, Nos. I, II,
III, IV,” Examiner, April 20, 1834, p. 244.

7.
In his notice, “The Monthly Repository for January,” Examiner, Jan. 12,
1834, p. 21.

8.
Charles Reece Pemberton’s “St. Valentine’s Day,” MR, VIII (Feb., 1834),
99.

9.
Sarah Flower’s “Winds and Clouds,” MR (March, 1834), 203.

10.
Evidently Fox.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 1 Stamford Grove / Upper Clapton. Postmarks:
T. P. / Leadenhall St. / 7 NIGHT 7 / FE 24 / 1834, and 8 MORN 8 / FE 25
/ 1834. MS at King’s. Published in part in Garnett, p. 154.

2.
Mrs. Taylor.

3.
See preceding letter, n. 2.

4.
Ibid., n. 4.

5.
The postscript was probably intended for Eliza Flower.

1.
Addressed: Thos Carlyle Esq / Craigenputtoch / Dumfries / N.B.
Postmarks: FREE / 3 MR 3 / 1834; O / MR 3 / 1834; and DUMFRIES / 5 MAR
1834. Franked by Chas. Buller. MS at NLS. Published in part in Elliot,
I, 93-97. In reply to Carlyle’s of Jan. 20 and Feb. 22, 1834, A.
Carlyle, pp. 90-99; answered by Carlyle, April 18, 1834, A. Carlyle,
99-102.

2.
Carlyle in his letter of Jan. 20, 1834, suggested that he might write
for the proposed review two articles he had long had in mind, an “Essay
on Authors” and another on John Knox. The first he seems never to have
written, and one on Knox not until 1875. He did deal with Knox, however,
in his lecture on “The Hero as Priest” (1840).

3.
See Letter 95, n. 10 and 11.

4.
“Scott’s Life of Napoleon,” WR, IX (April, 1828), 251-313. See Letters
19 and 22.

5.
Mémoires de Louis XVIII, recueillis et mis en ordre par M. le Duc de
D*** [or rather, written by E. L. de La Mothe Houdancourt, pseudonym of
Baron de La Mothe-Langon] (12 vols., Paris, 1832-33).

6.
The complete edition referred to below was: Mémoires complets et
authentiques du Duc de Saint-Simon (21 vols., Paris, 1829-30). Prior to
this, from 1788 on, various incomplete editions had appeared.

7.
The summary of French news in the Examiner each week from Dec. 29, 1833,
to Feb. 16, 1834.

8.
See Letter 98, n. 2.

9.
See Letter 88, n. 5.

10.
See Letter 91, n. 10.

11.
See ibid., n. 19.

12.
P. J. B. Buchez and P. C. Roux, Histoire parlementaire de la révolution
française . . . (40 vols., Paris, 1833-38). Carlyle later reviewed the
first twenty-three volumes for the LWR, V (April, 1837), 233-47.

13.
Mémoires biographiques, littéraires et politiques de Mirabeau, écrits
par lui-même, par son père, son oncle et son fils adoptif [ed. by the
latter, J. M. N. Lucas de Motigny] (8 vols., Paris, 1834-35). The work
was later reviewed unfavourably by Carlyle in LWR, IV (Jan., 1837),
382-439.

1.
Published by Knight, pp. 665-67. MS not located.

2.
George R. Porter (1792-1852), statistician.

3.
Sir Henry Brooke Parnell, later first Baron Congleton (1776-1842),
liberal Whig politician and highly reputed political economist and
writer on finance.

The “table of protections” is in App. III of On Financial Reform (3rd
ed., London, 1831).

4.
See Letter 43, n. 6.

5.
“Comparative Mortality of Different Populations,” FQR, XIII (May, 1834),
272-82.

6.
Unidentified.

7.
Published in the town of Cupar. It was described in Tait’s (NS III
[March, 1836], 195) as “a Radical paper of distinguished ability, and
extensively circulated among the numerous small towns of Fife, where
reading and Radicalism are nearly universal.” Nichol’s contributions
have not been identified.

8.
“probabilities and signs.”

9.
Lord Milton’s “Address to the Landowners of Great Britain on the Corn
Laws,” dated Feb., 1831, appeared in various editions, 1832-35.

10.
JSM’s own translation of Plato’s Gorgias, 514E (see Four Dialogues of
Plato, trans. JSM, ed. Ruth Borchardt [London, 1946]; p. 159), slightly
alters the meaning of the passage, which might more literally be
translated: “Isn’t it foolish, as the proverb goes, to begin with the
big jar when you’re learning the potter’s art?”

11.
Adapted from Francis Bacon’s Novum Organum, Aphorism LXX.

12.
See Letters 86 and 96.

13.
Early draft of “On Profits, and Interest,” published in Essays on Some
Unsettled Questions of Political Economy.

14.
Perhaps “the earlier of the St. Simonian tracts,” including Comte’s
Système de politique positive, the return of which Mill requested on
Dec. 21, 1837. See Letter 228.

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle Esq. / Craigenputtoch / Dumfries / N.B.
Postmarks: L.S / 28 AP 28 / 1834, and DUMFRIES / AP 30 / 1834. MS at
NLS. Published, with omissions, in Elliot, I, 97-99.

2.
Of April 18, 1834, in A. Carlyle, pp. 99-102.

3.
The Carlyles’ impending move to London would make correspondence
unnecessary; they arrived early in May and henceforth made their home
there.

4.
Frederick Denison Maurice.

5.
Sterling was ordained deacon in the Anglican Church on June 22, 1834,
and for the next eight months served as curate at Herstmonceux. He
resigned in Feb., 1835, partly because of ill health, but also because
of religious difficulties. Though he continued his study of theological
questions for some years, he never resumed clerical duties.

6.
Her translation (London, 1834) of Victor Cousin’s Report on the State of
Public Instruction in Prussia, which JSM reviewed favourably in MR, VIII
(July, 1834), 502-13.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 1 Stamford Grove / Upper Clapton. Postmarks:
T. P / Leadenhall St; EVEN 4 / JU 17 / 1834. MS at King’s. Published in
Garnett, pp. 149-50.

2.
The London Review.

3.
See Letter 94.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 1 Stamford Grove / Upper Clapton. Postmarks:
4 / JU 26 / 1834 / EVEN / T P / Leadenhall St, and 2 EVEN 2 / JU 26 /
1834. MS at King’s.

2.
Paternoster Row, where the Monthly Repository was printed.

3.
The paragraph on “The Beer Bill,” dated June 20, concludes the “Notes on
the Newspapers” in MR, VIII (July, 1834), 521-28. All but one (“Mr
Rawlinson & the man of no religion”) of the notes listed below appeared
in the July issue.

4.
Notes on “The Alleged Increase of Crime” and “Debate on the Universities
Admission Bill” appeared in the Aug. number, pp. 589-90.

5.
Page torn.

6.
Mrs. Taylor.

7.
John Taylor.

8.
This postscript is written at the top of the verso.

1.
MS at Yale. No salutation or signature. Published, with minor
variations, in Hayek, pp. 93-94, with facsimile of the original. At the
end is written, in Mrs. Taylor’s hand: “my own adored one!”

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 1 Stamford Grove / Upper Clapton. Postmarks:
T. P. / Leadenhall St /, and 4 EVEN 4 / JY. 14 / 1834. MS at King’s.
Published in part in Garnett, pp. 164-65.

2.
The crisis in Fox’s church, South Place Chapel, had arisen from his
domestic difficulties. As early as 1832 because of his growing affection
for his ward, Eliza Flower, Fox and his wife had agreed to consider
themselves separated although they (and Eliza) continued to live under
the same roof. In the summer of 1834 Mrs. Fox confided her troubles to
some of her husband’s congregation; the resultant scandal led to some
demands that he resign. Fox had taken the position that he could not
sacrifice his personal dignity by denying specific charges. On Aug. 15,
he offered his resignation but in Sept. he was acquitted of the charges
(in effect, of adultery) and was asked to withdraw his resignation. See
Garnett, pp. 155-68, and Mineka, The Dissidence of Dissent, pp. 188-97.

3.
Their belief that he and Eliza Flower had been lovers.

4.
Fox had expressed advanced views in the Monthly Repository on the
emancipation of women and on divorce. See “The Dissenting Marriage
Question,” MR, VII (Feb., 1833), 136-42. For a discussion of his views,
see Mineka, The Dissidence of Dissent, pp. 284-96.

5.
Mrs. Taylor.

6.
Dr. Thomas Hardy (ca. 1775-1849), father of Mrs. Taylor, and member of
Fox’s congregation.

1.
Printed, without identification of recipient, in Morrison, 253. MS not
located.

The reference in the first paragraph to the recipient’s father makes the
identification highly probable.

2.
Louis Sébastien Mercier (1740-1814), writer, member of the Convention
during the Revolution.

3.
Comte Antoine Claire Thibaudeau (1765-1854), politician and historian.

1.
Published by Knight, pp. 667-68. MS not located.

2.
No such series appeared in the London Review.

3.
Thomas Chalmers, On Political Economy in Connexion with the Moral State
and Moral Prospects of Society (Glasgow, 1832). Chalmers (1780-1847),
theologian, was professor of divinity at Edinburgh University for many
years.

4.
See Letters 86, 96, and 102.

5.
Probably the early version of the essay “Of the Influence of Consumption
on Production,” which appeared as the second of his Essays on Some
Unsettled Questions of Political Economy.

6.
Probably the early version of “On Profits, and Interest,” ibid.

7.
“On the Words Productive and Unproductive,” ibid.

8.
“Of the Laws of Interchange between Nations; and the Distribution of the
Gains of Commerce among the Countries of the Commercial World,” ibid.

9.
See Letter 85.

10.
The South Australian Association, formed earlier in 1834, included among
its directorate such friends of JSM as Buller, Grote, and Molesworth.
The Association had succeeded earlier in Aug. in getting through
Parliament the South Australian Act establishing a Crown colony. See
Richard Garnett, Edward Gibbon Wakefield (New York, 1898), pp. 98-104.

11.
For an account of Brougham’s strange behaviour in the political crisis
of the summer of 1834, see Arthur Aspinall, Lord Brougham and the Whig
Party (Manchester, 1927), pp. 193-201.

12.
Gossip was rife that Brougham was mad. The Times, which had now turned
against him, on Aug. 19, 1834, p. 2, remarked: “For some months Lord
Brougham has been under a morbid excitement, seldom evinced by those of
His Majesty’s subjects who are suffered to remain masters of their own
actions” (quoted in Aspinall, Lord Brougham and the Whig Party, p. 209).

1.
Published by J. Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire in M. Victor Cousin, Sa Vie et
Sa Correspondance (3 vols., Paris, 1895), I, 396-98. MS not located.

2.
Henry Dunn (1800-1878), religious and educational writer.

3.
Joseph Cotton Wigram (1798-1867), religious and educational writer,
secretary of the National Society for Promoting the Education of the
Poor in the Principles of the Established Church; later, Bishop of
Rochester.

4.
Roebuck’s second major speech on education had been made in the House of
Commons on June 3, 1834, in support of his motion for a select committee
to inquire into the means of establishing a system of national
education. His first speech on the subject had been made on July 30,
1833.

1.
Published by Knight, pp. 668-70. MS not located.

2.
Nichol in 1836 was appointed Regius Professor of Astronomy at Glasgow
University.

3.
One of Brougham’s purposes in founding the Society for the Diffusion of
Political Knowledge was to combat “the violent and slanderous press.”
See Aspinall, Lord Brougham and the Whig Party, p. 208.

4.
For a list of the original members of the Society, see Companion to the
Newspaper, II (Aug., 1834), 168. The Companion was thereafter published
under the auspices of the Society.

5.
Probably the MS in the Pierpont Morgan Library, which bears the
following note on the first folio: “This copy of Mr Mill’s Logic / being
an early manuscript draft / was sent by the author to my Father / the
late Professor J. P. Nichol. / J.N.” The draft, not in JSM’s
handwriting, corresponds roughly to Books I to III, chap. 4, of the
System of Logic.

6.
The attack on Adam Sedgwick’s Discourse on the Studies of the University
(London, Cambridge, 1833) appeared in the first number of the London
Review, I (April, 1835), 94-135; reprinted in Dissertations, I, 121-85.

7.
Eventually published in LWR, XXVI (Oct., 1836), 1-29, and reprinted in
Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy.

8.
Robert Torrens (1780-1864), economist and advocate of Australian
colonization.

JSM’s first published letter to a newspaper had been a reply to an
editorial by Torrens criticizing James Mill’s views on the cost of
production; see “Exchangeable Value,” Traveller, Dec. 6, 1822, p. 3, and
MacMinn, Bibliog., p. 1.

9.
Edward Wakefield (1774-1854), economist and father of the colonial
statesman, Edward Gibbon Wakefield.

10.
MR, VIII (1834), 612-24.

11.
Rev. James Martineau (1805-1900), Unitarian divine and philosopher.

12.
“On the Life, Character, and Works of Dr. Priestley,” MR, VII (1833),
19-30, 84-88, 231-41; reprinted in Martineau’s Essays, Reviews and
Addresses (4 vols., London, 1890-91).

13.
Deontology or the Science of Morality . . . (2 vols., London, 1834).

14.
See Letter 72, n. 12.

15.
John Austin, The Province of Jurisprudence Determined (London, 1832).

16.
“Notes on . . . Plato. No. 2. The Phaedrus,” MR, VIII (1834), 404-20,
633-46.

17.
Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind (2 vols., London, 1829).

1.
Published by Knight, pp. 670-71. MS not located.

2.
An article on “Tithes, and their Commutation,” signed J.P.N., appeared
in the first number of the London Review, I (April, 1835), 164-73. No
article on Chalmers was published. The only other article signed J.P.N.
published under JSM’s editorship was “The State of Discovery and
Speculation concerning the Nebulae,” LWR, XXV (July, 1836), 390-409.

3.
See preceding letter, n. 6.

4.
“Tennyson’s Poems,” which did not appear until the second number (July,
1835). See Letter 117.

5.
See preceding letter, n. 5.

6.
On Nov. 14, the King had suddenly dismissed the Whig ministry. This
precipitate action took by surprise Tories as well as Whigs. Sir Robert
Peel, who was to become the new Prime Minister, had to be summoned from
Italy, where he was vacationing.

7.
John George Lambton, first Earl of Durham (1792-1840), at this time
emerging as a leader of the advanced Whigs. A few years later JSM became
one of the staunchest defenders of Durham’s Canadian policy (see Letter
288, n. 14).

8.
Possibly, in view of their concern with definitions in the study of
political economy, Malthus’ Definitions in Political Economy (London,
1827).

1.
MS in the Hollander Collection, University of Illinois Library.

2.
The first two volumes of Henry Lytton Bulwer, La France: sociale,
politique et littéraire (4 vols., Paris, 1834-36). See Letter 172, n. 2.

3.
Probably Osmond de Beauvoir Priaulx or De Preaux (1805-1891), barrister,
author of Outlines of a System of National Education (London, 1834); of
National Education (London, 1837); and of other works.

4.
John Wilson. The London newspaper referred to should not be confused
with the Saint-Simonian periodical, Le Globe.

5.
See preceding letter, n. 6.

6.
I.e., the position of the conservatives that the Reform Act of 1832 was
a final constitutional change.

1.
MS at Arsenal. Published, with omissions, in Cosmopolis, VI, 363-66, and
in D’Eichthal Corresp., pp. 164-71.

2.
After the dispersal of the Saint-Simonians, D’Eichthal had gone to
Greece and had become director of the “Bureau d’Economie politique,” a
kind of ministry of public works.

3.
On Sept. 15, 1834. At the dinner, Brougham, already in trouble with the
Grey faction of the party, counselled caution in the reform programme.
Durham urged an immediate programme of sweeping reform. His speech was
widely interpreted as a violent attack on Brougham; this was the
beginning of the famous quarrel which led to the destruction of
Brougham’s political power. See C. W. New, Lord Durham (Oxford, 1929),
pp. 244-79.

4.
On Oct. 29, 1834.

5.
Bernhard Thiersch, Ueber das Zeitalter und Vaterland des Homer
(Halberstadt, 1832). No such review or article appeared in the London
Review.

6.
It did not appear until April, 1835.

7.
David Urquhart, Turkey and Its Resources (London, 1833).

1.
Addressed: Edwin Chadwick / 7 Trevor Square / Knightsbridge. MS at UCL.

2.
Aristide Mathieu Guilbert (1804-1863), writer, who because of the exile
of his father, had lived in London from 1815 to 1830. In the spring of
1835 he became Paris correspondent for the new London Review (see Letter
127).

3.
Le Bon Sens, established as a Sunday paper shortly after the revolution
of 1830 by members of the popular party, became a daily in April, 1834.
The Examiner, Feb. 8, 1835, p. 82, praised it warmly.

1.
MS at Brit. Mus. Undated, but presumably written about the same time as
the preceding letter to Edwin Chadwick.

1.
Published by Knight, pp. 671-72. MS not located.

2.
See Letter 29.

3.
The political crisis brought on by the King’s dismissal of the Whig
ministry.

4.
The article on Tennyson did not appear until the second number.

5.
The famous Tamworth Manifesto, calling for a new Conservative programme
of progressive reform, had just been published in The Times, p. 5, on
the morning of this letter.

1.
MS at LSE. Last two paragraphs published in Life and Labours of Albany
Fonblanque, ed. E. B. de Fonblanque (London, 1874), p. 39.

2.
Probably JSM’s notice of Eliza Flower’s Songs of the Months. A Musical
Garland, in Examiner, Jan. 4, 1835, p. 4.

3.
See Letters 112 and 114.

4.
Samuel Bailey (1791-1870), philosophical writer greatly admired by James
Mill. JSM reviewed favourably his Rationale of Political Representation
in London Rev., I (July, 1835), 341-71, but attacked his Review of
Berkeley’s Theory of Vision, WR, XXXVIII (Oct., 1842), 318-86, reprinted
in Dissertations, II, 162-97. No contribution by Bailey to the London
Review has been identified.

5.
Thomas Love Peacock (1775-1866), novelist, long associated with the
Mills in the employ of the East India Company. He contributed several
essays to the London Review.

6.
Probably John Wilson, secretary to the Factory Commission, and an editor
of the Globe newspaper.

1.
Excerpt published in James Drummond and C. B. Upton, Life and Letters of
James Martineau (2 vols., London, 1902), II, 276. MS not located.
According to the editors the letter was to welcome Martineau as a
contributor to the London Review.

2.
“On the Life, Character, and Works of Dr. Priestley,” MR, VII (1833),
19-30, 84-88, 231-41.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur Guilbert / 30 Red Cross Square. Postmarks: TP /
CORNHILL /, and 183(?) . . . MS at King’s. Published in Morrison, p.
253.

2.
So dated in Morrison.

3.
James Bentham Mill.

1.
Addressed: Rev. J. Blanco White / 5 Chesterfield Street / Liverpool.
Postmark: LS / 26FE26 / 1835. MS in the Liverpool University Library.

For JSM’s earlier acquaintance with White, see Letter 45. After
embracing Unitarian views, White in Jan. of this year had left Dublin,
where he had lived in the home of his patron Archbishop Whately, and
settled in Liverpool.

2.
Nassau Senior.

3.
A short-lived review, edited by White himself in 1829; only two numbers
were published.

4.
Robert Pollok, The Course of Time: A Poem in Ten Books (2 vols.,
Edinburgh, 1827), one of the most popular religious poems of the period;
twenty-five editions were published by 1868. White’s unfavourable
criticism of it was published in his London Review, I (Feb., 1829),
233-51.

5.
JSM’s first mention of Alexis de Tocqueville’s De la démocratie en
Amérique (2 vols., Paris, 1835), which was to influence profoundly his
political philosophy. Later in the spring he met Tocqueville during the
latter’s visit to England and a correspondence ensued (see Letter 137
and others). JSM eventually decided to review Tocqueville himself (see
Letter 135) for the Oct., 1835, number of the London Review; upon the
completion of the second part in 1840 he wrote another article for the
Oct., 1840, Edinburgh Review.

6.
Thomas Falconer (1805-1882), brother-in-law of J. A. Roebuck, barrister
and later judge of county court circuits, though nominally editor was
really sub-editor under JSM.

1.
MS at John Rylands Library, Manchester; bears no indication of
recipient, but see n. 3.

2.
A revised and corrected edition of The Last Days of Pompeii, originally
published in 1834, appeared in 1835.

3.
White’s review of the works of Francisco Martínez de la Rosa
(1787-1862), Spanish statesman and dramatist, appeared in the first
number of the London Review, I (April, 1835), 76-93, under the title
“Recent Spanish Literature.”

1.
MS in Bodleian Library.

Richard Bentley (1794-1871), publisher.

2.
Joseph Fiévée (1767-1839). The memorandum has not been located. The
workreferred to was Correspondance et Relations de J. Fiévée avec
Bonaparte . . . (1802 à 1813) (publié par l’auteur, Paris, 1836). See
also Letter 146.

3.
The MS of the note is in the Bentley Collection of the University of
Illinois Library. The editor is indebted to Professor Jack Stillinger
for supplying a copy of it.

4.
Correspondance politique et administrative, commencée au mois de mai
1814 . . . (3 vols., Paris, 1815-19).

1.
MS at LSE.

2.
Auber’s opera, first performed at Covent Garden on Feb. 21, 1835.

3.
Philipp Jakob Siebenpfeiffer (1789-1845), political writer.

4.
In London Rev., I (April, 1835), 201-50; by James Mill.

1.
MS at NLS. Published, with slight variations, in Elliot, I, 100-101.
Carlyle’s answer of March 9 in A. Carlyle, pp. 109-10.

2.
On the preceding evening JSM in great distress had called upon the
Carlyles and, after begging Mrs. Carlyle to go outside to speak to Mrs.
Taylor, who was waiting in a cab, informed Carlyle that the manuscript
of the first volume of his French Revolution had through carelessness
been completely burned.

D. A. Wilson, Carlyle to “The French Revolution” (1826-1837) (London,
1924), Book X, chap. xvii, and others have accepted the legend (which
must have originated with Carlyle) that the accident was really Mrs.
Taylor’s fault and that JSM gallantly accepted responsibility. Against
too ready acceptance of this should be placed the evidence of Letter 126
and of a letter of JSM’s sister Harriet to Carlyle shortly after (May
15, 1873) JSM’s death when the Daily Telegraph in an obituary article
attributed the by then famous literary accident to Mrs. Taylor: “As far
as my recollection goes, the misfortune arose from my brother’s own
inadvertence, in having given your papers amongst waste paper for
kitchen use. I can, perfectly well, remember our search, and my dear
brother’s extreme distress, and I fancy, though of this I do not feel so
sure, that some pages were found.” (MS 666, No. 109, at NLS.)

Carlyle in a gracious and touching reply to Miss Mill (May 17, 1873, MS
1778, NLS, hitherto unpublished) admitted that “in fact my impression
really was, that night when your Brother came to us pale and agitated,
as I have seldom seen any mortal, that Mrs. Taylor’s house and some
trifling neglect there, had been the cause of the catastrophe;—but in
fact, to prevent him almost perishing with excess of misery, we had to
forbear all questioning on the subject, which indeed was of no
importance to either of us, and to bid him ‘Be of Courage, never mind,
Be certain I can write it again, and will’! . . . Your dear Brother’s
conduct to me in this matter, as indeed in all others, then and
afterwards, was conspicuously noble, generous, and friend-like,—conduct
of the First, almost only Friend I then had in London, one who would
have made any sacrifice for me and what I then had most at heart.”

1.
MS at NLS. Published, with slight omissions, in Elliott, I, 101-2.

2.
Of March 9, 1835, in A. Carlyle, pp. 109-10: “You shall do the thing you
so earnestly entreat for [i.e., compensate Carlyle for the time lost by
the burning of the manuscript]: it is not unreasonable; ungigmanic
[i.e., unconventional] it may either be or not be.”

3.
Carlyle had offered to let JSM take the manuscript of this first book of
Vol. II he was then completing—“provided you durst take it.”

4.
This would seem to exculpate Mrs. Taylor though D. A. Wilson cites this
as only another instance of JSM’s gallantry in defending her.

5.
Considérations sur les principaux événemens de la révolution française
(3 vols., London, 1818), by Anne Louise Germaine Necker, baronne de
Staël-Holstein (1766-1817), writer and critic.

6.
The letter is not signed.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / M. Aristide Guilbert / Rue Joquelet /No 8 / à
Paris. MS at Arsenal. Guilbert had been in England recently. See Letters
115 and 120.

2.
In defence of M. Rouen, the responsible editor of the National, on Dec.
15, 1834, on a charge of impugning the dignity of the Chamber. See L.
Blanc, History of Ten Years (London, 1845), II, 304-7. The Examiner on
Dec. 21, 1834, pp. 808-9, printed excerpts of Carrel’s speech.

3.
Robert S. Rintoul (1787-1858), founder and editor of the Spectator.

4.
Paul Louis Courier (1772-1825), soldier, Hellenist, and pamphleteer. No
such essay appeared in the London Review. Carrel’s Essai sur la vie et
les écrits de P. L. Courier is published in the latter’s Œuvres
complètes (4 vols., Paris, 1829-30).

5.
Désiré Nisard (1806-1888), literary historian and critic, was closely
associated with Armand Carrel. His first contribution to the London
Review, an essay on Victor Hugo, did not appear until Jan., 1836 (II,
389-417).

6.
J. H. Garnier, a German refugee who supported himself by journalistic
and translating work, JSM in the Examiner for Sept. 14, 1834 (p. 581),
favourably reviewed Garnier’s periodical, Deutsches Leben, Kunst und
Poesie.

7.
JSM seems not to have carried out this project.

8.
Hippolyte Dussard. Years later he collaborated with J. G.
Courcelle-Seneuil in translating JSM’s Political Economy.

9.
François Mauguin (1785-1854) and Odilon Barrot, leaders of the moderate
opposition.

10.
Edward George Geoffrey Smith Stanley (1799-1869), later fourteenth Earl
of Derby, had broken with the Whig leadership in 1834, though he did not
formally join Peel and the Tories until July 1, 1835.

11.
Charles Paul de Kock (1794-1871), novelist. See Letters 134 and 140.

12.
Possibly Jean Nicolas Barba (1769-1846), author of Vie et aventures de
Pigault-Le Brun (Paris, 1836).

13.
Carlyle eventually reviewed it in LWR for April, 1837, pp. 233-47.

1.
MS at Huntington Library.

2.
JSM tried to persuade Carlyle to accept £200 but finally had to yield to
the latter’s refusal to accept more than £100. See Carlyle’s letters to
his brother and his mother in Letters of Thomas Carlyle, 1826-1836, ed.
C. E. Norton (London, 1889), pp. 506 and 510.

1.
MS in the Liverpool University Library. A portion of White’s letter in
reply is in Thom, II, 121-22.

2.
The Poetical Works of the Rev. George Crabbe; with his Letters and
Journals, and his Life, by his Son (8 vols., London, 1834).

3.
White’s article appeared in the second number, I (July, 1835), 316-41.

4.
The Rationale of Political Representation. By the author of Essays on
the Formation of Opinions, etc. [Samuel Bailey] (London, 1835). JSM
himself reviewed the book in the second number (I, 341-71).

5.
Robert Hall (1764-1831), popular Baptist preacher.

6.
See Letter 119.

7.
Cours d’Histoire moderne . . . [consisting of] Histoire générale de la
civilisation en Europe depuis la chute de l’Empire romain jusqu’a la
Révolution française (Paris, 1828), [and] Histoire de la civilisation en
France depuis la chute de l’Empire romain jusqu’en 1789 (5 vols. Paris,
1829-32). White wrote the review of Guizot in the Jan., 1836, London
Rev. (II, 306-36), but with cuts and additions by JSM (see Letters 135,
149, and 154).

1.
MS at LSE.

2.
See the following letter.

3.
A long excerpt from JSM’s “Postscript” to the first number of the London
Rev. (I, 254-56) was quoted in Fonblanque’s leading article, “The
Administration,” Examiner, April 19, 1835, p. 241.

4.
Fonblanque obliged with a leading article on the Review in the Examiner,
May 10, 1835, pp. 289-90.

1.
Probably a postscript to the foregoing. Written on the inside of a cover
of a letter addressed: Albany Fonblanque Esq. / 5 Pine Apple Place /
Kilburn Road. Postmark: 4 EVEN 4 / AP 20 / 1835. MS at LSE.

2.
Of Lord Melbourne.

1.
MS at NLS.

2.
James Bentham Mill.

1.
Addressed: M. Aristide Guilbert / Rue Joquelet / no 8, / à Paris / Parti
rue Joubert No. 47. Postmarks: 196 / F 35; 19 / 35; and Calais / 10 MAI
/ 1835. MS at King’s. Printed in Morrison, p. 253.

2.
On April 8 Peel had resigned after a vain effort of six weeks to
maintain a Tory administration. Melbourne then formed a straight Whig
ministry which, though it did not include the Radicals, received their
support.

3.
On April 24 (see The Times, April 27, 1835). John Cam Hobhouse, later
Baron Broughton de Gyfford (1786-1869), friend of Byron, Whig
politician.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / M. Aristide Guilbert / Rue Joubert / à Paris / No
47. Postmark: 210 / F 35. MS at King’s. Printed in Morrison, p. 254.

2.
Thomas Love Peacock. Although in both his article on “French Comic
Romances,” London Rev., II (Oct., 1835), 69-84, and the one entitled
“The Epicier,” ibid., II (Jan., 1836), 355-65, he promises to present an
article on De Kock, none appeared.

3.
No article by Carrel seems to have appeared.

4.
Louis Marie de La Haye, vicomte de Cormenin (1788-1868), jurist and
political writer.

5.
On May 11. Peel urged Tories to seek control of the House of Commons in
order to resist further constitutional reform. “We will not allow, if we
can prevent it . . . such an infusion of democracy into the institutions
of this country as shall essentially change their theory, and by slow
degrees deprive us of the advantages we have so long enjoyed under our
limited monarchy and ancient institutions” (The Times, May 12, 1835, p.
5).

1.
MS in the Liverpool University Library. White’s reply of May 28, 1835,
is in Thom, II, 126-27.

2.
See Letter 129.

3.
See Letter 121, n. 5.

4.
Bookseller who served as Liverpool agent for the London Review.

5.
Second Travels of an Irish Gentleman in Search of a Religion (2 vols.,
Dublin, 1833). This was White’s reply to Thomas Moore’s Travels of an
Irish Gentleman in Search of a Religion (2 vols., London, 1833). James
Martineau discussed these in his article “Catholic and Protestant Claims
to Infallibility,” LWR, XXV (July, 1836), 425-49.

6.
See Letter 129, n. 7.

1.
Excerpt published in J. Estlin Carpenter, James Martineau (London,
1905), pp. 165-66. MS not located.

2.
This work of Coleridge’s eventually appeared under the title Confessions
of an Inquiring Spirit, ed. H. N. Coleridge (London, 1840).

1.
Published in Mayer, pp. 291-93. MS in the Tocqueville archives.
Tocqueville’s reply is in Mayer, pp. 293-95.

1.
MS in Liverpool University Library. In reply to White’s letter of June
10, 1835, in Thom, II, 134-36.

2.
Henry Brougham, A Discourse of Natural Theology (Brussels, 1835). White
had written: “What do you intend to do with Lord Brougham? I have been
sadly disappointed by his Discourse on Paley—so much so, that I almost
fear I may be under some delusion. To find such a collection of
crudities coming from a man of his talents and reading, is quite
startling. . . . It appears to me that Lord Brougham has treated most
branches of physical and metaphysical science, as briefs put into his
hands, upon which he must say something plausible—just enough for the
satisfaction of people not much above the juries he has addressed in the
course of his life.”

3.
The end of the letter is missing.

1.
MS in Liverpool University Library. In reply to White’s letter of June
27, 1835, published in part in Thom, II, 137-38.

2.
A MS journal (82 pp., 2 vols., 4to, sewed) of this tour of the Rhine was
sold in Sotheby’s auction of March 27-29, 1922, as lot 716 (third day);
its present location is unknown.

3.
Charles Lamb, Specimens of English Dramatic Poets who lived about the
time of Shakespeare (new edition, 2 vols., London, 1835), which White
reviewed in the London Rev., II (Oct., 1835), 51-69.

4.
Dr. John Anster’s translation of Faust (London, 1835) was eventually
reviewed in “Translations of Faust,” LWR, XXV (July, 1836), 366-90,
probably by J. H. Garnier.

5.
The article (I, 257-95, signed P.Q.) was by James Mill.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / M. Aristide Guilbert / Rue de Joubert / 47 / à
Paris. Postmarks: F 35, and Paris / 16 AOUT / 1835. MS at King’s.
Printed in Morrison, pp. 254-55.

2.
Unidentified. Morrison has “Manuel” instead of “Maurel.”

3.
Léon Faucher (1803-1854), economist and statesman.

4.
Michel Théodore Leclercq (1777-1851), dramatist. No article on him
appeared in the London Review.

5.
Thomas Love Peacock.

6.
A projet of sternly repressive laws against the press proposed early in
Aug. in the Chamber of Deputies and finally adopted in Sept.

7.
Royal assent to the Municipal Corporations bill was given on Sept. 9.

8.
Pamphlets for the People, of which thirty-six weekly numbers appeared,
began publication on June 11, 1835. In addition to Roebuck, its writers
included Henry Chapman, Thomas Falconer, and Francis Place. See R. E.
Leader, Life and Letters of John Arthur Roebuck (London, 1897), pp. 71,
75-78.

1.
MS in Liverpool University Library. An excerpt from White’s reply,
inexplicably dated Aug. 25, 1835, is in Thom, II, 143.

2.
Observations on Heresy and Orthodoxy (London, 1835).

3.
See Letter 129, n. 7.

1.
Published in Mayer, pp. 297-99. MS in Tocqueville archives.

2.
Dated 12 7bre 1835, in Mayer, pp. 295-97.

3.
Ellipsis points here and elsewhere indicate missing portions in the MS,
which is torn.

4.
See Letter 127, n. 4.

5.
Lectures formed the basis of Guizot’s Histoire des origines du
gouvernement représentatif (1821-22), Histoire générale de la
civilisation en Europe (1828), and Histoire de la civilisation en France
(1829-32).

6.
See Letter 61, n. 7.

7.
The House of Lords had succeeded in carrying certain amendments to the
Corporation bill passed onSept. 7. The Radicals maintained that the
amendments nullified the reforms of the evils of the municipal
corporations which the original bill was designed to eliminate (see
Annual Register for 1835, pp. 242 ff. and 265-68).

8.
See Letter 140, n. 6.

9.
See Letter 121, n. 5.

10.
Gustave de Beaumont de la Bonninière (1802-1866), politician and writer,
associate of Tocqueville who accompanied him to America in 1831 and
collaborated with him in publishing their Du Système pénitentiaire aux
Etats-Unis et de son application en France (Paris, 1833).

1.
Addressed: T. Falconer Esq. MS in the possession of F. A. Hayek.

2.
John Pringle Nichol.

3.
“State of Discovery and Speculation concerning the Nebulae.” It did not
appear until July, 1836 (XXV, 390-409).

4.
“Postscript.—The Close of the Session,” London Rev., II (Oct., 1835),
270-77.

5.
“Journal by Frances Anne Butler,” ibid., pp. 194-227.

6.
See n. 3 above.

7.
Henry S. Chapman (1803-1881), journalist in Canada, 1823-34; closely
associated with the LWR (see Letters 162 and 163); later, judge of
Supreme Court of New Zealand.

8.
Molesworth contributed two articles: “Orange Societies in Great Britain,
Their Illegality and Criminality,” London Rev., II (Jan., 1836),
480-513, and “Orange Conspiracy,” LWR, XXV (April, 1836) 181-201.

9.
Possibly Robert Bell (1800-1867), editor of the Atlas, a weekly journal.

10.
Probably Edward Gibbon Wakefield, but no article by him can be
identified in the London Review.

11.
A reprint of James Mill’s article of that title, London Rev., II (Oct.,
1835), 1-51.

12.
Roebuck’s series, “Pamphlets for the People.” See Letter 140, n. 8.

1.
Published by Knight, p. 672. MS not located.

2.
See preceding letter, n. 3.

3.
L. A. J. Quetelet (1796-1874), Belgian astronomer, meteorologist, and
statistician. No article on either Chalmers or Quetelet appeared.

4.
Inexplicable as spelled here. If this is an error for Marie, JSM may be
referring to the novel by Tocqueville’s friend Gustave de Beaumont:
Marie, ou l’Esclavage aux Etats-Unis (Paris, 1835). On the other hand,
however, there is no reference to this work in the extant letters of
Tocqueville to JSM. In his letter of 12 7bre 1835 (Mayer, pp. 295-97)
Tocqueville proposed that he should write on the political and social
condition of France before the Revolution, a proposal subsequently
carried out (see Letters 142 and 169, n. 2). JSM included Marie in the
books he reviewed in his “State of Society in America,” London Rev., II
(Jan., 1836), 365-89.

5.
No such article appeared.

6.
George Combe (1788-1858), phrenologist. Which book of his on phrenology
is referred to is uncertain.

7.
See “Raphael’s Remains,” Athenæum, Nov. 16, 1833, p. 780.

8.
The leading article in the London Rev., Oct., 1835.

9.
Robert Tullis, publisher of the Fife Herald, and Nichol’s father-in-law.

1.
MS in the possession of Professor Henry William Spiegel of the Catholic
University of America, Washington, D.C. The person to whom JSM was
writing may have been someone connected with the Globe newspaper, for
which he wrote occasionally at this period. JSM apparently never wrote
the proposed article.

2.
This book evidently sought to capitalize on the popularity of Isaac
Tomkins’ (i.e., Henry Brougham’s) Thoughts upon the Aristocracy of
England, which reached at least eleven editions in the year of its
publication, 1835. Lydia Tomkins’ work appeared in at least three
editions that year. Also published under the pseudonym of Isaac Tomkins
in the same year was: “We Can’t Afford It!” Being Thoughts upon the
Aristocracy of England. Part the second. For a letter of James Mill to
Brougham on Tomkins’ works, see Bain, James Mill, pp. 380-81.

1.
MS in 1944 in possession of Sir John Murray, 50, Albemarle St., London,
W.C.1.

John Murray (1778-1843), founder of the publishing business that bears
his name.

2.
Aristide Guilbert. See Letter 148.

3.
See Letter 123, n. 2.

4.
See ibid., n. 4.

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle Esq. / Scotsbrig / Ecclefechan / N.B.
Postmarks: FREE / 17 OC 17 / 1835, and ES / 17 OC 17 / 1835. Franked by
G. Grote. A MS copy is at NLS; the original of the latter half of the
letter is at the Pierpont Morgan Library, New York. Carlyle’s answer of
Oct. 30, 1835, is in A. Carlyle, pp. 115-19.

2.
On Sept. 21 Carlyle completed the rewriting of the burned manuscript of
Vol. I of The French Revolution. Early in Oct. he went to Scotland to
recuperate from the ordeal.

3.
Two words illegible.

4.
Don Carlos (1788-1855), after the death of his brother, King Ferdinand
VII of Spain, provoked the first Carlist war (1833-39) by his efforts to
gain the Spanish throne. Don Carlos had visited England in 1834.

5.
On Oct. 7, 1835. Constantine Henry Phipps, second Earl of Mulgrave,
later first Marquis of Normanby (1797-1863), had recently been appointed
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. His friendly meetings with Daniel O’Connell
were being attacked at Protestant meetings and by The Times (see second
editorial, p. 2, Oct. 10, 1835).

6.
On Oct. 5 O’Connell, in an address to the Trades Political Union, said:
“If they [the Orange faction] could, they would change the succession to
the throne. They would do so, too, in favour of the white-whiskered Duke
of Cumberland, because he is a bigot. Prince of the blood he is, to be
sure, but, saving your presence, he is at the same time a mighty great
liar” (reported in The Times, Oct. 10, 1835, p. 3).

7.
The MS fragment at the Pierpont Morgan Library begins with this word.

8.
Athens: Its Rise and Fall (London, 1837).

9.
Comte Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès (1748-1836), journalist and statesman.

10.
Charles Austin (1799-1874), lawyer.

11.
Probably his History of the French Revolution.

12.
Horace Grant.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / M. Aristide Guilbert / 47 Rue de Joubert / à
Paris. Postmarks: E / IH and 1835. MS at King’s. Printed in Morrison, p.
255.

2.
George G. Bennis (1790-1866), writer, and from 1830 to 1836 director of
a librairie des étrangers, Paris.

3.
Letter 146.

4.
Probably Etienne Joseph Louis Garnier-Pagès (1801-1841), writer and
politician, rather than his half-brother, Louis Antoine Garnier-Pagès
(1803-1878), also a political figure.

5.
Gustave de Beaumont.

6.
Page torn by seal.

1.
MS in Liverpool University Library.

2.
See Letter 154.

3.
Edward Copleston (1776-1849), Bishop of Llandaff.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / M. Aristide Guilbert / Rue de Joubert / No 47 / à
Paris. Postmarks: I NOV / 1835 / Angleterre / Par / Calais / and 297 / F
/ 35. MS at King’s. Printed in Morrison, p. 255. Lacunae in the MS have
been supplied from Morrison.

2.
Unidentified.

3.
Jean A. (1796-1873) and William G. Galignani (1798-1882), publishers.

4.
J. B. M. Baillière (1797-1883), publisher.

5.
Letter 146.

6.
Unidentified. Morrison prints the name as Toulon.

7.
See Letter 101, n. 12.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / M. Aristide Guilbert / Rue de Joubert / No 47 / à
Paris. Postmarks: Angleterre par Calais / 13 NOV / 1835 / and F 35 /
226. MS at King’s. Printed in Morrison, p. 256.

2.
See Letter 146.

3.
It appeared in the Jan., 1836, number (II, 389-417).

1.
Published in Mayer, pp. 301-2, as is also Tocqueville’s answer of Dec.
3, pp. 302-4. MS in Tocqueville archives.

2.
In Oct. he had married an English girl, Miss Mary Mottley.

3.
“De Tocqueville on Democracy in America,” London Rev., II (Oct., 1835),
85-129.

1.
From copy in the possession of Professor J. M. McCrimmon, University of
Illinois. Dated by reference to Guizot article in the next letter.

2.
Probably John Robertson’s article, “Lives of Bacon,” London Rev., II
(Jan., 1836), 513-32. The article is signed “M.R.,” a signature used by
Robertson for other articles clearly identified as his.

3.
See Letters 149 and 154.

4.
[James Mill], “Aristocracy,” London Rev., II (Jan., 1836), 283-306,
signed “P.Q.”

1.
MS in Liverpool University Library.

2.
See Letter 149.

3.
Joanna Baillie (1762-1851), Scottish dramatist and poet, whose work JSM
had admired since boyhood; he regarded her Constantine Paleologus as
“one of the best dramas of the last two centuries” (Autobiog., p. 11,
n.). Her forthcoming publication was Dramas (3 vols., London, 1836). It
was not reviewed in LWR.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / M. Aristide Guilbert / Rue de Joubert / 47 / à
Paris. MS at King’s. Printed in Morrison, p. 256.

2.
“Victor Hugo,” London Rev., II (Jan., 1836), 389-417.

3.
Only one appeared that can be attributed to Tocqueville: “Political and
Social Condition of France,” LWR, XXV (April, 1836), 137-69, signed Δ.

4.
J. B. A. Paulin (1796-1859), publisher.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / Monsieur Aristide Guilbert / Rue de Joubert / 47 /
à Paris. MS at King’s. Printed in Morrison, p. 256.

2.
Brackets indicate where page has been torn by seal.

3.
Unidentified, but possibly the projected journal mentioned in Letter
157.

4.
Wife of Joseph Hume, Radical MP.

1.
Published in Mayer, pp. 305-6, in reply to Tocqueville’s of Dec. 3,
ibid., pp. 302-4. MS in Tocqueville archives.

2.
See Letter 152.

3.
“Prospects of France,” No. IV, Examiner, Oct. 10, 1830, pp. 642-44. “The
true idea of a representative government is undoubtedly this, that the
deputy is to legislate according to the best of his own judgment, and
not according to the instructions of his constituents, or even to the
opinion of the whole community” (ibid., p. 642).

4.
“Pledges,” Examiner, July 1, 1832, pp. 417-18, and July 15, pp. 449-51.
“The true idea of popular representation is not that the people govern
in their own persons, but that they choose their governors. In a good
government public questions are not referred to the suffrages of the
people themselves, but to those of the most judicious person whom the
people can find. The sovereignty of the people is essentially a
delegated sovereignty.” (Ibid., p. 417.) See Letter 54, n. 12.

5.
See Letter 165, n. 2.

6.
Probably William Sharman Crawford (1781-1861), Protestant liberal Irish
politician, then MP for Dundalk; but possibly William Crawford
(1788-1847), philanthropist, then inspector of prisons for the London
and Midland districts, who shared with Beaumont and Tocqueville an
interest in American prison practices. Beaumont was engaged at this time
on a book on Ireland and may have sought information from W. S.
Crawford.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / M. Aristide Guilbert / Rue de Joubert / 47 / à
Paris. Postmarks: F 35 / 243 and Angleterre / Par Calais / 28 DEC. MS at
King’s. Printed in Morrison, p. 257, but dated there Dec. 20, 1835.

2.
Unidentified, but see Letter 156.

3.
Guilbert’s “observations” are presumably the section headed “Political
Physiology of the Epicier,” quoted (pp. 359-61) from a “French MS.
communication,” in Thomas Love Peacock’s “The Epicier,” London Rev., II
(Jan., 1836), 355-65.

1.
MS in the possession of Arthur Pforzheimer, Bookseller, 26 East 56th
Street, New York City, in March, 1944.

2.
No such article appeared.

1.
Addressed: Madame / Madame Austin / à Boulogne-sur-Mer. Postmark:
Boulogne-sur-Mer / 10 / [. . . .] / 1836. MS at Yale.

2.
Unidentified.

3.
This is the first indication in the extant letters of the onset of the
serious illness that was to afflict him for much of the rest of the year
and to leave him with permanently impaired health. In April his
physician ordered him to Brighton to recuperate, and at the end of July
the East India Company gave him a three months’ leave of absence to seek
health in travel on the Continent.

4.
The Morning Chronicle.

5.
Mrs. Austin’s translation with H. E. Lloyd of Frederick L. G. von
Raumer’s England in 1835 (3 vols.) was published in March, 1836.

6.
Austin evidently declined the position, for later that year he accepted
an appointment with Sir George Cornewall Lewis to investigate the
government of Malta.

7.
The East India College there.

8.
Mrs. Austin’s daughter, later Lady Lucy (or Lucie) Duff Gordon
(1821-1869).

1.
From copy in the possession of Professor J. M. McCrimmon, University of
Illinois. The dating is based on the remarks about the advertising of
the London Review (see notes 2, 3, 4).

2.
An advertisement in the Examiner for Dec. 27, 1835, p. 830, announced
that the Review would be published on Dec. 31.

3.
The Examiner for Jan. 17, 1836, p. 46, announced that the Review would
be published on Jan. 18.

4.
Really Sunday. The Examiner for Jan. 24 carried no advertisement of the
Review, but the Jan. 31 number, p. 80, announced it as published.

5.
Andrew Bisset (1803-?), barrister and historian.

6.
William Henry Smith (1808-1872), philosopher and poet, writer for
Blackwood’s Magazine.

1.
From a copy in the possession of Professor J. M. McCrimmon.

2.
Nassau Senior, An Outline of the Science of Political Economy. This was
first published as the article on political economy in the Encyclopædia
Metropolitana, 1836, and a few copies were struck off for private
circulation (see Marian Bowley, Nassau Senior and Classical Economics
[London, 1937], p. 340). JSM seems not to have carried out his intention
of reviewing Senior.

3.
He did contribute, however, two articles to this number (April, 1836) of
the LWR: “Civilization,” pp. 1-28, and “The State of Politics in 1836,”
pp. 271-78.

1.
From copy in the possession of Professor J. M. McCrimmon.

2.
The original bears a note by H. S. Chapman: “Memo: No communication ever
received from Falconer.”

3.
Roebuck’s series, Pamphlets for the People, ended with the number for
Feb. 11, 1836. See Letter 140, n. 8.

4.
Molesworth, Roebuck, and J. T. Leader were projecting a new radical
paper on which Chapman was to be engaged. Professor McCrimmon possesses
a copy of an unpublished letter from Molesworth to Chapman, dated March
3 [1836], which begins: “Roebuck has I presume informed you that we
shall establish a paper—success to us—. Leader expects you on Saturday
at two o’clock when all will be arranged.” The plan apparently did not
materialize at this time, but Molesworth, Leader, and others established
a weekly newspaper The Guide in 1837 (see Letter 415, n. 2).

5.
The merger of the London Review and the Westminster Review became
effective with the April, 1836, number. See Letter 165, n. 2.

1.
Addressed: Madame / Madame Austin / à Boulogne sur Mer. Postmarks:
ANGLETERRE / PAR / CALAIS; BOULOGNE-SUR-MER / 19 / F36 / 184; UR MER /
1836 / (61); BOULOGNE. MS at King’s.

2.
Page torn.

1.
Part published in Life and Labours of Albany Fonblanque, ed. E. B. de
Fonblanque (London, 1874), pp. 39-40. MS at LSE. Bears pencil mark,
1834, but internal evidence establishes early 1836 as the proper date.

2.
Molesworth paid the proprietor of the Westminster £1,000. The Examiner
on March 20, 1836, p. 192, carried an advertisement announcing the
merger. The first issue of the London and Westminster Review was that
for April, 1836.

3.
A review of The Fudges in England (London, 1835) by Thomas Brown the
Younger (i.e., Tom Moore, the poet), WR, XXIV (Jan., 1836), 79-92.

4.
Probably Marmion W. Savage (1803-1872), Irish journalist and novelist,
editor of the Examiner, 1856-59.

5.
The reference is to an election of members to the Athenæum, to which
both JSM and James Mill, as well as Fonblanque, belonged (see T. Humphry
Ward, History of the Athenæum, 1824-1925 [London, 1926], pp. 41-42). The
names are barely legible, but the conclusion seems warranted that the
blackballed candidates were Robert Fellowes (1771-1847), philanthropist
and liberal, and Matthew Davenport Hill, QC (1792-1872), reformer of
criminal law.

1.
But addressed: Miss Flower / 5 Craven Hill / Bayswater. (Note
postscript.) Eliza Flower lived in Fox’s home. Postmarks: T. /
Leadenhall, and 2 AM 2 / FE 23 / 1836. Published in Garnett, p. 183,
except for postscript. MS at King’s.

2.
Richard Henry, or Hengist, Horne (1803-1884), miscellaneous writer and
poet, took over the editorship of the Monthly Repository from Fox in
July, 1836, and conducted it until July, 1837, when Leigh Hunt became
editor.

3.
Established in 1836 under the leadership of such reformers as Edward
Ellice and Sir William Molesworth.

4.
Fox’s Finsbury Lectures were published separately from time to time
between 1835 and 1840. The first two were: No. 1. “The Morality of
Poverty”; No. 2. “Aristocratical and Political Morality.” The Examiner
for Jan. 3, 1836, p. 16, announces the sixth, “On the Morality of the
Press,” and lists the previous five.

5.
Eliza Flower.

6.
Mrs. Taylor.

1.
MS at LSE. Dated by the passage quoted in first paragraph from Carlyle’s
letter, dated Thursday [Feb. 26, 1836], in A. Carlyle, pp. 120-21.

2.
For what Carlyle in his letter calls “the Lichfield Editorship.” George
L. Craik (1798-1866), journalist and literary historian.

3.
The Printing Machine; or Companion to the Library and Register of
Progressive Knowledge (3 vols., London, 1834-35) had merged with Leigh
Hunt’s London Journal (2 vols., 1834-35) in 1835, but the combined Leigh
Hunt’s London Journal and the Printing Machine survived only until Dec.,
1835.

4.
Published by Fonblanque with the title England under Seven
Administrations (3 vols., London, 1837). JSM reviewed it, LWR, XXVII
(April, 1837), 65-98.

5.
See Letter 165, n. 4.

6.
According to the secretary of the Athenæum, the name of Sterling was
entered as a candidate for membership, but his name was subsequently
withdrawn and not brought forward for election.

1.
MS in Brit. Mus.

Richard Colley Wellesley, Marquis Wellesley (1760-1842), Governor
General of India, 1797-1805.

2.
The Dispatches, Minutes and Correspondence of the Marquess Wellesley
During his Administration in India, ed. M. Martin (5 vols., London,
1836-37).

1.
Published in Mayer, pp. 307-8. MS in Tocqueville archives.

2.
“Political and Social Condition of France,” LWR, XXV (April, 1836),
137-69. Reprinted in Mayer, II, 1.

3.
The hope was unfulfilled. Tocqueville contributed no more to the Review;
for the next four years he was too much occupied with the concluding
volumes of his work on democracy.

4.
Eventually published as L’Irlande sociale, politique et religieuse (2
vols., Paris, 1839).

1.
Addressed: Revd Blanco White, Upper Stanhope Street, Liverpool. Franked
by Wm. Molesworth. Postmark: 9AP9 / 1836. MS in Liverpool University
Library. In reply to White’s letter of April 4, 1836, in Thom, II,
208-9.

2.
White had written (Thom, II, 208): “It appears to me, that our Review
avoids too much a direct collision with the mischievous system of
religion, which the State supports. You—the leaders—are too much away
from the mass of bigotry and superstition existing in the country, and,
as it were, disdain the subject. . . . The Theologians should be routed:
the evil they are doing is immense.”

3.
See Letter 135, n. 5.

4.
Both Evangelicals and Tractarians joined in protesting Lord Melbourne’s
appointment in 1836 of Renn Dickson Hampden (1793-1868) as Regius
Professor of Divinity at Oxford, because of the unorthodox views he had
expressed in his Bampton Lectures of 1832. See R. W. Church, The Oxford
Movement, 1833-1845 (London, 1891), chap. ix.

5.
JSM had apparently raised earlier questions of White’s treatment of
Charles Lamb’s humour in an article proposed for the Review. On Feb. 7,
1836, White wrote (Thom, II, 183): “I certainly thought that the
observations from which my disapprobation of Lamb’s style of humour
proceeds, were more generally received than your remarks imply. I ought,
however, to have remembered that there is a set of very able men,
writing constantly as critics, whose principal fund of humour arises
from the roystering, (I use their own descriptive word,) carousing,
eating, and drinking spirits, which they take a pleasure to bring out
before the public. . . . Their humourous writing is a kind of Row. It is
unquestionable that much of the talk which you find, especially in
Blackwood, would be impertinent and coarse in refined company; how then
can it be tolerable when addressed to the public? I cannot bear Fielding
in many parts of his works, though I greatly admire his talent.”

Though White promised to rewrite the article, he did not succeed in
satisfying JSM and it was not published.

6.
In an article, “The Poets of our Age, Considered as to their Philosophic
Tendencies,” signed D., in the April number of LWR, pp. 60-71.

7.
Conrad Friedrich von Schmidt-Phiseldek, Philosophiæ criticæ secundum
Kantium expositio systematica (2 vols., Hafniae, Altonae, 1796-98).

8.
White had written (Thom, II, 209): “I have had to learn experimentally
the abominable state of the law in regard to landlord and tenant. . . .
But I opened my eyes to the danger after I had put myself into the power
of the landlord.”

9.
The leading article in the April, 1836, number of his Review, pp. 1-28.

1.
Excerpt published in Bain, JSM, p. 43. MS not located. The portion in
brackets is Bain’s summary. JSM had been sent to Brighton to recuperate
from a severe illness (see Letter 160, n. 3).

Henry Mill (1820-1840), JSM’s favourite younger brother.

1.
Published in Mayer, pp. 310-11, in reply to Tocqueville’s of April 10,
ibid., pp. 308-9. MS in Tocqueville archives.

2.
See Letter 113, n. 2. The request for help from Beaumont proved
unavailing, but eventually Tocqueville sent notes on Bulwer’s book,
which are printed in Mayer, pp. 318-24. No review of the book appeared
in the Westminster, however.

1.
Excerpt published in Bain, James Mill, p. 409. MS not located. Bracketed
portion is Bain’s introduction to the excerpt.

1.
Published in Mayer, pp. 312-13, in reply to Tocqueville’s of June 5,
ibid., pp. 311-12. MS in Tocqueville archives.

2.
Beaumont was to marry Clémentine de Lafayette, grand-daughter of the
General, on June 29.

1.
MS in collection of autographs formed by Mrs. Richard Ford, sister of
Sir William Molesworth. Collection in 1945 in possession of Sir John
Molesworth-St. Aubyn, Pencarrow, Washaway, Bodmin, Cornwall. The letter
is on black-edged notepaper, undated, but was apparently written very
shortly after the death of James Mill on Wednesday, June 23, 1836.

2.
The family’s name for Henry Mill.

3.
Ordered away for three months by his physician, JSM at the end of July
took his two younger brothers Henry and George to the Continent.

1.
MS at NLS. Published in Elliot, I, 100, but dated as probably of 1835
and annotated as referring to the MS of the French Revolution. Carlyle’s
letter of Friday, July 22, 1836 (in A. Carlyle, pp. 133-35), however, is
clearly an answer to this. The MS discussed is that of Carlyle’s article
on Mirabeau, which appeared in LWR, XXVI (Jan., 1837), 382-439. For
Carlyle’s scornful reception of the corrections, see Thomas Carlyle:
Letters to His Wife, ed. Trudy Bliss (London, 1953), pp. 112-13.

1.
MS at LSE. Addressed: Mrs. Mill / Kensington / London / Angleterre /,
but latter three lines have been crossed out and Mickleham / Surrey
substituted. Postmarks: BIRFA . . . / 4 / A . . . / 183 . . .; LONDON /
6 / AUG / 1836; and 10FN10 / AUG / 1836. Published, with minor
variations, in Hayek, pp. 101-2.

Accompanied by his younger brothers Henry and George, JSM had left
England on July 30 to seek recovery of his health on the Continent. They
met Mrs. Taylor and her children in Paris, evidently by prearrangement.
To the letters which George and Henry wrote their sisters Wilhelmina and
Harriet, JSM added this note to Clara.

Subsequently, leaving the children in Switzerland in the care of a
nurse, JSM and Mrs. Taylor proceeded to the north of Italy, where they
spent two months. At the end of Oct. they rejoined the children in
Lausanne and returned to England (Nov. 12) by way of Paris (see next
letter).

2.
Mrs. Taylor’s son Herbert.

1.
MS at LSE. Addressed: Mrs. Mill / 18 Kensington Square / London /
Angleterre. Postmarks: PARIS / 4 / NOV / 183 . . . and LONDON / 7 / NOV
/ 1836. Appended to a letter from Henry Mill to his sister Wilhelmina.

2.
After the death of James Mill the family disposed of the house in
Vicarage Place, Church Street, Kensington, in which they had lived since
1831, and moved to a smaller house in Kensington Square.

1.
Published in Mayer, pp. 299-301. There dated Nov. 9, 1835, but JSM was
not in France in 1835 though he was in 1836. For other evidence that the
date should be 1836, see notes below. Also, Tocqueville’s letter of Nov.
19, 1836 (Mayer, pp. 313-16), appears to be a reply to this. MS in
Tocqueville archives.

2.
Carrel died on July 24, 1836, as the result of a duel with Emile de
Girardin.

3.
George G. Bennis.

4.
See Letters 113, n. 2, and 172, n. 2.

5.
QR, LVII (Sept., 1836), 132-62. Basil Hall (1788-1844), naval officer
and writer of Tory views.

6.
North American Rev., XLIII (July, 1836), 178-206.

7.
“The Rationale of Political Representation,” American Quar. Rev., XX
(Sept., 1836), 174-216.

8.
Senior had received the appointment on June 10, 1836.

9.
Sic, but see n. 1 above.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / M. Aristide Guilbert / 47 Rue de Joubert / à
Paris. Postmarks: LONDO... / 22 NOV 1836 / and ANGLETERRE PAR CALAIS /
24 NOV 1836. MS at King’s. Printed in Morrison, p. 257.

2.
The Jan., 1837, LWR contains no article that can be attributed to
Guilbert.

1.
MS in the possession of Bulwer’s great-grand-daughter, Lady Hermione
Cobbold, Knebworth House, Knebworth, Herts. Collated by Dr. Eileen
Curran, of Colby College. Published in Elliot, I, 102-5, and, with
several omissions, in Earl of Lytton, Life of Edward Bulwer, First Lord
Lytton (London, 1913).

2.
The death of his father in June, 1836.

3.
LWR.

4.
ER, LXIV (Oct., 1836), 1-35.

5.
James Mill.

1.
Addressed: Edw. Lytton Bulwer Esq. M.P. / Reform Club / Pall Mall / to
be forwarded. Postmark: 7NE[?]7 / NO 29 / 1836. MS in the possession of
Lady Hermione Cobbold. Collated by Dr. Eileen Curran. Published in
Elliot, I, 105-6.

2.
See Letters 147, n. 8, and 206, n. 4.

3.
Paper torn.

1.
MS in 1945 in the possession of Sir John Molesworth-St. Aubyn.

2.
Probably “Terms of Alliance between Radicals and Whigs,” LWR, XXVI
(Jan., 1837), 279-318.

1.
Excerpt published in Alexander Bain, James Mill, p. 11 n. MS not
located.

David Barclay, an early friend of James Mill, occupied the farm upon
which stood the cottage in which Mill had been born. Bain says that JSM,
largely ignorant of his father’s early life, wrote this letter to obtain
information for Andrew Bisset, whom he had invited to write a biography
of his father for the Encyclopædia Britannica (the seventh edition,
published in parts between 1830 and 1842). The volume containing
Bisset’s biography of James Mill (with some passages by JSM) appeared in
the summer of 1837. Bisset also contributed a biography to the volume of
the Penny Cyclopædia published in 1839.

2.
Sir John Stuart (originally Belsches), of Fettercairn (1753-1821), James
Mill’s early patron, for whom he named his eldest son. Two others of the
Mill children were named for this family: for Lady Jane Stuart, and for
her daughter, Wilhelmina, who became the wife of Sir William Forbes.

1.
Published in Mayer, pp. 316-18; in reply to Tocqueville’s of Nov. 19,
1836, ibid., pp. 313-16. MS in Tocqueville archives.

2.
“Terms of Alliance between Radicals and Whigs,” LWR, XXVI (Jan., 1837),
279-318.

3.
John Revans, Evils of the State of Ireland, their Causes and the
Remedy—a Poor Law (London, 1837).

4.
See Letters 113, n. 2, and 172, n. 2.

1.
MS in the possession of Lady Hermione Cobbold. Text provided by Dr.
Eileen Curran.

2.
The Duchess de la Vallière, published in 1836, but first produced, at
Covent Garden, on Jan. 3, 1837.

3.
He persuaded W. J. Fox to write the review. See Letters 187 and 200.

4.
“It is in the worst taste of the worst school—the school of modern
French romance” (The Times, Jan. 5, 1837, p. 3).

5.
“We cannot pass uncensored the dramatist who calls upon us to sympathize
with the woes of a discarded mistress and a disappointed voluptuary. It
is the pathos of the stews.” (Spectator, Jan. 7, 1837, p. 10.)

6.
See Letter 147, n. 8.

7.
James Prior, The Life of Oliver Goldsmith (2 vols., London, 1837).

8.
Neither suggestion was adopted by Bulwer. The new editions of Cowper
were those edited by Robert Southey in 15 vols. (1835-37) and by T. S.
Grimshawe in 8 vols. (1835, 1836).

9.
Probably a reference to his speech at a Reform Dinner at Bath on Jan. 5,
1837, but perhaps to his article in the Jan. LWR. See preceding letter,
paragraph 2.

1.
Published, except for last sentence, in Garnett, pp. 183-84. MS at
King’s.

2.
“Fallacies on Poor Laws,” LWR, XXVI (Jan., 1837), 357-82, signed W. E.
H[ickson].

3.
See preceding letter, n. 2, and Letter 200, n. 2.

1.
Published, except for postscript, in Garnett, pp. 184-85. MS at King’s.

2.
R. H. Horne, with whose editorship of the Monthly Repository Fox was
dissatisfied.

3.
The True Sun. See Letter 200, n. 3.

4.
See preceding letter.

5.
The article had alluded to “the doctrines maintained, and the tone
assumed by ‘the London Dispatch,’ ‘The True Sun,’ ‘The Weekly Dispatch.’
” Fox himself later wrote also for the Weekly Dispatch.

6.
Mrs. Taylor.

1.
Addressed: Mrs. Austin. MS at King’s. Mrs. Austin’s unpublished letter
in reply from Malta, March 3, 1837, is at LSE.

2.
See Letter 185, n. 2.

3.
His illness had produced a chronic facial twitch, an affliction from
which he suffered the rest of his life.

4.
George Cornewall Lewis. He and John Austin were then in Malta as
commissioners to inquire into the administration of the island.

5.
Unidentified.

6.
“The London and Westminster Review for October 1836—The Voluntary
Principle,” Church of England Quar. Rev., I (Jan., 1837), 121-40, was an
attack upon Lewis’ “Endowment and the Voluntary Principle: Separation of
Church and State,” LWR, XXVI (Oct., 1836), 244-77.

7.
The French Revolution.

1.
Published by Knight, pp. 673-74. MS not located.

2.
“Thoughts in the Cloister and the Crowd,” LWR, XXVI (Jan., 1837),
348-57.

3.
See preceding letter, n. 3.

4.
Nichol had become Regius Professor of Astronomy at the University of
Glasgow the preceding year.

5.
After announcing in Sept., 1836, that because of loss of support by
old-line Whigs he would not again seek to represent East Cornwall in
Parliament, Molesworth had become a candidate for Leeds. He was pursuing
an intransigent Radical line, especially on the question of the ballot,
which was threatening to destroy the uneasy alliance between the Whigs
and the Radicals.

6.
John Temple Leader (1810-1903), then MP for Westminster.

7.
See Examiner, Dec. 25, 1836, p. 819. Molesworth had been irked by
Fonblanque’s criticism of him in the leader of Dec. 18 (ibid., p. 801).

8.
At a great Reform Dinner at Drury Lane Theatre on Jan. 23, 1837. See
Examiner, Jan. 29, 1837, pp. 71-73.

9.
Sir John Beckett (1777-1847), the Tory candidate, head of the Leeds
banking firm of Beckett & Co., was defeated in the General Election held
in July. Molesworth and Baines were elected.

10.
Edward Baines (1774-1848), journalist and MP for Leeds, 1834-41.

1.
MS at Brit. Mus.

2.
At the opening of Parliament on Jan. 31, 1837, in the debate on the
Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne, Roebuck had sharply
attacked the Whig ministry from the Radical, democratic point of view
and had charged that there was a virtual alliance against further
reform. Place greatly admired the speech; he at once wrote Roebuck a
congratulatory note: “God bless you, my dear boy” (Brit. Mus. Add. MSS
35,150, f. 238).

3.
On the repeal of the stamp tax on newspapers.

4.
Grote had already announced his intention to present a bill for the
election of members of Parliament by ballot. See Examiner, Feb. 5, 1837,
p. 87. A similar motion had failed the preceding year.

5.
Joseph Hume had announced his intention to introduce a bill to extend
the elective franchise to householders in general.

1.
MS at Brit. Mus.

2.
See the two following letters.

1.
Addressed: Francis Place Esq. / 21 Brompton Square. Postmarks: 2 AN 2 /
FE 10 / 1837, and TP / Cornhill. MS at Brit. Mus.

2.
See Letters 192 and 194.

3.
£5. See Letter 194.

4.
See Letter 191, n. 2.

5.
Fonblanque in the Examiner’s leading article for Feb. 5, 1837, had been
critical of Roebuck for his attack on the Whig ministry.

6.
Place retorted: “I have no present inclination to waste my time with men
who are infirm of purpose, and worry myself to no useful purpose”
(quoted in Graham Wallas, Life of Francis Place [London, 1898], pp.
351-52). The full draft of Place’s letter is in Brit. Mus. Add. MSS
35,150, ff. 241-42.

1.
MS at LSE. Excerpts published in Life and Labours of Albany Fonblanque,
ed. E. B. de Fonblanque (London, 1874), pp. 30-31.

2.
It was due to be presented on March 7.

3.
Letter 191.

4.
Letter 193.

5.
Ibid., n. 6.

6.
Fonblanque’s England under Seven Administrations, a three-volume
collection of his political pieces in the Examiner. Published this
month, the book was reviewed by JSM in LWR, XXVII (April, 1837), 65-98.

1.
MS at LSE.

2.
In the House of Commons on Tuesday, Feb. 14, Molesworth had moved for
leave to bring in a bill to abolish the property qualification of
members of Parliament. The motion lost by a vote of 104 to 133.

3.
Henry Warburton, who had previously given notice of a motion to amend
the property qualification, supported Molesworth’s motion, but suggested
that in Committee some alteration of the qualification might be
substituted for abolition of it.

1.
MS not located. An excerpt quoted in an unpublished letter by Carlyle to
Leigh Hunt, dated Friday morning [Feb. 24, 1837], in Cornell University
Library: “I have just received a letter from Mill; of which this is the
first paragraph: [quoted paragraph] Hand to the work, therefore! And
best speed to you! So says, / Yours always / T. Carlyle.” JSM’s letter
was in answer to Carlyle’s of Wednesday [Feb. 22, 1837], in A. Carlyle,
pp. 147-48.

2.
“Lady Mary Wortley Montagu,” published in LWR, XXVII (April, 1837),
130-64.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / Monsieur Gustave d’Eichthal. MS at Arsenal.

2.
Probably Les Deux Mondes par M. Gustave d’Eichthal . . . , servant
d’introduction à l’ouvrage de M. Urquhart “La Turquie et ses
ressources,” though the only copy located bears the imprint, Leipzig,
1837.

3.
Brackets indicate where page is torn.

1.
Addressed: Leigh Hunt Esq. / 4 Upper Cheyne Row. MS at Brit. Mus.
Carlyle, on Saturday, March 11, had urged Hunt to get his article to JSM
that very night (see A. Carlyle, p. 149). On the outside of the letter
is written: “I send you this back to read, because giving pleasure to
others I knew it would give pleasure to yourself / L.H. [Leigh Hunt]”;
and in pencil in yet another hand: “This moment arrived / ½ past 6. / T.
C.”

2.
See Letter 196, n. 2.

1.
MS at Brit. Mus. MS dated in pencil in another hand: [?] circ 1840; the
reference to Hunt’s first contribution to the London and Westminster
Review (see Letters 196 and 198), however, permits the inference of the
date here assigned.

2.
See Letter 196, n. 2.

3.
Hunt continued to use this as his signature for other articles in the
Review.

1.
Addressed: Rev. W. J. Fox / 366 Strand. Marked: private. Postmarks: T.
P. / Leadenhall, and 4 EG4 / MR 15 / 1837. MS at King’s. Published in
Garnett, p. 185.

2.
“Bulwer’s Tragedies,” LWR, XXVII (April, 1837), 247-70. See Letters 186
and 187.

3.
The True Sun. JSM made at least one contribution to this newspaper to
free Fox to write the review; it was an unheaded article on the sale of
public lands in the colonies, True Sun, Feb. 22, 1837, p. 3.

4.
Fox’s review contained generous extracts of Bulwer’s tragedy Cromwell,
which was not published until four years later in The Dramatic Works of
Sir Edward Lytton Bulwer (London, 1841).

1.
MS at LSE.

John Macrone (ca. 1810-1837) best known as the early publisher of
Charles Dickens, had published the Westminster and continued as
publisher of the London and Westminster until his death in Sept. of this
year.

2.
Originally announced for publication on March 31, the April number did
not appear until April 6. See Examiner, March 26, 1837, p. 208; April 2,
p. 224; and April 9, p. 240.

3.
John Robertson (d. 1875), a native of Aberdeen, who had been called to
the bar at Lincoln’s Inn and who had been working on the Morning
Chronicle. He was to remain as nominal editor until JSM relinquished
control of the Review in 1840.

1.
Addressed: Leigh Hunt Esq. / 3 Upper Cheyne Row / Chelsea. MS at Brit.
Mus.

2.
In Hunt’s article, “Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.” See Letter 196, n. 2.

3.
See preceding letter, n. 3.

1.
Addressed: Mrs. Austin. MS at King’s. Sent in parcel by Henry Reeves to
Malta (see Letter 204). In reply to Mrs. Austin’s unpublished letter of
March 3 (MS at LSE).

2.
Mrs. Austin had written: “With this packet they [John Austin and G. C.
Lewis] send home their report on the Liberty of the Press & a draft of a
Libel law which is entirely his [Austin’s] & which Lewis says he
believes to be the most perfect specimen of legislation in existence.”

3.
Mrs. Austin had written: “If I escape poisoning you may rejoice. . . . I
am sorry to be an object of hostility to anybody, but civility to the
Maltese is an inexpiable offence in the eyes of the English ladies, and
I had no choice.”

4.
The April, 1837, number.

5.
John Robertson.

6.
“Shakspeare,” LWR, XXVI (Oct., 1836), 30-57, signed M.R.

7.
“Memoirs of Mirabeau,” LWR, XXVI (Jan., 1837), 382-439. Mrs. Austin had
written: “Mr Lewis & my husband are clamorous against poor Carlyle’s
article & say you will ruin the review if you admit any more. I am
afraid this is a very general opinion, though I grieve it should be so.
I am anxious to see his book [The French Revolution] and yet I dread to
see it. The article is certainly one of his most extravagant as to
style.”

8.
The Statesman (London, 1836), reviewed by Grote (and in part by JSM) in
the LWR, XXVII (April, 1837), 1-32.

9.
For James Mill. See Letter 189. Mrs. Austin had written with reference
to the proposed epitaph: “What does Lord Langdale say? He really knew &
loved your father.”

10.
Brackets in this sentence indicate where page is torn.

11.
This was the first of four series of public lectures Carlyle delivered
annually, 1837-40. The first lecture was delivered on May 1, 1837.

1.
Addressed: Mrs. Austin / Malta. Franked by H. Taylor. MS in the
possession of Mr. Gordon Waterfield.

2.
Henry Reeve (1813-1895), man of letters, editor of the Edinburgh Review,
1855-95. He was a nephew of Mrs. Austin.

3.
James Milne (1754-1839), who held the chair from 1797 until his death.
He was succeeded by William Fleming (1791-1866).

1.
Excerpt published in [Mrs. Harriet Grote], The Philosophic Radicals of
1832 (London, 1866), p. 34. MS not located.

2.
Probably Henry Warburton.

3.
On March 6 Lord John Russell for the Whig ministry had presented to the
House of Commons a set of ten resolutions dealing with the troubled
affairs of Lower Canada and in effect declaring an intention to suspend
representative government in the province. The House approved the
resolutions by a large majority on March 8 despite the strenuous
opposition of such Radicals as Roebuck, Hume, and Molesworth.

1.
Published in Elliot, I, 107. MS in the possession of Lady Hermione
Cobbold. Collated by Dr. Eileen Curran.

2.
“The Works of Thomas Gray,” LWR, XXVII (July, 1837), 1-16.

3.
Ibid., pp. 14-15.

4.
Athens, Its Rise and Fall was published in May, 1837.

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / M. Aristide Guilbert / recommandé aux soins de /
Monsieur Peschot / Propriétaire / 5 Rue Jadot / à Paris. Postmarks: E
21; 19 / JUNE / 1837 /; and Angleterre / Par Calais / 21 / JUIN / 1837.
MS at King’s. Printed in Morrison, p. 257, but dated June 29, 1837.

2.
No such article appeared in LWR.

3.
By Carlyle, LWR, XXVII (April, 1837), 233-47.

4.
Page torn.

1.
Addressed: J. Robertson Esq. MS at LSE. Dated by the references to the
July, 1837, LWR.

2.
Probably “The School of Design,” ibid., pp. 116-39, signed E.C., which
contained an analysis of a recent parliamentary inquiry and report on
arts and manufactures.

3.
Not identified.

4.
Evidently it had been printed off, for Bulwer’s “The Works of Thomas
Gray” begins on page 1 of the July number.

5.
JSM’s review of Carlyle’s The French Revolution (LWR, XXVII, 17-53)
contains copious extracts.

6.
No such article appeared.

7.
John Temple Leader.

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle Esq. MS at Brit. Mus. One passage published in
William Foster, The East India House (London, 1924), p. 214. Carlyle’s
answer of July 18, 1837, in A. Carlyle, pp. 153-56.

2.
See preceding letter, n. 5.

3.
Fraser’s, XVI (July, 1837), 85-104.

4.
Thomas Frederick Elliot.

5.
John Wilson Croker. The Quarterly did not review the book.

6.
See Letter 203, n. 11.

7.
Simpkin and Marshall, Booksellers.

8.
Not located. It is not from the long review (by W. M. Thackeray) in The
Times, Aug. 3, 1837, p. 6.

This postscript is written on the outside, diagonally, above the
address.

1.
MS at Brit. Mus.

2.
It was to be over a year before another of Hunt’s was to appear in the
LWR. See Letter 240, n. 2.

3.
“Letters of Charles Lamb,” LWR, XXVII (July, 1837), 229-43.

4.
The signature has been cut out.

5.
Hunt had just taken over from R. H. Horne the proprietorship of the
Monthly Repository. See Mineka, The Dissidence of Dissent, pp. 382-93.

1.
Published by Towers, pp. 58-59. MS not located. Mrs. Towers says that it
was addressed to Robertson at Boulogne, France, where he was
vacationing. The bracketed ellipses indicate Mrs. Towers’ deletions.

2.
Tocqueville in his letter of June 24, 1837 (Mayer, p. 324), had
expressed his hope that the second part of Démocratie en Amérique might
be published by the spring of 1838; it did not appear, however, until
1840.

3.
William Whewell (1794-1866), later Master of Trinity College, Cambridge,
published his History of the Inductive Sciences this year.

4.
John Stuart Blackie (1809-1895), Scottish professor and man of letters,
who had published a verse translation of Faust in 1834.

5.
Wolfgang Menzel (1798-1873), poet, critic, and historian, had published
his Die deutsche Literatur in 1836.

6.
Tom Moore.

7.
No article on either Moore or Southey appeared in LWR.

8.
Henry Hooper, bookseller, had recently become publisher of LWR.

9.
Presumably her Society in America, published in May, 1837.

10.
Miss Martineau’s first contribution to LWR, “Miss Sedgwick’s Works,”
appeared in the Oct., 1837, number, XXVIII, 42-65. Catherine Maria
Sedgwick (1789-1867) was a popular American novelist.

11.
Les Deux Mondes (Leipzig, 1837).

12.
Andrew Bisset, a contributor to the Review.

13.
In Bk. IV, chap. iv of The French Revolution. Dickens at this point was
at the height of his early fame because of the extraordinary popularity
of his nearly completed Pickwick Papers.

1.
Published by Towers, p. 59. MS not located.

2.
Mrs. Towers summarizes the first part of the letter as saying that
Guilbert has been vexed to have missed seeing Robertson, who has by this
time left Paris.

3.
F. A. M. Mignet (1796-1884), historian, associated with Le National. The
work referred to cannot be identified.

4.
Philarète E. Chasles (1798-1873), journalist, librarian, and later
professor at the Collège de France.

5.
“Letter from an Englishman to a Frenchman, on a Recent Apology in ‘The
Journal Des Débats,’ for the Faults of the English National Character,”
MR, VIII (June, 1834), 385-95.

6.
Probably Léon Galibert. editor of the Révue britannique.

7.
“Transactions of the Statistical Society of London,” signed R., did not
appear in the LWR until April, 1838 (XXIX, 45-72).

8.
In the numbers for April, 1835, and July, 1836.

9.
Views of the Architecture of the Heavens (Edinburgh, 1837).

1.
Published by Towers, p. 60. MS not located.

2.
No such article appeared in LWR.

3.
Edmund Spencer, Travels in Circassia, Krim Tartary, etc. (2 vols.,
London, 1837).

4.
A Selection from the Poems of Louis the First, King of Bavaria, Imitated
in English Verse, by G. Everill (London, 1837).

5.
See Letter 228.

6.
Joseph Hume was defeated for Middlesex, but was almost immediately
returned for Kilkenny; George Grote barely escaped defeat for the City
of London.

7.
Horace Twiss (1787-1849), wit and politician, vehement opponent of
reform, defeated for Nottingham.

8.
Francis R. Bonham, defeated for Harwich.

9.
Charles Ross (1799-1860), defeated for Northampton.

10.
Presumably the article, “History of Hanover,” signed S.R.T., LWR, XXVIII
(Oct., 1837), 198-216.

11.
See preceding letter, n. 4.

1.
Addressed: Thomas Carlyle Esq. / Scotsbrig / Ecclefechan / N.B.
Postmark: LS / 8 AU 8. MS at Pierpont Morgan Library, New York.
Carlyle’s reply of Aug. 10, 1837, is in A. Carlyle, pp. 157-59.

2.
Letter 91.

3.
“Armand Carrel,” LWR, XXVIII (Oct., 1837), 66-111.

4.
On logic.

5.
Of Aug. 3. JSM was mistaken as to Edward Sterling’s authorship of the
review; it was by W. M. Thackeray.

1.
MS at Arsenal. Letter bears no salutation or address.

2.
See Letter 197, n. 2.

3.
Sic. Professor Georg Iggers has pointed out that this is probably
intended for kief (modern form keyif), a Turkish word defined by
D’Eichthal as “cette heureuse disposition à jouer de ce qu’il y a de bon
dans toutes les situations où l’on se trouve, sans trop s’inquiéter de
ce qu’elles ont de mauvais” (Les Deux Mondes, p. 240).

1.
Addressed: Monsieur / Aristide Guilbert / Rue de Clos Georgeot / à
Paris. Postmarks: 29 / AUG / 1837 and 31 / AOUT / 1837. MS in the
possession of Dr. James M. Osborn, Yale University.

2.
Unidentified; no article by De Cormenin appears to have been published
during JSM’s editorship.

3.
See Letter 214, n. 3.

4.
See Letter 207, n. 2.

1.
Published, with omissions, by Towers, p. 61. MS at King’s.

2.
See Letter 211, n. 10.

3.
“Works of Theodore Hook,” LWR, XXVIII (Oct., 1837), 169-98. Theodore
Edward Hook (1788-1841), novelist, wit, founder in 1820 of the John Bull
newspaper, and editor of the New Monthly Magazine, 1836-41.

4.
[Angelo Usiglio], “Italian Literature since 1830,” LWR, XXVIII (Oct.,
1837), 132-68.

5.
Presumably “Congregational Dissenters,” ibid., pp. 217-60.

6.
JSM’s “Armand Carrel,” ibid., pp. 66-111.

7.
JSM’s “Parties and the Ministry,” ibid., pp. 1-26.

8.
[Charles Wheatstone], “Willis on Reed Organ Sounds,” ibid., pp. 27-41.
Charles (later Sir Charles) Wheatstone (1802-1875), scientist and
inventor.

9.
Sir William F. P. Napier contributed an article to the next number: “The
Duke of Wellington,” LWR, XXVIII (Jan., 1838), 367-436.

1.
Published by Towers, pp. 62-63. MS not located.

2.
An article on the new Queen, which never appeared in LWR. Mrs. Towers
prints (p. 62) part of a letter of Miss Martineau’s, dated Aug. 26,
1837: “Here is my say about the Queen. It will appear to you very
obvious, I fear, and perhaps too sermon-like; but indeed I think this
strain of meditation much wanted to be uttered.”

3.
Mary Russell Mitford (1787-1855), novelist and dramatist.

4.
Charles Wentworth Dilke (1789-1864), editor of the Athenæum, 1830-46.

5.
The omission is Mrs. Towers’.

6.
Probably his political article for the Oct. number; see preceding
letter, n. 7. The Oct. number was not published until Oct. 23.

1.
Addressed: John Robertson Esq / 4 Grove Place / Brompton / London.
Postmarks: TP / Rate 2d; 10 FN 10 / OC 6 / 1837; and BRECON. Published
with omissions by Towers, pp. 64-65. MS at King’s.

2.
See preceding letter.

1.
Addressed: John Robertson Esq. / care of Mr Hooper bookseller / 13 Pall
Mall East. Postmark: [ . . . ] 8 / [ . . . ] 31 / 1837. Published in
part by Towers, p. 65; there dated as of Oct. 31, but the nearest Sunday
fell on Oct. 29. MS at King’s.

2.
No such article appeared in LWR.

3.
See the two preceding letters.

4.
Page torn. Words in brackets appear in Mrs. Towers’ published version.

1.
Published by Towers, p. 61. MS not located.

2.
Mrs. Towers dates as probably of Sept., 1837, but Carlyle in a letter of
Friday, Nov. 10 (in A. Carlyle, p. 162), alludes to JSM’s talk with him
on Nov. 9 about the review of Lockhart’s Life of Scott.

3.
Carlyle’s review, “Lockhart’s Life of Scott,” appeared in the Jan.,
1838, LWR, XXVII, 293-345.

4.
David Crockett (1786-1836), American frontiersman. One of the books must
have been A Narrative of the Life of David Crockett, Written by Himself
(London, 1834), which was written to correct erroneous impressions
created by an unknown writer’s Sketches and Eccentricities of Colonel
David Crockett (London, 1834).

1.
Addressed: William Tait Esq. / Bookseller / Edinburgh. Postmarks: LS /
18N018 / 1837; and NOV / C20F / 1837. MS at LSE.

2.
John Bowring’s Memoirs of Jeremy Bentham was eventually published in
1843 in vols. X and XI of The Works of Jeremy Bentham (Edinburgh and
London, 1838-43).

1.
Addressed: William Tait Esq / Bookseller / Edinburgh. Postmarks:
LS/21N021/ . . . / and NOV / 23 / 1837. MS at LSE.

2.
This eventuated in his article “The Works of Jeremy Bentham,” LWR, XXIX
(Aug., 1838), 467-506.

1.
Addressed: Leigh Hunt Esq. / 3 Upper Cheyne Row / Chelsea. Postmarks: 4
EG 4 / NO 20 / 1837, and Leadenhall St. MS at Brit. Mus.

2.
“Explanation and Retrospection—The Examiner Twenty Years Ago,” MR,
Enlarged Series I (Oct., 1837), 225-35.

3.
“Fonblanque’s England under Seven Administrations,” LWR, XXVII (April,
1837), 65-98.

4.
Hunt as the original editor of the Examiner had suffered various
prosecutions and had been imprisoned for two years (1813-15) for a libel
on the Prince Regent.

1.
MS at Columbia University.

2.
Both Lewis and the Austins were still in Malta.

3.
See Letter 217, n. 7.

4.
On Nov. 20, at the opening of the new Parliament, Wakley and Molesworth
for the Radicals had attempted to amend the Address to the Throne by
making it advocate extension of the franchise, vote by ballot, and
shortening of the parliamentary term. Lord John Russell, for the Whig
ministry, took a stand against further alteration of the Reform Act on
the ground that “entering into this question of the construction of our
representation so soon again would destroy the stability of our
institutions” (Examiner, Nov. 6, 1837, pp. 757-58).

5.
Not published at this time. Probably an early version of chap. iv (“On
the Applicability of the Principle of Authority to Questions of
Religion”) of Lewis’ An Essay on the Influence of Authority in Matters
of Opinion (London, 1849).

6.
In the LWR for April and Oct., 1836, respectively.

1.
Addressed: J. H. Burton Esq. / 9 Warriston Crescent / Edinburgh.
Postmarks: LS / 30 NO 30 / 1837, and DEC / C2F / 1837. Original in
possession of Professor John Burton Cleland, of Adelaide, South
Australia, the grandson of J. H. Burton. Copy supplied by Professor
Cleland’s son-in-law, Professor J. A. La Nauze of the Department of
History, University of Melbourne.

John Hill Burton (1809-1881), Scottish historian, at the time of this
letter was engaged in the editing of the collected edition of The Works
of Jeremy Bentham, published under the superintendence of Bentham’s
executor, John Bowring.

2.
Bentham’s Rationale of Judicial Evidence, ed. JSM, 5 vols., 1827, was
reprinted in the collected edition, vols. VI and VII. To the reprinted
original Preface was added the following note, presumably by JSM: “At an
interval of more than ten years from the first publication of this work,
the original Editor feels that an apology is due from him for the air of
confident dogmatism perceptible in some of his notes and additions, and
for which he can only urge the palliation of their having been written
in very early youth—a time of life at which such faults are more venial
than at any other, because they generally arise, not so much from the
writer’s own self-conceit, as from confidence in the authority of his
teachers. It is due, however, to himself to state, that the tone of some
of the passages in question would have been felt by him, even then, to
be unbecoming, as proceeding from himself individually: he wrote them in
the character of an anonymous Editor of Mr. Bentham’s work, who, in the
trifling contributions which the author desired at his hands, considered
(so far as mere manner was concerned) rather what would be accordant
with the spirit of the work itself, and in Mr. Bentham admissible, than
what would be decorous from a person of his years and his limited
knowledge and experience. His name was subsequently affixed, contrary to
his own strongly expressed wish, at the positive desire of the venerable
author, who certainly had a right to require it.” See also Letter 13.

3.
Bentham’s An Introductory View of the Rationale of Evidence is placed at
the beginning of vol. VI in the collected edition.

1.
Addressed: John Robertson Esq. MS at King’s.

2.
Robertson’s article, “Caricatures,” LWR, XXVIII (Jan., 1838), 261-93.

3.
Discussion of the theory of caricature expounded by Francis Grose
(1731?-1791), antiquarian and author of Rules for Drawing Caricatures,
1788.

4.
The article was eventually published in the Aug., 1838, LWR (XXIX,
352-72). Bearing the title “England and Britany,” it compared books on
rural life by the French novelist Emile Souvestre (1806-1854) and the
English miscellaneous writer William Howitt (1792-1879).

Henry Fothergill Chorley (1808-1872), miscellaneous writer and music
critic for the Athenæum, 1830-68.

5.
G. A. Hoskins, Travels in Ethiopia (London, 1835); Visit to the Great
Oasis of the Libyan Desert (London, 1837).

1.
Published by Knight, pp. 674-76. MS not located.

2.
George Peacock, A Treatise on Algebra (Cambridge, 1830).

3.
Two volumes of the eventual six had been published by this time: I. Les
Préliminaires généraux et la philosophie mathématique (Paris, 1830); II.
La Philosophie astronomique et la philosophie de la physique (Paris,
1835).

4.
See Letter 102, postscript.

5.
No such article appeared in LWR.

6.
See Letter 213.

7.
Presumably Robertson’s article, “Congregational Dissenters” in the Oct.,
1837, LWR, had helped to bring this about.

8.
John Playfair (1748-1819), mathematician and geologist.

9.
See Letter 225, n. 4.

10.
John Temple Leader.

11.
Daniel Whittle Harvey (1786-1863), then MP for Southwark.

12.
Thomas Wakley (1795-1862), medical reformer, founder of the Lancet; MP,
1835-62.

13.
“To the Electors of Leeds,” in the advertising columns, Spectator, Dec.
3, 1837, p. 1149. Except for a few words at the beginning and end, it
was written by JSM (see MacMinn, Bibliog., p. 49).

14.
Word had just been received in London that armed rebellion against the
government had broken out in November in Lower Canada. The rebellion had
actually been suppressed by Canadian forces by mid-December, but the
news of its outbreak arriving on the eve of a parliamentary recess for
Christmas led to much speculation whether the Whig ministry would resort
to war. JSM earlier in the year had indicated his opposition to Whig
policies on Canada (see Letter 205), and throughout 1838 he devoted much
of his political activity and writing to the support of the Radicals’
position and the work of Lord Durham, who on Jan. 15, 1838, accepted
appointment as High Commissioner and Governor General of British North
America (see Letters 231, 239, 248, 249, 250, and 252).

15.
Adam Black (1784-1874), Edinburgh publisher and politician.

16.
JSM’s brother.

17.
Augustus De Morgan (1806-1871), professor of mathematics at University
College, London, 1828-31 and 1836-66.


