The appearance of a treatise like the present, on a subject on which so
many works of merit already exist, may be thought to require some
explanation.

It might, perhaps, be sufficient to say, that no existing treatise on
Political Economy contains the latest improvements which have been made
in the theory of the subject. Many new ideas, and new applications of
ideas, have been elicited by the discussions of the last few years,
especially those on Currency, on Foreign Trade, and on the important
topics connected more or less intimately with Colonization: and there
seems reason that the field of Political Economy should be re-surveyed
in its whole extent, if only for the purpose of incorporating the
results of these speculations, and bringing them into harmony with the
principles previously laid down by the best thinkers on the subject.

To supply, however, these deficiencies in former treatises bearing a
similar title, is not the sole, or even the principal object which the
author has in view. The design of the book is different from that of any
treatise on Political Economy which has been produced in England since
the work of Adam Smith.

The most characteristic quality of that work, and the one in which it
most differs from some others which have equalled or even surpassed it
as mere expositions of the general principles of the subject, is that it
invariably associates the principles with their applications. This of
itself implies a much wider range of ideas and of topics than are
included in Political Economy, considered as a branch of abstract
speculation. For practical purposes, Political Economy is inseparably
intertwined with many other branches of Social Philosophy. Except on
matters of mere detail, there are perhaps no practical questions, even
among those which Edition: current; Page: [xxviii] approach nearest to
the character of purely economical questions, which admit of being
decided on economical premises alone. And it is because Adam Smith never
loses sight of this truth; because, in his applications of Political
Economy, he perpetually appeals to other and often far larger
considerations than pure Political Economy affords—that he gives that
well-grounded feeling of command over the principles of the subject for
purposes of practice, owing to which the Wealth of Nations, alone among
treatises on Political Economy has not only been popular with general
readers, but has impressed itself strongly on the minds of men of the
world and of legislators.

It appears to the present writer that a work similar in its object and
general conception to that of Adam Smith, but adapted to the more
extended knowledge and improved ideas of the present age, is the kind of
contribution which Political Economy at present requires. The Wealth of
Nations is in many parts obsolete, and in all, imperfect. Political
Economy, properly so called, has grown up almost from infancy since the
time of Adam Smith; and the philosophy of society, from which
practically that eminent thinker never separated his more peculiar
theme, though still in a very early stage of its progress, has advanced
many steps beyond the point at which he left it. No attempt, however,
has yet been made to combine his practical mode of treating his subject
with the increased knowledge since acquired of its theory, or to exhibit
the economical phenomena of society in the relation in which they stand
to the best social ideas of the present time, as he did, with such
admirable success, in reference to the philosophy of his century.

Such is the idea which the writer of the present work has kept before
him. To succeed even partially in realizing it, would be a sufficiently
useful achievement, to induce him to incur willingly all the chances of
failure. It is requisite, however, to add, that although his object is
practical, and, as far as the nature of the subject admits, popular, he
has not attempted to purchase either of those advantages by the
sacrifice of strict scientific reasoning. Though he desires that his
treatise should be more than a mere exposition of the abstract doctrines
of Political Economy, he is also desirous that such an exposition should
be found in it.1

Edition: current; Page: [xxix]


[Addition to the Preface in the Second Edition, 1849]

The additions and alterations in the present edition are generally of
little moment; but the increased importance which the Socialist
controversy has assumed since this work was written has made it
desirable to enlarge the chapter which treats of it; the more so, as the
objections therein stated to the specific schemes propounded by some
Socialists have been erroneously understood as a general condemnation of
all that is commonly included under that name. A full appreciation of
Socialism, and of the questions which it raises, can only be
advantageously attempted in a separate work.


Preface to the Third Edition [July, 1852]

The present edition has been revised throughout, and several chapters
either materially added to or entirely re-cast. Among these may be
mentioned that on the “Means of abolishing Cottier Tenantry,” the
suggestions contained in which had reference exclusively to Ireland, and
to Ireland in a condition which has been much modified by subsequent
events. An addition has been made to the theory of International Values
laid down in the eighteenth chapter of the Third Book.

The chapter on Property has been almost entirely re-written. I was far
from intending that the statement which it contained of the objections
to the best known Socialist schemes should be understood as a
condemnation of Socialism, regarded as an ultimate result of human
progress. The only objection to which any great importance will be found
to be attached in the present edition is the unprepared state of mankind
in general, and of the labouring classes in particular; their extreme
unfitness at present for any order of things, which would make any
considerable demand on either their intellect or their virtue. It
appears to me that the great end of social improvement should be to fit
mankind by cultivation for a state of society combining the greatest
personal freedom with that just distribution of the fruits of labour
which the present laws of property do not profess to aim at. Whether,
when this state of mental and moral cultivation shall be attained,
individual property in some form (though a form very remote from the
present) or community of ownership in the instruments of production and
Edition: current; Page: [xxx] a regulated division of the produce will
afford the circumstances most favourable to happiness, and best
calculated to bring human nature to its greatest perfection, is a
question which must be left, as it safely may, to the people of that
time to decide. Those of the present are not competent to decide it.

The chapter on the “Futurity of the Labouring Classes” has been enriched
with the results of the experience afforded, since this work was first
published, by the co-operative associations in France. That important
experience shows that the time is ripe for a larger and more rapid
extension of association among labourers than could have been
successfully attempted before the calumniated democratic movements in
Europe, which, though for the present put down by the pressure of brute
force, have scattered widely the seeds of future improvement. I have
endeavoured to designate more clearly the tendency of the social
transformation, of which these associations are the initial step; and at
the same time to disconnect the co-operative cause from the exaggerated
or altogether mistaken declamations against competition, so largely
indulged in by its supporters.


[Addition to the Preface in the Fourth Edition, 1857]

The present edition (the fourth) has been revised throughout, and some
additional explanations inserted where they appeared to be necessary.
The chapters to which most has been added are those on the Influence of
Credit on Prices, and on the Regulation of a Convertible Paper Currency.


[Addition to the Preface in the Fifth Edition, 1862]

The present fifth edition has been revised throughout, and the facts, on
several subjects, brought down to a later date than in the former
editions. Additional arguments and illustrations have been inserted
where they seemed necessary, but not in general at any considerable
length.


[Addition to the Preface in the Sixth, Edition, 1865]

The present, like all previous editions, has been revised throughout,
and additional explanations, or answers to new objections, have been
inserted where they seemed necessary; but not, in Edition: current;
Page: [xxxi] general, to any considerable length. The chapter in which
the greatest addition has been made is that on the Rate of Interest; and
for most of the new matter there introduced, as well as for many minor
improvements, I am indebted to the suggestions and criticisms of my
friend Professor Cairnes, one of the most scientific of living political
economists.


[Addition to the Preface in “The People's Edition,” 1865]

The present edition is an exact transcript from the sixth, except that
all extracts and most phrases in foreign languages have been translated
into English, and a very small number of quotations, or parts of
quotations, which appeared superfluous, have been struck out.1 A reprint
of an old controversy with the Quarterly Review on the condition of
landed property in France, which had been subjoined as an Appendix, has
been dispensed with.2


Preface to the Seventh Edition [1871]∗

The present edition, with the exception of a few verbal corrections,3
corresponds exactly with the last Library Edition and with the People's
Edition. Since the publication of these, there has been some instructive
discussion on the theory of Demand and Supply, and on the influence of
Strikes and Trades Unions on wages, by which additional light has been
thrown on these subjects; but the results, in the author's opinion, are
not yet ripe for incorporation in a general treatise on Political
Economy.† For an analogous reason, all notice of the alteration made in
the Land Laws of Ireland by the recent Act, is deferred until experience
shall have had time to pronounce on the operation of that well-meant
attempt to deal with the greatest practical evil in the economic
institutions of that country.




PRELIMINARY REMARKS

In every department of human affairs, Practice long precedes Science:
systematic enquiry into the modes of action of the powers of nature, is
the tardy product of a long course of efforts to use those powers for
practical ends. The conception, accordingly, of Political Economy as a
branch of science is extremely modern; but the subject with which its
enquiries are conversant has in all ages necessarily constituted one of
the chief practical interests of mankind, and, in some, a most unduly
engrossing one.

That subject is Wealth. Writers on Political Economy profess to teach,
or to investigate, the nature of Wealth, and the laws of its production
and distribution: including, directly or remotely, the operation of all
the causes by which the condition of mankind, or of any society of human
beings, in respect to this universal object of human desire, is made
prosperous or the reverse. Not that any treatise on Political Economy
can discuss or even enumerate all these causes; but it undertakes to set
forth as much as is known of the laws and principles according to which
they operate.

Every one has a notion, sufficiently correct for common purposes, of
what is meant by wealth. The enquiries which relate to it are in no
danger of being confounded with those relating to any other of the great
human interests. All know that it is one thing to be rich, another thing
to be enlightened, brave, or humane; that the questions how a nation is
made wealthy, and how it is made free, or virtuous, or eminent in
literature, in the fine arts, in arms, or in polity, are totally
distinct enquiries. Those things, indeed, are all Edition: current;
Page: [2] indirectly connected, and react upon one another. A people has
sometimes become free, because it had first grown wealthy; or wealthy,
because it had first become free. The creed and laws of a people act
powerfully upon their economical condition; and this again, by its
influence on their mental development and social relations, reacts upon
their creed and laws. But though the subjects are in very close contact,
they are essentially different, and have never been supposed to be
otherwise.

It is no part of the design of this treatise to aim at metaphysical
nicety of definition, where the ideas suggested by a term are already as
determinate as practical purposes require. But, little as it might be
expected that any mischievous confusion of ideas could take place on a
subject so simple as the question, what is to be considered as wealth,
it is matter of history, that such confusion of ideas has existed—that
theorists and practical politicians have been equally and at one period
universally, infected by it, and that for many generations it gave a
thoroughly false direction to the policy of Europe. I refer to the set
of doctrines designated, since the time of Adam Smith, by the
appellation of the Mercantile System.

While this system prevailed, it was assumed, either expressly or
tacitly, in the whole policy of nations, that wealth consisted solely of
money; or of the precious metals, which, when not already in the state
of money, are capable of being directly converted into it. According to
the doctrines then prevalent, whatever tended to heap up money or
bullion in a country added to its wealth. Whatever sent the precious
metals out of a country impoverished it. If a country possessed no gold
or silver mines, the only industry by which it could be enriched was
foreign trade, being the only one which could bring in money. Any branch
of trade which was supposed to send out more money than it brought in,
however ample and valuable might be the returns in another shape, was
looked upon as a losing trade. Exportation of goods was favoured and
encouraged (even by means extremely onerous to the real resources of the
country), because, the exported goods being stipulated to be paid for in
money, it was hoped that the returns would actually be made in gold and
silver. Importation of anything, other than the precious metals, was
regarded as a loss to the nation of the whole price of the things
imported; unless they were brought in to be re-exported at a profit, or
unless, being the materials or instruments of some industry practised in
the country itself, they Edition: current; Page: [3] gave the power of
producing exportable articles at smaller cost, and thereby effecting a
larger exportation. The commerce of the world was looked upon as a
struggle among nations, which could draw to itself the largest share of
the gold and silver in existence; and in this competition no nation
could gain anything, except by making others lose as much, or, at the
least, preventing them from gaining it.

It often happens that the universal belief of one age of Mankind—a
belief from which no one was, nor without an extraordinary effort of
genius and courage, could at that time be free—becomes to a subsequent
age so palpable an absurdity, that the only difficulty then is to
imagine how such a thing can ever have appeared credible. It has so
happened with the doctrine that money is synonymous with wealth. The
conceit seems too preposterous to be thought of as a serious opinion. It
looks like one of the crude fancies of childhood, instantly corrected by
a word from any grown person. But let no one feel confident that he
would have escaped the delusion if he had lived at the time when it
prevailed. All the associations engendered by common life, and by the
ordinary course of business, concurred in promoting it. So Long as those
associations were the only medium through which the subject was looked
at, what we now think so gross an absurdity seemed a truism. Once
questioned, indeed, it was doomed; but no one was likely to think of
questioning it whose mind had not become familiar with certain modes of
stating and of contemplating economical phenomena, which have only found
their way into the general understanding through the influence of Adam
Smith and of his expositors.

In common discourse, wealth is always expressed in money. If you ask how
rich a person is, you are answered that he has so many thousand pounds.
All income and expenditure, all gains and losses, everything by which
one becomes richer or poorer, are reckoned as the coming in or going out
of so much money. It is true that in the inventory of a person's fortune
are included, not only the money in his actual possession, or due to
him, but all other articles of value. These, however, enter, not in
their own character, but in virtue of the sums of money which they would
sell for; and if they would sell for less, their owner is reputed less
rich, though the things themselves are precisely the same. It is true,
also, that people do not grow rich by keeping their money unused, and
that they must be willing to spend in order to gain. Those who enrich
themselves by commerce, do so by giving money for goods as well Edition:
current; Page: [4] as goods for money; and the first is as necessary a
part of the process as the last. But a person who buys goods for
purposes of gain, does so to sell them again for money, and in the
expectation of receiving more money than he laid out: to get money,
therefore, seems even to the person himself the ultimate end of the
whole. It often happens that he is not paid in money, but in something
else; having bought goods to a value equivalent, which are set off
against those he sold. But he accepted these at a money valuation, and
in the belief that they would bring in more money eventually than the
price at which they were made over to him. A dealer doing a large amount
of business, and turning over his capital rapidly, has but a small
portion of it in ready money at any one time. But he only feels it
valuable to him as it is convertible into money: he considers no
transaction closed until the net result is either paid or credited in
money: when he retires from business it is into money that he converts
the whole, and not until then does he deem himself to have realized his
gains: just as if money were the only wealth, and money's worth were
only the means of attaining it. If it be now asked for what end money is
desirable, unless to supply the wants or pleasures of oneself or others,
the champion of the system would not be at all embarrassed by the
question. True, he would say, these are the uses of wealth, and very
laudable uses while confined to domestic commodities, because in that
case, by exactly the amount which you expend, you enrich others of your
countrymen. Spend your wealth, if you please, in whatever indulgences
you have a taste for; but your wealth is not the indulgences, it is the
sum of money, or the annual money income, with which you purchase them.

While there were so many things to render the assumption which is the
basis of the mercantile system plausible, there is also some small
foundation in reason, though a very insufficient one, for the
distinction which that system so emphatically draws between money and
every other kind of valuable possession. We really, and justly, look
upon a person as possessing the advantages of wealth, not in proportion
to the useful and agreeable things of which he is in the actual
enjoyment, but to his command over the general fund of things useful and
agreeable; the power he possesses of providing for any exigency, or
obtaining any object of desire. Now, money is itself that power; while
all other things, in a civilized state, seem to confer it only by their
capacity of being exchanged for money. To possess any other article of
wealth, is to possess that particular Edition: current; Page: [5] thing,
and nothing else: if you wish for another thing instead of it, you have
first to sell it, or to submit to the inconvenience and delay (if not
the impossibility) of finding some one who has what you want, and is
willing to barter it for what you have. But with money you are at once
able to buy whatever things are for sale: and one whose fortune is in
money, or in things rapidly convertible into it, seems both to himself
and others to possess not any one thing, but all the things which the
money places it at his option to purchase. The greatest part of the
utility of wealth, beyond a very moderate quantity, is not the
indulgences it procures, but the reserved power which its possessor
holds in his hands of attaining purposes generally; and this power no
other kind of wealth confers so immediately or so certainly as money. It
is the only form of wealth which is not merely applicable to some one
use, but can be turned at once to any use. And this distinction was the
more likely to make an impression upon governments, as it is one of
considerable importance to them. A civilized government derives
comparatively little advantage from taxes unless it can collect them in
money: and if it has large or sudden payments to make, especially
payments in foreign countries for wars or subsidies, either for the sake
of conquering or of not being conquered (the two chief objects of
national policy until a late period), scarcely any medium of payment
except money will serve the purpose. All these causes conspire to make
both individuals and governments, in estimating their means, attach
almost exclusive importance to money, either in esse or in posse, and
look upon all other things (when viewed as part of their resources)
scarcely otherwise than as the remote means of obtaining that which
alone, when obtained, affords the indefinite, and at the same time
instantaneous, command over objects of desire, which best answers to the
idea of wealth.

An absurdity, however, does not cease to be an absurdity when we have
discovered what were the appearances which made it plausible; and the
Mercantile Theory could not fail to be seen in its true character when
men began, even in an imperfect manner, to explore into the foundations
of things, and seek their premises from elementary facts, and not from
the forms and phrases of common discourse. So soon as they asked
themselves what is really meant by money—what it is in its essential
characters, and the precise nature of the functions it performs—they
reflected that money, like other things, is only a desirable possession
on account of its uses; and that these, instead of being, as they
delusively Edition: current; Page: [6] appear, indefinite, are of a
strictly defined and limited description, namely, to facilitate the
distribution of the produce of industry according to the convenience of
those among whom it is shared. Further consideration showed that the
uses of money are in no respect promoted by increasing the quantity
which exists and circulates in a country; the service which it performs
being as well rendered by a small as by a large aggregate amount. Two
million quarters of corn will not feed so many persons as four millions;
but two millions of pounds sterling will carry on as much traffic, will
buy and sell as many commodities, as four millions, though at lower
nominal prices. Money, as money, satisfies no want; its worth to any
one, consists in its being a convenient shape in which to receive his
incomings of all sorts, which incomings he afterwards, at the times
which suit him best, converts into the forms in which they can be useful
to him. Great as the difference would be between a country with money,
and a country altogether without it, it would be only one of
convenience; a saving of time and trouble, like grinding by water power
instead of by hand, or (to use Adam Smith's illustration) like the
benefit derived from roads; and to mistake money for wealth, is the same
sort of error as to mistake the highway which may be the easiest way of
getting to your house or lands, for the house and lands themselves.1

Money, being the instrument of an important public and private purpose,
is rightly regarded as wealth; but everything else which serves any
human purpose, and which nature does not afford gratuitously, is wealth
also. To be wealthy is to have a large stock of useful articles, or the
means of purchasing them. Everything forms therefore a part of wealth,
which has a power of purchasing; for which anything useful or agreeable
would be given in exchange. Things for which nothing could be obtained
in exchange, however useful or necessary they may be, are not wealth in
the sense in which the term is used in Political Economy. Air, for
example, though the most absolute of necessaries, bears no price in the
market, because it can be obtained gratuitously: to accumulate a stock
of it would yield no profit or advantage to any one; and the laws of its
production and distribution are the subject of a very different study
from Political Economy. But though air is not wealth, mankind are much
richer by obtaining it gratis, since the time Edition: current; Page:
[7] and labour which would otherwise be required for supplying the most
pressing of all wants, can be devoted to other purposes. It is possible
to imagine circumstances in which air would be a part of wealth. If it
became customary to sojourn long in places where the air does not
naturally penetrate, as in diving-bells sunk in the sea, a supply of air
artificially furnished would, like water conveyed into houses, bear a
price: and if from any revolution in nature the atmosphere became too
scanty for the consumption, or could be monopolized, air might acquire a
very high marketable value. In such a case, the possession of it, beyond
his own wants, would be, to its owner, wealth; and the general wealth of
mankind might at first sight appear to be increased, by what would be so
great a calamity to them. The error would lie in not considering, that
however rich the possessor of air might become at the expense of the
rest of the community, all persons else would be poorer by all that they
were compelled to pay for what they had before obtained without payment.

This leads to an important distinction in the meaning of the word
wealth, as applied to the possessions of an individual, and to those of
a nation, or of mankind. In the wealth of mankind, nothing is included
which does not of itself answer some purpose of utility or pleasure. To
an individual anything is wealth, which, though useless in itself,
enables him to claim from others a part of their stock of things useful
or pleasant. Take, for instance, a mortgage of a thousand pounds on a
landed estate. This is wealth to the person to whom it brings in a
revenue, and who could perhaps sell it in the market for the full amount
of the debt. But it is not wealth to the country; if the engagement were
annulled, the country would be neither poorer nor richer. The mortgagee
would have lost a thousand pounds, and the owner of the land would have
gained it. Speaking nationally, the mortgage was not itself wealth, but
merely gave A a claim to a portion of the wealth of B. It was wealth to
A, and wealth which he could transfer to a third person; but what he so
transferred was in fact a joint ownership, to the extent of a thousand
pounds, in the land of which B was nominally the sole proprietor. The
position of fundholders, or owners of the public debt of a country, is
similar. They are mortgagees on the general wealth of the country. The
cancelling of the debt would be no destruction of wealth, but a transfer
of it: a wrongful abstraction of wealth from certain members of the
community, for the profit of the government, or of the tax-payers.
Funded property Edition: current; Page: [8] therefore cannot be counted
as part of the national wealth. This is not always borne in mind by the
dealers in statistical calculations. For example, in estimates of the
gross income of the country, founded on the proceeds of the income-tax,
incomes derived from the funds are not always excluded: though the
tax-payers are assessed on their whole nominal income, without being
permitted to deduct from it the portion levied from them in taxation to
form the income of the fundholder. In this calculation, therefore, one
portion of the general income of the country is counted twice over, and
the aggregate amount made to appear greater than it is by almost1 thirty
millions. A country, however, may include in its wealth all stock held
by its citizens in the funds of foreign countries, and other debts due
to them from abroad. But even this is only wealth to them by being a
part ownership in wealth held by others. It forms no part of the
collective wealth of the human race. It is an element in the
distribution, but not in the composition, of the general wealth.

2 Another example of a possession which is wealth to the person holding
it, but not wealth to the nation, or to mankind, is slaves. It is by a
strange confusion of ideas that slave property (as it is termed) is
counted, at so much per head, in an estimate of the wealth, or of the
capital, of the country which tolerates the existence of such property.
If a human being, considered as an object possessing productive powers,
is part of the national wealth when his powers are owned by another man,
he cannot be less a part of it when they are owned by himself. Whatever
he is worth to his master is so much property abstracted from himself,
and its abstraction cannot augment the possessions of the two together,
or of the country to which they both belong. In propriety of
classification, however, the people of a country are not to be counted
in its wealth. They are that for the sake of which its wealth exists.
The term wealth is wanted to denote the desirable objects which they
possess, not inclusive of, but in contradistinction to, their own
persons. They are not wealth to themselves, though they are means of
acquiring it.

It has been proposed to define wealth as signifying “instruments:”
meaning not tools and machinery alone, but the whole accumulation
possessed by individuals or communities, of means for the attainment of
their ends. Thus, a field is an instrument, Edition: current; Page: [9]
because it is a means to the attainment of corn. Corn is an instrument,
being a means to the attainment of flour. Flour is an instrument, being
a means to the attainment of bread. Bread is an instrument, as a means
to the satisfaction of hunger and to the support of life. Here we at
last arrive at things which are not instruments, being desired on their
own account, and not as mere means to something beyond. This view of the
subject is philosophically correct; or rather, this mode of expression
may be usefully employed along with others, not as conveying a different
view of the subject from the common one, but as giving more distinctness
and reality to the common view. It departs, however, too widely from the
custom of language, to be likely to obtain general acceptance, or to be
of use for any other purpose than that of occasional illustration.

Wealth, then, may be defined, all useful or agreeable things which
possess exchangeable value; or, in other words, all useful or agreeable
things except those which can be obtained, in the quantity desired,
without labour or sacrifice. To this definition, the only objection
seems to be, that it leaves in uncertainty a question which has been
much debated—whether what are called immaterial products are to be
considered as wealth: whether, for example, the skill of a workman, or
any other natural or acquired power of body or mind, shall be called
wealth, or not: a question, not of very great importance, and which, so
far as requiring discussion, will be more conveniently considered in
another place.∗ 1

These things having been premised respecting wealth, we shall next turn
our attention to the extraordinary differences in respect to it, which
exist between nation and nation, and between different ages of the
world; differences both in the quantity of wealth, and in the kind of
it; as well as in the manner in which the wealth existing in the
community is shared among its members.

There is perhaps, no people or community, now existing, which subsists
entirely on the spontaneous produce of vegetation. But many tribes still
live exclusively, or almost exclusively, on wild animals, the produce of
hunting or fishing. Their clothing is skins; their habitations, huts
rudely formed of logs or boughs of trees, and abandoned at an hour's
notice. The food they use being little susceptible of storing up, they
have no accumulation of it, and are often Edition: current; Page: [10]
exposed to great privations. The wealth of such a community consists
solely of the skins they wear; a few ornaments, the taste for which
exists among most savages; some rude utensils; the weapons with which
they kill their game, or fight against hostile competitors for the means
of subsistence; canoes for crossing rivers and lakes, or fishing in the
sea; and perhaps some furs or other productions of the wilderness,
collected to be exchanged with civilized people for blankets, brandy,
and tobacco; of which foreign produce also there may be some unconsumed
portion in store. To this scanty inventory of material wealth, ought to
be added their land; an instrument of production of which they make
slender use, compared with more settled communities, but which is still
the source of their subsistence, and which has a marketable value if
there be any agricultural community in the neighbourhood requiring more
land than it possesses. This is the state of greatest poverty in which
any entire community of human beings is known to exist; though there are
much richer communities in which portions of the inhabitants are in a
condition, as to subsistence and comfort, as little enviable as that of
the savage.

The first great advance beyond this state consists in the domestication
of the more useful animals; giving rise to the pastoral or nomad state,
in which mankind do not live on the produce of hunting, but on milk and
its products, and on the annual increase of flocks and herds. This
condition is not only more desirable in itself, but more conducive to
further progress: and a much more considerable amount of wealth is
accumulated under it. So long as the vast natural pastures of the earth
are not yet so fully occupied as to be consumed more rapidly than they
are spontaneously reproduced, a large and constantly increasing stock of
subsistence may be collected and preserved, with little other labour
than that of guarding the cattle from the attacks of wild beasts, and
from the force or wiles of predatory men. Large flocks and herds,
therefore, are in time possessed, by active and thrifty individuals
through their own exertions, and by the heads of families and tribes
through the exertions of those who are connected with them by
allegiance. There thus arises, in the shepherd state, inequality of
possessions; a thing which scarcely exists in the savage state, where no
one has much more than absolute necessaries, and in case of deficiency
must share even those with his tribe. In the nomad state, some have an
abundance of cattle, sufficient for the food of a multitude, while
others have not contrived to appropriate and retain any superfluity, or
perhaps any cattle at all. But subsistence has ceased to be precarious,
Edition: current; Page: [11] since the more successful have no other use
which they can make of their surplus than to feed the less fortunate,
while every increase in the number of persons connected with them is an
increase both of security and of power: and thus they are enabled to
divest themselves of all labour except that of government and
superintendence, and acquire dependents to fight for them in war and to
serve them in peace. One of the features of this state of society is,
that a part of the community, and in some degree even the whole of it,
possess leisure. Only a portion of time is required for procuring food,
and the remainder is not engrossed by anxious thought for the morrow, or
necessary repose from muscular activity. Such a life is highly
favourable to the growth of new wants, and opens a possibility of their
gratification. A desire arises for better clothing, utensils, and
implements, than the savage state contents itself with; and the surplus
food renders it practicable to devote to these purposes the exertions of
a part of the tribe. In all or most nomad communities we find domestic
manufactures of a coarse, and in some, of a fine kind. There is ample
evidence that while those parts of the world which have been the cradle
of modern civilization were still generally in the nomad state,
considerable skill had been attained in spinning, weaving, and dyeing
woollen garments, in the preparation of leather, and in what appears a
still more difficult invention, that of working in metals. Even
speculative science took its first beginnings from the leisure
characteristic of this stage of social progress. The earliest
astronomical observations are attributed, by a tradition which has much
appearance of truth, to the shepherds of Chaldea.

From this state of society to the agricultural the transition is not
indeed easy (for no great change in the habits of mankind is otherwise
than difficult, and in general either painful or very slow), but it lies
in what may be called the spontaneous course of events. The growth of
the population of men and cattle began in time to press upon the earth's
capabilities of yielding natural pasture: and this cause doubtless
produced the first tilling of the ground, just as at a later period the
same cause made the superfluous hordes of the nations which had remained
nomad precipitate themselves upon those which had already become
agricultural; until, these having become sufficiently powerful to repel
such inroads, the invading nations, deprived of this outlet, were
obliged also to become agricultural communities.

But after this great step had been completed, the subsequent Edition:
current; Page: [12] progress of mankind seems by no means to have been
so rapid (certain rare combinations of circumstances excepted) as might
perhaps have been anticipated. The quantity of human food which the
earth is capable of returning even to the most wretched system of
agriculture, so much exceeds what could be obtained in the purely
pastoral state, that a great increase of population is invariably the
result. But this additional food is only obtained by a great additional
amount of labour; so that not only an agricultural has much less leisure
than a pastoral population, but, with the imperfect tools and unskilful
processes which are for a long time employed (and which over the greater
part of the earth have not even yet been abandoned), agriculturists do
not, unless in unusually advantageous circumstances of climate and soil,
produce so great a surplus of food, beyond their necessary consumption,
as to support any large class of labourers engaged in other departments
of industry. The surplus, too, whether small or great, is usually torn
from the producers, either by the government to which they are subject,
or by individuals, who by superior force, or by availing themselves of
religious or traditional feelings of subordination, have established
themselves as lords of the soil.

The first of these modes of appropriation, by the government, is
characteristic of the extensive monarchies which from a time beyond
historical record have occupied the plains of Asia. The government, in
those countries, though varying in its qualities according to the
accidents of personal character, seldom leaves much to the cultivators
beyond mere necessaries, and often strips them so bare even of these,
that it finds itself obliged, after taking all they have, to lend part
of it back to those from whom it has been taken, in order to provide
them with seed, and enable them to support life until another harvest.
Under the régime in question, though the bulk of the population are ill
provided for, the government, by collecting small contributions from
great numbers, is enabled, with any tolerable management, to make a show
of riches quite out of proportion to the general condition of the
society; and hence the inveterate impression, of which Europeans have
only at a late period been disabused, concerning the great opulence of
Oriental nations. In this wealth, without reckoning the large portion
which adheres to the hands employed in collecting it, many persons of
course participate, besides the immediate household of the sovereign. A
large part is distributed among the various functionaries of government,
and among the objects of the sovereign's favour or Edition: current;
Page: [13] caprice. A part is occasionally employed in works of public
utility. The tanks, wells, and canals for irrigation, without which in
many tropical climates cultivation could hardly be carried on; the
embankments which confine the rivers, the bazars for dealers, and the
seraees for travellers, none of which could have been made by the scanty
means in the possession of those using them, owe their existence to the
liberality and enlightened self-interest of the better order of princes,
or to the benevolence or ostentation of here and there a rich
individual, whose fortune, if traced to its source, is always found to
have been drawn immediately or remotely from the public revenue, most
frequently by a direct grant of a portion of it from the sovereign.

The ruler of a society of this description, after providing largely for
his own support, and that of all persons in whom he feels an interest,
and after maintaining as many soldiers as he thinks needful for his
security or his state, has a disposable residue, which he is glad to
exchange for articles of luxury suitable to his disposition: as have
also the class of persons who have been enriched by his favour, or by
handling the public revenues. A demand thus arises for elaborate and
costly manufactured articles, adapted to a narrow but a wealthy market.
This demand is often supplied almost exclusively by the merchants of
more advanced communities, but often also raises up in the country
itself a class of artificers, by whom certain fabrics are carried to as
high excellence as can be given by patience, quickness of perception and
observation, and manual dexterity, without any considerable knowledge of
the properties of objects: such as some of the cotton fabrics of India.
These artificers are fed by the surplus food which has been taken by the
government and its agents as their share of the produce. So literally is
this the case, that in some countries the workman, instead of taking his
work home, and being paid for it after it is finished, proceeds with his
tools to his customer's house, and is there subsisted until the work is
complete. The insecurity, however, of all possessions in this state of
society, induces even the richest purchasers to give a preference to
such articles as, being of an imperishable nature, and containing great
value in small bulk, are adapted for being concealed or carried off.
Gold and jewels, therefore, constitute a large proportion of the wealth
of these nations, and many a rich Asiatic carries nearly his whole
fortune on his person, or on those of the women of his harem. No one,
except the monarch, thinks of investing his wealth in a manner not
susceptible of removal. He, indeed, Edition: current; Page: [14] if he
feels safe on his throne, and reasonably secure of transmitting it to
his descendants, sometimes indulges a taste for durable edifices, and
produces the Pyramids, or the Taj Mehal and the Mausoleum at Sekundra.
The rude manufactures destined for the wants of the cultivators are
worked up by village artisans, who are remunerated by land given to them
rent-free to cultivate, or by fees paid to them in kind from such share
of the crop as is left to the villagers by the government. This state of
society, however, is not destitute of a mercantile class; composed of
two divisions, grain dealers and money dealers. The grain dealers do not
usually buy grain from the producers, but from the agents of government,
who, receiving the revenue in kind, are glad to devolve upon others the
business of conveying it to the places where the prince, his chief civil
and military officers, the bulk of his troops, and the artisans who
supply the wants of these various persons, are assembled. The money
dealers lend to the unfortunate cultivators, when ruined by bad seasons
or fiscal exactions, the means of supporting life and continuing their
cultivation, and are repaid with enormous interest at the next harvest;
or, on a larger scale, they lend to the government, or to those to whom
it has granted a portion of the revenue, and are indemnified by
assignments on the revenue collectors, or by having certain districts
put into their possession, that they may pay themselves from the
revenues; to enable them to do which, a great portion of the powers of
government are usually made over simultaneously, to be exercised by them
until either the districts are redeemed, or their receipts have
liquidated the debt. Thus, the commercial operations of both these
classes of dealers take place principally upon that part of the produce
of the country which forms the revenue of the government. From that
revenue their capital is periodically replaced with a profit, and that
is also the source from which their original funds have almost always
been derived. Such, in its general features, is the economical condition
of most of the countries of Asia, as it has been from beyond the
commencement of authentic history, and is still [1848], wherever not
disturbed by foreign influences.

In the agricultural communities of ancient Europe whose early condition
is best known to us, the course of things was different. These, at their
origin, were mostly small town-communities, at the first plantation of
which, in an unoccupied country, or in one from which the former
inhabitants had been expelled, the land which was taken possession of
was regularly divided, in equal or in graduated Edition: current; Page:
[15] allotments, among the families composing the community. In some
cases, instead of a town there was a confederation of towns, occupied by
people of the same reputed race, and who were supposed to have settled
in the country about the same time. Each family produced its own food
and the materials of its clothing, which were worked up within itself,
usually by the women of the family, into the coarse fabrics with which
the age was contented. Taxes there were none, as there were either no
paid officers of government, or if there were, their payment had been
provided for by a reserved portion of land, cultivated by slaves on
account of the state; and the army consisted of the body of citizens.
The whole produce of the soil, therefore, belonged, without deduction,
to the family which cultivated it. So long as the process of events
permitted this disposition of property to last, the state of society
was, for the majority of the free cultivators, probably not an
undesirable one; and under it, in some cases, the advance of mankind in
intellectual culture was extraordinarily rapid and brilliant. This more
especially happened where, along with advantageous circumstances of race
and climate, and no doubt with many favourable accidents of which all
trace is now lost, was combined the advantage of a position on the
shores of a great inland sea, the other coasts of which were already
occupied by settled communities. The knowledge which in such a position
was acquired of foreign productions, and the easy access of foreign
ideas and inventions, made the chain of routine, usually so strong in a
rude people, hang loosely on these communities. To speak only of their
industrial development; they early acquired variety of wants and
desires, which stimulated them to extract from their own soil the utmost
which they knew how to make it yield; and when their soil was sterile,
or after they had reached the limit of its capacity, they often became
traders, and bought up the productions of foreign countries, to sell
them in other countries with a profit.

The duration, however, of this state of things was from the first
precarious. These little communities lived in a state of almost
perpetual war. For this there were many causes. In the ruder and purely
agricultural communities a frequent cause was the mere pressure of their
increasing population upon their limited land, aggravated as that
pressure so often was by deficient harvests, in the rude state of their
agriculture, and depending as they did for food upon a very small extent
of country. On these occasions, Edition: current; Page: [16] the
community often emigrated en masse, or sent forth a swarm of its youth,
to seek, sword in hand, for some less warlike people, who could be
expelled from their land, or detained to cultivate it as slaves for the
benefit of their despoilers. What the less advanced tribes did from
necessity, the more prosperous did from ambition and the military
spirit: and after a time the whole of these city-communities were either
conquerors or conquered. In some cases, the conquering state contented
itself with imposing a tribute on the vanquished: who being, in
consideration of that burden, freed from the expense and trouble of
their own military and naval protection, might enjoy under it a
considerable share of economical prosperity, while the ascendant
community obtained a surplus of wealth, available for purposes of
collective luxury or magnificence. From such a surplus the Parthenon and
the Propylaea were built, the sculptures of Pheidias paid for, and the
festivals celebrated, for which AEschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, and
Aristophanes composed their dramas. But this state of political
relations, most useful, while it lasted, to the progress and ultimate
interest of mankind, had not the elements of durability. A small
conquering community which does not incorporate its conquests, always
ends by being conquered. Universal dominion, therefore, at last rested
with the people who practised this art—with the Romans; who, whatever
were their other devices, always either began or ended by taking a great
part of the land to enrich their own leading citizens, and by adopting
into the governing body the principal possessors of the remainder. It is
unnecessary to dwell on the melancholy economical history of the Roman
empire. When inequality of wealth once commences, in a community not
constantly engaged in repairing by industry the injuries of fortune, its
advances are gigantic; the great masses of wealth swallow up the
smaller. The Roman empire ultimately became covered with the vast landed
possessions of a comparatively few families, for whose luxury, and still
more for whose ostentation, the most costly products were raised, while
the cultivators of the soil were slaves, or small tenants in nearly
servile condition. From this time the wealth of the empire progressively
declined. In the beginning, the public revenues, and the resources of
rich individuals, sufficed at least to cover Italy with splendid
edifices, public and private; but at length so dwindled under the
enervating influences of misgovernment, that what remained was not even
sufficient to keep those edifices from decay. The strength and riches of
the civilized world became inadequate to make head against the nomad
population Edition: current; Page: [17] which skirted its northern
frontier; they overran the empire, and a different order of things
succeeded.

In the new frame in which European society was now cast, the population
of each country may be considered as composed, in unequal proportions,
of two distinct nations or races, the conquerors and the conquered: the
first the proprietors of the land, the latter the tillers of it. These
tillers were allowed to occupy the land on conditions which, being the
product of force, were always onerous, but seldom to the extent of
absolute slavery. Already, in the later times of the Roman empire,
predial slavery had extensively transformed itself into a kind of
serfdom: the coloni of the Romans were rather villeins than actual
slaves; and the incapacity and distaste of the barbarian conquerors for
personally superintending industrial occupations, left no alternative
but to allow to the cultivators, as an incentive to exertion, some real
interest in the soil. If, for example, they were compelled to labour,
three days in the week, for their superior, the produce of the remaining
days was their own. If they were required to supply the provisions of
various sorts, ordinarily needed for the consumption of the castle, and
were often subject to requisitions in excess, yet after supplying these
demands they were suffered to dispose at their will of whatever
additional produce they could raise. Under this system during the Middle
Ages it was not impossible, no more than in modern Russia (where, up to
the recent measure of emancipation, the same system still essentially
prevailed),1 for serfs to acquire property; and in fact, their
accumulations are the primitive source of the wealth of modern Europe.

In that age of violence and disorder, the first use made by a serf of
any small provision which he had been able to accumulate, was to buy his
freedom and withdraw himself to some town or fortified village, which
had remained undestroyed from the time of the Roman dominion; or,
without buying his freedom, to abscond thither. In that place of refuge,
surrounded by others of his own class, he attempted to live, secured in
some measure from the outrages and exactions of the warrior caste, by
his own prowess and that of his fellows. These emancipated serfs mostly
became artificers; and lived by exchanging the produce of their industry
for the surplus food and material which the soil yielded to its feudal
proprietors. This gave rise to a sort of European counterpart of the
economical Edition: current; Page: [18] condition of Asiatic countries;
except that, in lieu of a single monarch and a fluctuating body of
favourites and employés, there was a numerous and in a considerable
degree fixed class of great landholders; exhibiting far less splendour,
because individually disposing of a much smaller surplus produce, and
for a long time expending the chief part of it in maintaining the body
of retainers whom the warlike habits of society, and the little
protection afforded by government, rendered indispensable to their
safety. The greater stability, the fixity of personal position, which
this state of society afforded, in comparison with the Asiatic polity to
which it economically corresponded, was one main reason why it was also
found more favourable to improvement. From this time the economical
advancement of society has not been further interrupted. Security of
person and property grew slowly, but steadily; the arts of life made
constant progress; plunder ceased to be the principal source of
accumulation; and feudal Europe ripened into commercial and
manufacturing Europe. In the latter part of the Middle Ages, the towns
of Italy and Flanders, the free cities of Germany, and some towns of
France and England, contained a large and energetic population of
artisans, and many rich burghers, whose wealth had been acquired by
manufacturing industry, or by trading in the produce of such industry.
The Commons of England, the Tiers-Etat of France, the bourgeoisie of the
Continent generally, are the descendants of this class. As these were a
saving class, while the posterity of the feudal aristocracy were a
squandering class, the former by degrees substituted themselves for the
latter as the owners of a great proportion of the land. This natural
tendency was in some cases retarded by laws contrived for the purpose of
detaining the land in the families of its existing possessors, in other
cases accelerated by political revolutions. Gradually, though more
slowly, the immediate cultivators of the soil, in all the more civilized
countries, ceased to be in a servile or semi-servile state: though the
legal position, as well as the economical condition attained by them,
vary extremely in the different nations of Europe, and in the great
communities which have been founded beyond the Atlantic by the
descendants of Europeans.

The world now contains several extensive regions, provided with the
various ingredients of wealth in a degree of abundance of which former
ages had not even the idea. Without compulsory labour, an enormous mass
of food is annually extracted from the soil, and maintains, besides the
actual producers, an equal, Edition: current; Page: [19] sometimes a
greater number of labourers, occupied in producing conveniences and
luxuries of innumerable kinds, or in transporting them from place to
place; also a multitude of persons employed in directing and
superintending these various labours; and over and above all these, a
class more numerous than in the most luxurious ancient societies, of
persons whose occupations are of a kind not directly productive, and of
persons who have no occupation at all. The food thus raised supports a
far larger population than had ever existed (at least in the same
regions) on an equal space of ground; and supports them with certainty,
exempt from those periodically recurring famines so abundant in the
early history of Europe, and in Oriental countries even now not
unfrequent. Besides this great increase in the quantity of food, it has
greatly improved in quality and variety; while conveniences and
luxuries, other than food, are no longer limited to a small and opulent
class, but descend, in great abundance, through many widening strata in
society. The collective resources of one of these communities, when it
chooses to put them forth for any unexpected purpose; its ability to
maintain fleets and armies, to execute public works, either useful or
ornamental, to perform national acts of beneficence like the ransom of
the West India slaves; to found colonies, to have its people taught, to
do anything in short which requires expense, and to do it with no
sacrifice of the necessaries or even the substantial comforts of its
inhabitants, are such as the world never saw before.

But in all these particulars, characteristic of the modern industrial
communities, those communities differ widely from one another. Though
abounding in wealth as compared with former ages, they do so in very
different degrees. Even of the countries which are justly accounted the
richest, some have made a more complete use of their productive
resources, and have obtained, relatively to their territorial extent, a
much larger produce, than others; nor do they differ only in amount of
wealth, but also in the rapidity of its increase. The diversities in the
distribution of wealth are still greater than in the production. There
are great differences in the condition of the poorest class in different
countries; and in the proportional numbers and opulence of the classes
which are above the poorest. The very nature and designation of the
classes who originally share among them the produce of the soil, vary
not a little in different places. In some, the landowners are a class in
themselves, almost entirely separate from the classes engaged in
industry. in others, the proprietor of the land is almost universally
Edition: current; Page: [20] its cultivator, owning the plough, and
often himself holding it. Where the proprietor himself does not
cultivate, there is sometimes, between him and the labourer, an
intermediate agency, that of the farmer, who advances the subsistence of
the labourers, supplies the instruments of production, and receives,
after paying a rent to the landowner, all the produce: in other cases,
the landlord, his paid agents, and the labourers, are the only sharers.
Manufactures, again, are sometimes carried on by scattered individuals,
who own or hire the tools or machinery they require, and employ little
labour besides that of their own family; in other cases, by large
numbers working together in one building, with expensive and complex
machinery owned by rich manufacturers. The same difference exists in the
operations of trade. The wholesale operations indeed are everywhere
carried on by large capitals, where such exist; but the retail dealings,
which collectively occupy a very great amount of capital, are sometimes
conducted in small shops, chiefly by the personal exertions of the
dealers themselves, with their families, and perhaps an apprentice or
two; and sometimes in large establishments, of which the funds are
supplied by a wealthy individual or association, and the agency is that
of numerous salaried shopmen or shopwomen. Besides these differences in
the economical phenomena presented by different parts of what is usually
called the civilized world, all those earlier states which we previously
passed in review, have continued in some part or other of the world,
down to our own time. Hunting communities still exist in America,
nomadic in Arabia and the steppes of Northern Asia; Oriental society is
in essentials what it has always been; the great empire of Russia is1
even now, in many respects, the scarcely modified image of feudal
Europe. Every one of the great types of human society, down to that of
the Esquimaux or Patagonians, is still extant.2

These remarkable differences in the state of different portions of the
human race, with regard to the production and distribution of wealth,
must, like all other phenomena, depend on causes. And it is not a
sufficient explanation to ascribe them exclusively to the degrees of
knowledge possessed at different times and places, of the laws of nature
and the physical arts of life. Many other causes co-operate; and that
very progress and unequal distribution of physical Edition: current;
Page: [21] knowledge are partly the effects, as well as partly the
causes, of the state of the production and distribution of wealth.

In so far as the economical condition of nations turns upon the state of
physical knowledge, it is a subject for the physical sciences, and the
arts founded on them. But in so far as the causes are moral or
psychological, dependent on institutions and social relations, or on the
principles of human nature, their investigation belongs not to physical,
but to moral and social science, and is the object of what is called
Political Economy.

The production of wealth; the extraction of the instruments of human
subsistence and enjoyment from the materials of the globe, is evidently
not an arbitrary thing. It has its necessary conditions. Of these, some
are physical, depending on the properties of matter, and on the amount
of knowledge of those properties possessed at the particular place and
time. These Political Economy does not investigate, but assumes;
referring for the grounds, to physical science or common experience.
Combining with these facts of outward nature other truths relating to
human nature, it attempts to trace the secondary or derivative laws, by
which the production of wealth is determined; in which must lie the
explanation of the diversities of riches and poverty in the present and
past, and the ground of whatever increase in wealth is reserved for the
future.

Unlike the laws of Production, those of Distribution are partly of human
institution: since the manner in which wealth is distributed in any
given society, depends on the statutes or usages therein obtaining. But
though governments or nations have the power of deciding what
institutions shall exist, they cannot arbitrarily determine how those
institutions shall work. The conditions on which the power they possess
over the distribution of wealth is dependent, and the manner in which
the distribution is effected by the various modes of conduct which
society may think fit to adopt, are as much a subject for scientific
enquiry as any of the physical laws of nature.

The laws of Production and Distribution, and some of the practical
consequences deducible from them, are the subject of the following
treatise.

Edition: current; Page: [22]


BOOK I: PRODUCTION


CHAPTER I: of the requisites of production

§ 1. The requisites of production are two: labour, and appropriate
natural objects.

Labour is either bodily or mental; or, to express the distinction more
comprehensively, either muscular or nervous; and it is necessary to
include in the idea, not solely the exertion itself, but feelings of a
disagreeable kind, all bodily inconvenience or mental annoyance,
connected with the employment of one's thoughts, or muscles, or both, in
a particular occupation. Of the other requisite—appropriate natural
objects—it is to be remarked, that some objects exist or grow up
spontaneously, of a kind suited to the supply of human wants. There are
caves and hollow trees capable of affording shelter; fruit, roots, wild
honey, and other natural products, on which human life can be supported;
but even here a considerable quantity of labour is generally required,
not for the purpose of creating, but of finding and appropriating them.
In all but these few and (except in the very commencement of human
society) unimportant cases, the objects supplied by nature are only
instrumental to human wants, after having undergone some degree of
transformation by human exertion. Even the wild animals of the forest
and of the sea, from which the hunting and fishing tribes derive their
sustenance—though the labour of which they are the subject is chiefly
that required for appropriating them—must yet, before they are used as
food, be killed, divided into fragments, and subjected in almost all
cases to some culinary process, which are operations Edition: current;
Page: [23] requiring a certain degree of human labour. The amount of
transformation which natural substances undergo before being brought
into the shape in which they are directly applied to human use, varies
from this or a still less degree of alteration in the nature and
appearance of the object, to a change so total that no trace is
perceptible of the original shape and structure. There is little
resemblance between a piece of a mineral substance found in the earth,
and a plough, an axe, or a saw. There is less resemblance between
porcelain and the decomposing granite of which it is made, or between
sand mixed with sea weed, and glass. The difference is greater still
between the fleece of a sheep, or a handful of cotton seeds, and a web
of muslin or broad cloth; and the sheep and seeds themselves are not
spontaneous growths, but results of previous labour and care. In these
several cases the ultimate product is so extremely dissimilar to the
substance supplied by nature, that in the custom of language nature is
represented as only furnishing materials.

Nature, however, does more than supply materials; she also supplies
powers. The matter of the globe is not an inert recipient of forms and
properties impressed by human hands; it has active energies by which it
co-operates with, and may even be used as a substitute for, labour. In
the early ages people converted their corn into flour by pounding it
between two stones; they next hit on a contrivance which enabled them,
by turning a handle, to make one of the stones revolve upon the other;
and this process, a little improved, is still the common practice of the
East. The muscular exertion, however, which it required, was very severe
and exhausting, insomuch that it was often selected as a punishment for
slaves who had offended their masters. When the time came at which the
labour and sufferings of slaves were thought worth economizing, the
greater part of this bodily exertion was rendered unnecessary, by
contriving that the upper stone should be made to revolve upon the
lower, not by human strength, but by the force of the wind or of falling
water. In this case, natural agents, the wind or the gravitation of the
water, are made to do a portion of the work previously done by labour.

§ 2. Cases like this, in which a certain amount of labour has been
dispensed with, its work being devolved upon some natural agent, are apt
to suggest an erroneous notion of the comparative functions of labour
and natural powers; as if the co-operation of Edition: current; Page:
[24] those powers with human industry were limited to the cases in which
they are made to perform what would otherwise be done by labour; as if,
in the case of things made (as the phrase is) by hand, nature only
furnished passive materials. This is an illusion. The powers of nature
are as actively operative in the one case as in the other. A workman
takes a stalk of the flax or hemp plant, splits it into separate fibres,
twines together several of these fibres with his fingers, aided by a
simple instrument called a spindle; having thus formed a thread, he lays
many such threads side by side, and places other similar threads
directly across them, so that each passes alternately over and under
those which are at right angles to it; this part of the process being
facilitated by an instrument called a shuttle. He has now produced a web
of cloth, either linen or sack-cloth, according to the material. He is
said to have done this by hand, no natural force being supposed to have
acted in concert with him. But by what force is each step of this
operation rendered possible, and the web, when produced, held together?
By the tenacity, or force of cohesion, of the fibres: which is one of
the forces in nature, and which we can measure exactly against other
mechanical forces, and ascertain how much of any of them it suffices to
neutralize or counterbalance.

If we examine any other case of what is called the action of man upon
nature, we shall find in like manner that the powers of nature, or in
other words the properties of matter, do all the work, when once objects
are put into the right position. This one operation, of putting things
into fit places for being acted upon by their own internal forces, and
by those residing in other natural objects, is all that man does, or can
do, with matter. He only moves one thing to or from another. He moves a
seed into the ground; and the natural forces of vegetation produce in
succession a root, a stem, leaves, flowers, and fruit. He moves an axe
through a tree, and it falls by the natural force of gravitation; he
moves a saw through it, in a particular manner, and the physical
properties by which a softer substance gives way before a harder, make
it separate into planks, which he arranges in certain positions, with
nails driven through them, or adhesive matter between them, and produces
a table, or a house. He moves a spark to fuel, and it ignites, and by
the force generated in combustion it cooks the food, melts or softens
the iron, converts into beer or sugar the malt or cane-juice, which he
has previously moved to the spot. He has no other means of acting on
matter than by moving it. Motion, and resistance to Edition: current;
Page: [25] motion, are the only things which his muscles are constructed
for. By muscular contraction he can create a pressure on an outward
object, which, if sufficiently powerful, will set it in motion, or if it
be already moving, will check or modify or altogether arrest its motion,
and he can do no more. But this is enough to have given all the command
which mankind have acquired over natural forces immeasurably more
powerful than themselves; a command which, great as it is already, is
without doubt destined to become indefinitely greater. He exerts this
power either by availing himself of natural forces in existence, or by
arranging objects in those mixtures and combinations by which natural
forces are generated; as when by putting a lighted match to fuel, and
water into a boiler over it, he generates the expansive force of steam,
a power which has been made so largely available for the attainment of
human purposes.∗

Labour, then, in the physical world, is always and solely employed in
putting objects in motion; the properties of matter, the laws of nature,
do the rest. The skill and ingenuity of human beings are chiefly
exercised in discovering movements, practicable by their powers, and
capable of bringing about the effects which they desire. But, while
movement is the only effect which man can immediately and directly
produce by his muscles, it is not necessary that he should produce
directly by them all the movements which he requires. The first and most
obvious substitute is the muscular action of cattle: by degrees the
powers of inanimate nature are made to aid in this too, as by making the
wind, or water, things already in motion, communicate a part of their
motion to the wheels, which before that invention were made to revolve
by muscular force. This service is extorted from the powers of wind and
water by a set of actions, consisting like the former in moving certain
objects into certain positions in which they constitute what is termed a
machine; but the muscular action necessary for this is not constantly
renewed, but performed once for all, and there is on the whole a great
economy of labour.

§ 3. Some writers have raised the question, whether nature gives more
assistance to labour in one kind of industry or in another; and have
said that in some occupations labour does most, in others Edition:
current; Page: [26] nature most. In this, however, there seems much
confusion of ideas. The part which nature has in any work of man, is
indefinite and incommensurable. It is impossible to decide that in any
one thing nature does more than in any other. One cannot even say that
labour does less. Less labour may be required; but if that which is
required is absolutely indispensable, the result is just as much the
product of labour, as of nature. When two conditions are equally
necessary for producing the effect at all, it is unmeaning to say that
so much of it is produced by one and so much by the other; it is like
attempting to decide which half of a pair of scissors has most to do in
the act of cutting; or which of the factors, five and six, contributes
most to the production of thirty. The form which this conceit usually
assumes, is that of supposing that nature lends more assistance to human
endeavours in agriculture, than in manufactures. This notion, held by
the French Economistes, and from which Adam Smith was not free, arose
from a misconception of the nature of rent. The rent of land being a
price paid for a natural agency, and no such price being paid in
manufactures, these writers imagined that since a price was paid, it was
because there was a greater amount of service to be paid for: whereas a
better consideration of the subject would have shown that the reason why
the use of land bears a price is simply the limitation of its quantity,
and that if air, heat, electricity, chemical agencies, and the other
powers of nature employed by manufacturers, were sparingly supplied, and
could, like land, be engrossed and appropriated, a rent could be exacted
for them also.

§ 4. This leads to a distinction which we shall find to be of primary
importance. Of natural powers, some are unlimited, others limited in
quantity. By an unlimited quantity is of course not meant literally, but
practically unlimited: a quantity beyond the use which can in any, or at
least in present circumstances, be made of it. Land is, in some newly
settled countries, practically unlimited in quantity: there is more than
can be used by the existing population of the country, or by any
accession likely to be made to it for generations to come. But even
there, land favourably situated with regard to markets or means of
carriage, is generally limited in quantity: there is not so much of it
as persons would gladly occupy and cultivate, or otherwise turn to use.
In all old countries, land capable of cultivation, land at least of any
tolerable fertility, must be ranked among agents limited in quantity.
Water, for ordinary Edition: current; Page: [27] purposes, on the banks
of rivers or lakes, may be regarded as of unlimited abundance; but if
required for irrigation, it may even there be insufficient to supply all
wants, while in places which depend for their consumption on cisterns or
tanks, or on wells which are not copious, or are liable to fail, water
takes its place among things the quantity of which is most strictly
limited. Where water itself is plentiful, yet water-power, i.e. a fall
of water applicable by its mechanical force to the service of industry,
may be exceedingly limited, compared with the use which would be made of
it if it were more abundant. Coal, metallic ores, and other useful
substances found in the earth, are still more limited than land. They
are not only strictly local but exhaustible; though, at a given place
and time, they may exist in much greater abundance than would be applied
to present use even if they could be obtained gratis. Fisheries, in the
sea, are in most cases a gift of nature practically unlimited in amount;
but the Arctic whale fisheries have long been insufficient for the
demand which exists even at the very considerable price necessary to
defray the cost of appropriation: and the immense extension which the
Southern fisheries have in consequence assumed, is tending to exhaust
them likewise. River fisheries are a natural resource of a very limited
character, and would be rapidly exhausted, if allowed to be used by
every one without restraint. Air, even that state of it which we term
wind, may, in most situations, be obtained in a quantity sufficient for
every possible use; and so likewise, on the sea coast or on large
rivers, may water carriage: though the wharfage or harbour-room
applicable to the service of that mode of transport is in many
situations far short of what would be used if easily attainable.

It will be seen hereafter how much of the economy of society depends on
the limited quantity in which some of the most important natural agents
exist, and more particularly land. For the present I shall only remark
that so long as the quantity of a natural agent is practically
unlimited, it cannot, unless susceptible of artificial monopoly, bear
any value in the market, since no one will give anything for what can be
obtained gratis. But as soon as a limitation becomes practically
operative; as soon as there is not so much of the thing to be had, as
would be appropriated and used if it could be obtained for asking; the
ownership or use of the natural agent acquires an exchangeable value.
When more water power is wanted in a particular district, than there are
falls of water to supply it, persons will give an equivalent for the use
of a fall of water. When Edition: current; Page: [28] there is more land
wanted for cultivation than a place possesses, or than it possesses of a
certain quality and certain advantages of situation, land of that
quality and situation may be sold for a price, or let for an annual
rent. This subject will hereafter be discussed at length; but it is
often useful to anticipate, by a brief suggestion, principles and
deductions which we have not yet reached the place for exhibiting and
illustrating fully.

Edition: current; Page: [29]


CHAPTER II: of labour as an agent of production

§ 1. The labour which terminates in the production of an article fitted
for some human use, is either employed directly about the thing, or in
previous operations destined to facilitate, perhaps essential to the
possibility of, the subsequent ones. In making bread, for example, the
labour employed about the thing itself is that of the baker; but the
labour of the miller, though employed directly in the production not of
bread but of flour, is equally part of the aggregate sum of labour by
which the bread is produced; as is also the labour of the sower and of
the reaper. Some may think that all these persons ought to be considered
as employing their labour directly about the thing; the corn, the flour,
and the bread being one substance in three different states. Without
disputing about this question of mere language, there is still the
ploughman, who prepared the ground for the seed, and whose labour never
came in contact with the substance in any of its states; and the
plough-maker, whose share in the result was still more remote. All these
persons ultimately derive the remuneration of their labour from the
bread, or its price: the plough-maker as much as the rest; for since
ploughs are of no use except for tilling the soil, no one would make or
use ploughs for any other reason than because the increased returns,
thereby obtained from the ground, afforded a source from which an
adequate equivalent could be assigned for the labour of the
plough-maker. If the produce is to be used or consumed in the form of
bread, it is from the bread that this equivalent must come. The bread
must suffice to remunerate all these labourers, and several others; such
as the carpenters and bricklayers who erected the farm-buildings; the
hedgers and ditchers who made the fences necessary for the protection of
the crop; the miners and smelters who extracted or prepared the iron of
which the plough and other implements Edition: current; Page: [30] were
made. These, however, and the plough-maker, do not depend for their
remuneration upon the bread made from the produce of a single harvest,
but upon that made from the produce of all the harvests which are
successively gathered until the plough, or the buildings and fences, are
worn out. We must add yet another kind of labour; that of transporting
the produce from the place of its production to the place of its
destined use: the labour of carrying the corn to market, and from market
to the miller's, the flour from the miller's to the baker's, and the
bread from the baker's to the place of its final consumption. This
labour is sometimes very considerable: flour is [1848] transported to
England from beyond the Atlantic, corn from the heart of Russia; and in
addition to the labourers immediately employed, the waggoners and
sailors, there are also costly instruments, such as ships, in the
construction of which much labour has been expended: that labour,
however, not depending for its whole remuneration upon the bread, but
for a part only; ships being usually, during the course of their
existence, employed in the transport of many different kinds of
commodities.

To estimate, therefore, the labour of which any given commodity is the
result, is far from a simple operation. The items in the calculation are
very numerous—as it may seem to some persons, infinitely so; for if, as
a part of the labour employed in making bread, we count the labour of
the blacksmith who made the plough, why not also (it may be asked) the
labour of making the tools used by the blacksmith, and the tools used in
making those tools, and so back to the origin of things? But after
mounting one or two steps in this ascending scale, we come into a region
of factions too minute for calculation. Suppose, for instance, that the
same plough will last, before being worn out, a dozen years. Only
one-twelfth of the labour of making the plough must be placed to the
account of each year's harvest. A twelfth part of the labour of making a
plough is an appreciable quantity. But the same set of tools, perhaps,
suffice to the plough-maker for forging a hundred ploughs, which serve
during the twelve years of their existence to prepare the soil of as
many different farms. A twelve-hundredth part of the labour of making
his tools, is as much, therefore, as has been expended in procuring one
year's harvest of a single farm: and when this fraction comes to be
further apportioned among the various sacks of corn and loaves of bread,
it is seen at once that such quantities are not worth taking into the
Edition: current; Page: [31] account for any practical purpose connected
with the commodity. It is true that if the tool-maker had not laboured,
the corn and bread never would have been produced; but they will not be
sold a tenth part of a farthing dearer in consideration of his labour.

§ 2. Another of the modes in which labour is indirectly or remotely
instrumental to the production of a thing, requires particular notice:
namely, when it is employed in producing subsistence, to maintain the
labourers while they are engaged in the production. This previous
employment of labour is an indispensable condition to every productive
operation, on any other than the very smallest scale. Except the labour
of the hunter and fisher, there is scarcely any kind of labour to which
the returns are immediate. Productive operations require to be continued
a certain time, before their fruits are obtained. Unless the labourer,
before commencing his work, possesses a store of food, or can obtain
access to the stores of some one else, in sufficient quantity to
maintain him until the production is completed, he can undertake no
labour but such as can be carried on at odd intervals, concurrently with
the pursuit of his subsistence. He cannot obtain food itself in any
abundance; for every mode of so obtaining it, requires that there be
already food in store. Agriculture only brings forth food after the
lapse of months; and though the labours of the agriculturist are not
necessarily continuous during the whole period, they must occupy a
considerable part of it. Not only is agriculture impossible without food
produced in advance, but there must be a very great quantity in advance
to enable any considerable community to support itself wholly by
agriculture. A country like England or France is only able to carry on
the agriculture of the present year, because that of past years has
provided, in those countries or somewhere else, sufficient food to
support their agricultural population until the next harvest. They are
only enabled to produce so many other things besides food, because the
food which was in store at the close of the last harvest suffices to
maintain not only the agricultural labourers, but a large industrious
population besides.

The labour employed in producing this stock of subsistence, forms a
great and important part of the past labour which has been necessary to
enable present labour to be carried on. But there is a difference,
requiring particular notice, between this and the other kinds of
previous or preparatory labour. The miller, the reaper, the ploughman,
the plough-maker, the waggoner and Edition: current; Page: [32]
waggon-maker, even the sailor and ship-builder when employed, derive
their remuneration from the ultimate product—the bread made from the
corn on which they have severally operated, or supplied the instruments
for operating. The labour that produced the food which fed all these
labourers, is as necessary to the ultimate result, the bread of the
present harvest, as any of those other portions of labour; but is not,
like them, remunerated from it. That previous labour has received its
remuneration from the previous food. In order to raise any product,
there are needed labour, tools, and materials, and food to feed the
labourers. But the tools and materials are of no use except for
obtaining the product, or at least are to be applied to no other use,
and the labour of their construction can be remunerated only from the
product when obtained. The food, on the contrary, is intrinsically
useful, and is applied to the direct use of feeding human beings. The
labour expended in producing the food, and recompensed by it, needs not
be remunerated over again from the produce of the subsequent labour
which it has fed. If we suppose that the same body of labourers carried
on a manufacture, and grew food to sustain themselves while doing it,
they have had for their trouble the food and the manufactured article;
but if they also grew the material and made the tools, they have had
nothing for that trouble but the manufactured article alone.

The claim to remuneration founded on the possession of food, available
for the maintenance of labourers, is of another kind; remuneration for
abstinence, not for labour. If a person has a store of food, he has it
in his power to consume it himself in idleness, or in feeding others to
attend on him, or to fight for him, or to sing or dance for him. If,
instead of these things, he gives it to productive labourers to support
them during their work, he can, and naturally will, claim a remuneration
from the produce. He will not be content with simple repayment; if he
receives merely that, he is only in the same situation as at first, and
has derived no advantage from delaying to apply his savings to his own
benefit or pleasure. He will look for some equivalent for this
forbearance: he will expect his advance of food to come back to him with
an increase, called in the language of business, a profit; and the hope
of this profit will generally have been a part of the inducement which
made him accumulate a stock, by economizing in his own consumption; or,
at any rate, which made him forego the application of it, when
accumulated, to his personal ease or satisfaction. Edition: current;
Page: [33] The food also which maintained other workmen while producing
the tools or materials, must have been provided in advance by some one,
and he, too, must have his profit from the ultimate product; but there
is this difference, that here the ultimate product has to supply not
only the profit, but also the remuneration of the labour. The tool-maker
(say, for instance, the plough-maker) does not indeed usually wait for
his payment until the harvest is reaped; the farmer advances it to him,
and steps into his place by becoming the owner of the plough.
Nevertheless, it is from the harvest that the payment is to come; since
the farmer would not undertake this outlay unless he expected that the
harvest would repay him, and with a profit too on this fresh advance;
that is, unless the harvest would yield, besides the remuneration of the
farm labourers (and a profit for advancing it), a sufficient residue to
remunerate the plough-maker's labourers, give the plough-maker a profit,
and a profit to the farmer on both.

§ 3. From these considerations it appears, that in an enumeration and
classification of the kinds of industry which are intended for the
indirect or remote furtherance of other productive labour, we need not
include the labour of producing subsistence or other necessaries of life
to be consumed by productive labourers; for the main end and purpose of
this labour is the subsistence itself; and though the possession of a
store of it enables other work to be done, this is but an incidental
consequence. The remaining modes in which labour is indirectly
instrumental to production, may be arranged under five heads.

First: Labour employed in producing materials, on which industry is to
be afterwards employed. This is, in many cases, a labour of mere
appropriation; extractive industry, as it has been aptly named by M.
Dunoyer. The labour of the miner, for example, consists of operations
for digging out of the earth substances convertible by industry into
various articles fitted for human use. Extractive industry, however, is
not confined to the extraction of materials. Coal, for instance, is
employed, not only in the process of industry, but in directly warming
human beings. When so used, it is not a material of production, but is
itself the ultimate product. So, also, in the case of a mine of precious
stones. These are to some small extent employed in the productive arts,
as diamonds by the glass-cutter, emery and corundum for polishing, but
their principal destination, that of ornament, is a Edition: current;
Page: [34] direct use; though they commonly require, before being so
used, some process of manufacture, which may perhaps warrant our
regarding them as materials. Metallic ores of all sorts are materials
merely.

Under the head, production of materials, we must include the industry of
the wood-cutter, when employed in cutting and preparing timber for
building, or wood for the purposes of the carpenter's or any other art.
In the forests of America, Norway, Germany, the Pyrenees and Alps, this
sort of labour is largely employed on trees of spontaneous growth. In
other cases, we must add to the labour of the wood-cutter that of the
planter and cultivator.

Under the same head are also comprised the labours of the agriculturist
in growing flax, hemp, cotton, feeding silkworms, rising food for
cattle, producing bark, dye-stuffs, some oleaginous plants, and many
other things only useful because required in other departments of
industry. So, too, the labour of the hunter, as far as his object is
furs or feathers; of the shepherd and the cattle-breeder, in respect of
wool, hides, horn, bristles, horse-hair, and the like. The things used
as materials in some process or other of manufacture are of a most
miscellaneous character, drawn from almost every quarter of the animal,
vegetable, and mineral kingdoms. And besides this, the finished products
of many branches of industry are the materials of others. The thread
produced by the spinner is applied to hardly any use except as material
for the weaver. Even the product of the loom is chiefly used as material
for the fabricators of articles of dress or furniture, or of further
instruments of productive industry, as in the case of the sail-maker.
The currier and tanner find their whole occupation in converting raw
material into what may be termed prepared material. In strictness of
speech, almost all food, as it comes from the hands of the
agriculturist, is nothing more than material for the occupation of the
baker or the cook.

§ 4. The second kind of indirect labour is that employed in making tools
or implements for the assistance of labour. I use these terms in their
most comprehensive sense, embracing all permanent instruments or helps
to production, from a flint and steel for striking a light, to a
steam-ship, or the most complex apparatus of manufacturing machinery.
There may be some hesitation where to draw the line between implements
and materials; Edition: current; Page: [35] and some things used in
production (such as fuel) would scarcely in common language be called by
either name, popular phraseology being shaped out by a different class
of necessities from those of scientific exposition. To avoid a
multiplication of classes and denominations answering to distinctions of
no scientific importance, political economists generally include all
things which are used as immediate means of production (the means which
are not immediate will be considered presently) either in the class of
implements or in that of materials. Perhaps the line is most usually and
most conveniently drawn, by considering as a material every instrument
of production which can only be used once, being destroyed (at least as
an instrument for the purpose in hand) by a single employment. Thus
fuel, once burnt, cannot be again used as fuel; what can be so used is
only any portion which has remained unburnt the first time. And not only
it cannot be used without being consumed, but it is only useful by being
consumed; for if no part of the fuel were destroyed, no heat would be
generated. A fleece, again, is destroyed as a fleece by being spun into
thread; and the thread cannot be used as thread when woven into cloth.
But an axe is not destroyed as an axe by cutting down a tree: it may be
used afterwards to cut down a hundred or a thousand more; and though
deteriorated in some small degree by each use, it does not do its work
by being deteriorated, as the coal and the fleece do theirs by being
destroyed; on the contrary, it is the better instrument the better it
resists deterioration. There are some things, rightly classed as
materials, which may be used as such a second and a third time, but not
while the product to which they at first contributed remains in
existence. The iron which formed a tank or a set of pipes may be melted
to form a plough or a steam-engine; the stones with which a house was
built may be used after it is pulled down, to build another. But this
cannot be done while the original product subsists; their function as
materials is suspended, until the exhaustion of the first use. Not so
with the things classed as implements; they may be used repeatedly for
fresh work, until the time, sometimes very distant, at which they are
worn out, while the work already done by them may subsist unimpaired,
and when it perishes, does so by its own laws, or by casualties of its
own.∗

Edition: current; Page: [36]
The only practical difference of much importance arising from the
distinction between materials and implements, is one which has attracted
our attention in another case. Since materials are destroyed as such by
being once used, the whole of the labour required for their production,
as well as the abstinence of the person who supplied the means for
carrying it on, must be remunerated from the fruits of that single use.
Implements, on the contrary, being susceptible of repeated employment,
the whole of the products which they are instrumental in bringing into
existence are a fund which can be drawn upon to remunerate the labour of
their construction, and the abstinence of those by whose accumulations
that labour was supported. It is enough if each product contributes a
fraction, commonly an insignificant one, towards the remuneration of
that labour and abstinence, or towards indemnifying the immediate
producer for advancing that remuneration to the person who produced the
tools.

§ 5. Thirdly: Besides materials for industry to employ itself on, and
implements to aid it, provision must be made to prevent its operations
from being disturbed, and its products injured, either by the destroying
agencies of nature, or by the violence or rapacity of men. This gives
rise to another mode in which labour not employed directly about the
product itself, is instrumental to its production; namely, when employed
for the protection of industry. Such is the object of all buildings for
industrial purposes; all manufactories, warehouses, docks, granaries,
barns, farm-buildings devoted to cattle, or to the operations of
agricultural labour. I exclude those in which the labourers live, or
which are destined for their personal accommodation: these, like their
food, supply actual wants, and must be counted in the remuneration of
their labour. There are many modes in which labour is still more
directly applied to the protection of productive operations. The
herdsman has little other occupation than to protect the cattle from
harm: the positive agencies concerned in the realization of the product,
go on nearly of themselves. I have already mentioned the labour Edition:
current; Page: [37] of the hedger and ditcher, of the builder of walls
or dykes. To these must be added that of the soldier, the policeman, and
the judge. These functionaries are not indeed employed exclusively in
the protection of industry, nor does their payment constitute, to the
individual producer, a part of the expenses of production. But they are
paid from the taxes, which are derived from the produce of industry; and
in any tolerably governed country they render to its operations a
service far more than equivalent to the cost. To society at large they
are therefore part of the expenses of production; and if the returns to
production were not sufficient to maintain these labourers in addition
to all the others required, production, at least in that form and
manner, could not take place. Besides, if the protection which the
government affords to the operations of industry were not afforded, the
producers would be under a necessity of either withdrawing a large share
of their time and labour from production, to employ it in defence, or of
engaging armed men to defend them; all which labour, in that case, must
be directly remunerated from the produce; and things which could not pay
for this additional labour, would not be produced. Under the present
arrangements, the product pays its quota towards the same protection,
and notwithstanding the waste and prodigality incident to government
expenditure, obtains it of better quality at a much smaller cost.

§ 6. Fourthly: There is a very great amount of labour employed, not in
bringing the product into existence, but in rendering it, when in
existence, accessible to those for whose use it is intended. Many
important classes of labourers find their sole employment in some
function of this kind. There is first the whole class of carriers, by
land or water: muleteers, waggoners, bargemen, sailors, wharfmen,
coalheavers, porters, railway establishments, and the like. Next, there
are the constructors of all the implements of transport; ships, barges,
carts, locomotives, &c., to which must be added roads, canals, and
railways. Roads are sometimes made by the government, and opened
gratuitously to the public; but the labour of making them is not the
less paid for from the produce. Each producer, in paying his quota of
the taxes levied generally for the construction of roads, pays for the
use of those which conduce to his convenience; and if made with any
tolerable judgment, they increase the returns to his industry by far
more than an equivalent amount.

Edition: current; Page: [38]
Another numerous class of labourers employed in rendering the things
produced accessible to their intended consumers, is the class of dealers
and traders, or, as they may be termed, distributors. There would be a
great waste of time and trouble, and an inconvenience often amounting to
impracticability, if consumers could only obtain the articles they want
by treating directly with the producers. Both producers and consumers
are too much scattered, and the latter often at too great a distance
from the former. To diminish this loss of time and labour, the
contrivance of fairs and markets was early had recourse to, where
consumers and producers might periodically meet, without any
intermediate agency; and this plan answers tolerably well for many
articles, especially agricultural produce, agriculturists having at some
seasons a certain quantity of spare time on their hands. But even in
this case, attendance is often very troublesome and inconvenient to
buyers who have other occupations, and do not live in the immediate
vicinity; while, for all articles the production of which requires
continuous attention from the producers, these periodical markets must
be held at such considerable intervals, and the wants of the consumers
must either be provided for so long beforehand, or must remain so long
unsupplied, that even before the resources of society admitted of the
establishment of shops, the supply of these wants fell universally into
the hands of itinerant dealers: the pedlar, who might appear once a
month, being preferred to the fair, which only returned once or twice a
year. In country districts, remote from towns or large villages, the
industry of the pedlar is not yet wholly superseded. But a dealer who
has a fixed abode and fixed customers is so much more to be depended on,
that consumers prefer resorting to him if he is conveniently accessible;
and dealers therefore find their advantage in establishing themselves in
every locality where there are sufficient consumers near at hand to
afford them a remuneration.

In many cases the producers and dealers are the same persons, at least
as to the ownership of the funds and the control of the operations. The
tailor, the shoemaker, the baker, and many other tradesmen, are the
producers of the articles they deal in, so far as regards the last stage
in the production. This union, however, of the functions of manufacturer
and retailer is only expedient when the article can advantageously be
made at or near the place convenient for retailing it, and is, besides,
manufactured and sold in small parcels. When things have to be brought
from a distance, the same Edition: current; Page: [39] person cannot
effectually superintend both the making and the retailing of them; when
they are best and most cheaply made on a large scale, a single
manufactory requires so many local channels to carry off its supply,
that the retailing is most conveniently delegated to other agency; and
even shoes and coats, when they are to be furnished in large quantities
at once, as for the supply of a regiment or of a workhouse, are usually
obtained not directly from the producers, but from intermediate dealers,
who make it their business to ascertain from what producers they can be
obtained best and cheapest. Even when things are destined to be at last
sold by retail, convenience soon creates a class of wholesale dealers.
When products and transactions have multiplied beyond a certain point;
when one manufactory supplies many shops, and one shop has often to
obtain goods from many different manufactories, the loss of time and
trouble both to the manufacturers and to the retailers by treating
directly with one another makes it more convenient to them to treat with
a smaller number of great dealers or merchants, who only buy to sell
again, collecting goods from the various producers and distributing them
to the retailers, to be by them further distributed among the consumers.
Of these various elements is composed the Distributing Class, whose
agency is supplementary to that of the Producing Class: and the produce
so distributed, or its price, is the source from which the distributors
are remunerated for their exertions, and for the abstinence which
enabled them to advance the funds needful for the business of
distribution.

§ 7. We have now completed the enumeration of the modes in which labour
employed on external nature is subservient to production. But there is
yet another mode of employing labour, which conduces equally, though
still more remotely, to that end: this is, labour of which the subject
is human beings. Every human being has been brought up from infancy at
the expense of much labour to some person or persons, and if this
labour, or part of it, had not been bestowed, the child would never have
attained the age and strength which enable him to become a labourer in
his turn. To the community at large, the labour and expense of rearing
its infant population form a part of the outlay which is a condition of
production, and which is to be replaced with increase from the future
produce of their labour. By the individuals, this labour and expense are
usually incurred from other motives than to obtain such ultimate return,
and, for most purposes of political economy, need Edition: current;
Page: [40] not be taken into account as expenses of production. But the
technical or industrial education of the community; the labour employed
in learning and in teaching the arts of production, in acquiring and
communicating skill in those arts; this labour is really, and in general
solely, undergone for the sake of the greater or more valuable produce
thereby attained, and in order that a remuneration, equivalent or more
than equivalent, may be reaped by the learner, besides an adequate
remuneration for the labour of the teacher, when a teacher has been
employed.

As the labour which confers productive powers, whether of hand or of
head, may be looked upon as part of the labour by which society
accomplishes its productive operations, or in other words, as part of
what the produce costs to society, so too may the labour employed in
keeping up productive powers; in preventing them from being destroyed or
weakened by accident or disease. The labour of a physician or surgeon,
when made use of by persons engaged in industry, must be regarded in the
economy of society as a sacrifice incurred, to preserve from perishing
by death or infirmity that portion of the productive resources of
society which is fixed in the lives and bodily or mental powers of its
productive members. To the individuals, indeed, this forms but a part,
sometimes an imperceptible part, of the motives that induce them to
submit to medical treatment: it is not principally from economical
motives that persons have a limb amputated, or endeavour to be cured of
a fever, though when they do so, there is generally sufficient
inducement for it even on that score alone. This is, therefore, one of
the cases of labour and outlay which, though conducive to production,
yet not being incurred for that end, or for the sake of the returns
arising from it, are out of the sphere of most of the general
propositions which political economy has occasion to assert respecting
productive labour: though, when society and not the individuals are
considered, this labour and outlay must be regarded as part of the
advance by which society effects its productive operations, and for
which it is indemnified by the produce.

§ 8. Another kind of labour, usually classed as mental, but conducing to
the ultimate product as directly, though not so immediately, as manual
labour itself, is the labour of the inventors of industrial processes. I
say, usually classed as mental, because in reality it is not exclusively
so. All human exertion is compounded of some mental and some bodily
elements. The stupidest hodman, Edition: current; Page: [41] who repeats
from day to day the mechanical act of climbing a ladder, performs a
function partly intellectual; so much so, indeed, that the most
intelligent dog or elephant could not, probably, be taught to do it. The
dullest human being, instructed beforehand, is capable of turning a
mill; but a horse cannot turn it without somebody to drive and watch
him. On the other hand, there is some bodily ingredient in the labour
most purely mental, when it generates any external result. Newton could
not have produced the Principia without the bodily exertion either of
penmanship or of dictation; and he must have drawn many diagrams, and
written out many calculations and demonstrations, while he was preparing
it in his mind. Inventors, besides the labour of their brains, generally
go through much labour with their hands, in the models which they
construct and the experiments they have to make before their idea can
realize itself successfully in act. Whether mental, however, or bodily,
their labour is a part of that by which the production is brought about.
The labour of Watt in contriving the steam-engine was as essential a
part of production as that of the mechanics who build or the engineers
who work the instrument; and was undergone, no less than theirs, in the
prospect of a remuneration from the produce. The labour of invention is
often estimated and paid on the very same plan as that of execution.
Many manufacturers of ornamental goods have inventors in their
employment, who receive wages or salaries for designing patterns,
exactly as others do for copying them. All this is strictly part of the
labour of production; as the labour of the author of a book is equally a
part of its production with that of the printer and binder.

In a national, or universal point of view, the labour of the savant, or
speculative thinker, is as much a part of production in the very
narrowest sense, as that of the inventor of a practical art; many such
inventions having been the direct consequences of theoretic discoveries,
and every extension of knowledge of the powers of nature being fruitful
of applications to the purposes of outward life. The electro-magnetic
telegraph was the wonderful and most unexpected consequence of the
experiments of Œrsted and the mathematical investigations of Ampère: and
the modern art of navigation is an unforeseen emanation from the purely
speculative and apparently merely curious enquiry, by the mathematicians
of Alexandria, into the properties of three curves formed by the
intersection of a plane surface and a cone. No limit can be set to the
importance, even in a purely productive and material Edition: current;
Page: [42] point of view, of mere thought. Inasmuch, however, as these
material fruits, though the result, are seldom the direct purpose of the
pursuits of savants, nor is their remuneration in general derived from
the increased production which may be caused incidentally, and mostly
after a long interval, by their discoveries; this ultimate influence
does not, for most of the purposes of political economy, require to be
taken into consideration; are generally classed as the producers only of
books, or other useable or saleable articles, which directly emanate
from them. But when (as in political economy one should always be
prepared to do) we shift our point of view, and consider not individual
acts, and the motives by which they are determined, but national and
universal results, intellectual speculation must be looked upon as a
most influential part of the productive labour of society, and the
portion of its resources employed in carrying on and in remunerating
such labour, as a highly productive part of its expenditure.

§ 9. In the foregoing survey of the modes of employing labour in
furtherance of production, I have made little use of the popular
distinction of industry into agricultural, manufacturing, and
commercial. For, in truth, this division fulfils very badly the purposes
of a classification. Many great branches of productive industry find no
place in it, or not without much straining; for example (not to speak of
hunters or fishers) the miner, the road-maker, and the sailor. The
limit, too, between agricultural and manufacturing industry cannot be
precisely drawn. The miller, for instance, and the baker—are they to be
reckoned among agriculturists, or among manufacturers? Their occupation
is in its nature manufacturing; the food has finally parted company with
the soil before it is handed over to them: this, however, might be said
with equal truth of the thresher, the winnower, the makers of butter and
cheese; operations always counted as agricultural, probably because it
is the custom for them to be performed by persons resident on the farm,
and under the same superintendence as tillage. For many purposes all
these persons, the miller and baker inclusive, must be placed in the
same class with ploughmen and reapers. They are all concerned in
producing food, and depend for their remuneration on the food produced;
when the one class abounds and flourishes, the others do so too; they
form collectively the “agricultural interest;” they render but one
service to the community by their united labours, and are paid from one
Edition: current; Page: [43] common source. Even the tillers of the
soil, again, when the produce is not food, but the materials of what are
commonly termed manufactures, belong in many respects to the same
division in the economy of society as manufacturers. The cotton-planter
of Carolina, and the wool-grower of Australia, have more interests in
common with the spinner and weaver than with the corn-grower. But, on
the other hand, the industry which operates immediately upon the soil
has, as we shall see hereafter, some properties on which many important
consequences depend, and which distinguish it from all the subsequent
stages of production, whether carried on by the same person or not; from
the industry of the thresher and winnower, as much as from that of the
cotton-spinner. When I speak, therefore, of agricultural labour, I shall
generally mean this, and this exclusively, unless the contrary is either
stated or implied in the context. The term manufacturing is too vague to
be of much use when precision is required, and when I employ it, I wish
to be understood as intending to speak popularly rather than
scientifically.

Edition: current; Page: [44]


CHAPTER III: of unproductive labour

§ 1. Labour is indispensable to production, but has not always
production for its effect. There is much labour, and of a high order of
usefulness, of which production is not the object. Labour has
accordingly been distinguished into Productive and Unproductive. There
has been not a little controversy among political economists on the
question, what kinds of labour should be reputed to be unproductive; and
they have not always perceived, that there was in reality no matter of
fact in dispute between them.

Many writers have been unwilling to class any labour as productive,
unless its result is palpable in some material object, capable of being
transferred from one person to another. There are others (among whom are
Mr. M'Culloch and M. Say) who looking upon the word unproductive as a
term of disparagement, remonstrate against imposing it upon any labour
which is regarded as useful—which produces a benefit or a pleasure worth
the cost. The labour of officers of government, of the army and navy, of
physicians, lawyers, teachers, musicians, dancers, actors, domestic
servants, &c., when they really accomplish what they are paid for, and
are not more numerous than is required for its performance, ought not,
say these writers, to be “stigmatized” as unproductive, an expression
which they appear to regard as synonymous with wasteful or worthless.
But this seems to be a misunderstanding of the matter in dispute.
Production not being the sole end of human existence, the term
unproductive does not necessarily imply any stigma; nor was ever
intended to do so in the present case. The question is one of mere
language and classification. Differences of language, however, are by no
means unimportant, even when not grounded on differences of opinion; for
though either of two expressions may be consistent with the whole truth,
they generally tend to fix attention upon different parts of it. We must
therefore enter a little into the consideration of the various Edition:
current; Page: [45] meanings which may attach to the words productive
and unproductive when applied to labour.

In the first place, even in what is called the production of material
objects, it must be remembered that what is produced is not the matter
composing them. All the labour of all the human beings in the world
could not produce one particle of matter. To weave broadcloth is but to
re-arrange, in a peculiar manner, the particles of wool; to grow corn is
only to put a portion of matter called a seed, into a situation where it
can draw together particles of matter from the earth and air, to form
the new combination called a plant. Though we cannot create matter, we
can cause it to assume properties, by which, from having been useless to
us, it becomes useful. What we produce, or desire to produce, is always,
as M. Say rightly terms it, an utility. Labour is not creative of
objects, but of utilities. Neither, again, do we consume and destroy the
objects themselves; the matter of which they were composed remains, more
or less altered in form: what has really been consumed is only the
qualities by which they were fitted for the purpose they have been
applied to. It is, therefore, pertinently asked by M. Say and
others—since, when we are said to produce objects, we only produce
utility, why should not all labour which produces utility be accounted
productive? Why refuse that title to the surgeon who sets a limb, the
judge or legislator who confers security, and give it to the lapidary
who cuts and polishes a diamond? Why deny it to the teacher from whom I
learn an art by which I can gain my bread, and accord it to the
confectioner who makes bonbons for the momentary pleasure of a sense of
taste?

It is quite true that all these kinds of labour are productive of
utility; and the question which now occupies us could not have been a
question at all, if the production of utility were enough to satisfy the
notion which mankind have usually formed of productive labour.
Production, and productive, are of course elliptical expressions,
involving the idea of a something produced; but this something, in
common apprehension, I conceive to be, not utility, but Wealth.
Productive labour means labour productive of wealth. We are recalled,
therefore, to the question touched upon in our first chapter, what
Wealth is, and whether only material products, or all useful products,
are to be included in it.

§ 2. Now the utilities produced by labour are of three kinds. They are,

Edition: current; Page: [46]
First, utilities fixed and embodied in outward objects; by labour
employed in investing external material things with properties which
render them serviceable to human beings. This is the common case, and
requires no illustration.

Secondly, utilities fixed and embodied in human beings; the labour being
in this case employed in conferring on human beings, qualities which
render them serviceable to themselves and others. To this class belongs
the labour of all concerned in education; not only schoolmasters,
tutors, and professors, but governments, so far as they aim successfully
at the improvement of the people; moralists, and clergymen, as far as
productive of benefit; the labour of physicians, as far as instrumental
in preserving life and physical or mental efficiency; of the teachers of
bodily exercises, and of the various trades, sciences, and arts,
together with the labour of the learners in acquiring them; and all
labour bestowed by any persons, throughout life, in improving the
knowledge or cultivating the bodily or mental faculties of themselves or
others.

Thirdly and lastly, utilities not fixed or embodied in any object, but
consisting in a mere service rendered; a pleasure given, an
inconvenience or a pain averted, during a longer or a shorter time, but
without leaving a permanent acquisition in the improved qualities of any
person or thing; the labour being employed in producing an utility
directly, not (as in the two former cases) in fitting some other thing
to afford an utility. Such, for example, is the labour of the musical
performer, the actor, the public declaimer or reciter, and the showman.
Some good may no doubt be produced, and much more might be produced,
beyond the moment, upon the feelings and disposition, or general state
of enjoyment of the spectators; or instead of good there may be harm;
but neither the one nor the other is the effect intended, is the result
for which the exhibitor works and the spectator pays; nothing but the
immediate pleasure. Such, again, is the labour of the army and navy;
they, at the best, prevent a country from being conquered, or from being
injured or insulted, which is a service, but in all other respects leave
the country neither improved nor deteriorated. Such, too, is the labour
of the legislator, the judge, the officer of justice, and all other
agents of government, in their ordinary functions, apart from any
influence they may exert on the improvement of the national mind. The
service which they render, is to maintain peace and security; these
compose the utility which they produce. It may appear to some, that
carriers, Edition: current; Page: [47] and merchants or dealers, should
be placed in this same class, since their labour does not add any
properties to objects: but I reply that it does: it adds the property of
being in the place where they are wanted, instead of being in some other
place: which is a very useful property, and the utility it confers is
embodied in the things themselves, which now actually are in the place
where they are required for use, and in consequence of that increased
utility could be sold at an increased price, proportioned to the labour
expended in conferring it. This labour, therefore, does not belong to
the third class, but to the first.

§ 3. We have now to consider which of these three classes of labour
should be accounted productive of wealth, since that is what the term
productive, when used by itself, must be understood to import. Utilities
of the third class, consisting in pleasures which only exist while being
enjoyed, and services which only exist while being performed, cannot be
spoken of as wealth, except by an acknowledged metaphor. It is essential
to the idea of wealth to be susceptible of accumulation: things which
cannot, after being produced, be kept for some time before being used,
are never, I think, regarded as wealth, since however much of them may
be produced and enjoyed, the person benefited by them is no richer, is
nowise improved in circumstances. But there is not so distinct and
positive a violation of usage in considering as wealth any product which
is both useful and susceptible of accumulation. The skill, and the
energy and perseverance, of the artisans of a country, are reckoned part
of its wealth, no less than their tools and machinery.∗ Edition:
current; Page: [48] According to this definition, we should regard all
labour as productive which is employed in creating permanent utilities,
whether embodied in human beings, or in any other animate or inanimate
objects. This nomenclature I have, in a former publication,∗
recommended, as most conducive to the ends of classification; and I am
still of that opinion.

But in applying the term wealth to the industrial capacities of human
beings, there seems always, in popular apprehension, to be a tacit
reference to material products. The skill of an artisan is accounted
wealth, only as being the means of acquiring wealth in a material sense;
and any qualities not tending visibly to that object are scarcely so
regarded at all. A country would hardly be said to be richer, except by
a metaphor, however precious a possession it might have in the genius,
the virtues, or the accomplishments of its inhabitants; unless indeed
these were looked upon as marketable articles, by which it could attract
the material wealth of other countries, as the Greeks of old, and
several modern nations have done. While, therefore, I should prefer,
were I constructing a new technical language, to make the distinction
turn upon the permanence rather than upon the materiality of the
product, yet when employing terms which common usage has taken complete
possession of, it seems advisable so to employ them as to do the least
possible violence to usage; since any improvement in terminology
obtained by straining the received meaning of a popular phrase, is
generally purchased beyond its value, by the obscurity arising from the
conflict between new and old associations.

I shall, therefore, in this treatise, when speaking of wealth,
understand by it only what is called material wealth, and by productive
labour only those kinds of exertion which produce utilities embodied in
material objects. But in limiting myself to this sense of the word, I
mean to avail myself of the full extent of that restricted acceptation,
and I shall not refuse the appellation productive, to labour which
yields no material product as its direct result, provided that an
increase of material products is its ultimate consequence. Thus, labour
expended in the acquisition of manufacturing skill, I class as
productive, not in virtue of the skill itself, but of the manufactured
products created by the skill, and to the creation of which the labour
of learning the trade is essentially conducive. The labour of officers
of government in affording the protection which, Edition: current; Page:
[49] afforded in some manner or other, is indispensable to the
prosperity of industry, must be classed as productive even of material
wealth, because without it, material wealth, in anything like its
present abundance, could not exist. Such labour may be said to be
productive indirectly or mediately, in opposition to the labour of the
ploughman and the cotton-spinner, which are productive immediately. They
are all alike in this, that they leave the community richer in material
products than they found it; they increase, or tend to increase,
material wealth.

§ 4. By Unproductive Labour, on the contrary, will be understood labour
which does not terminate in the creation of material wealth; which,
however largely or successfully practised, does not render the
community, and the world at large, richer in material products, but
poorer by all that is consumed by the labourers while so employed.

All labour is, in the language of political economy, unproductive, which
ends in immediate enjoyment, without any increase of the accumulated
stock of permanent means of enjoyment. And all labour, according to our
present definition, must be classed as unproductive, which terminates in
a permanent benefit, however important, provided that an increase of
material products forms no part of that benefit. The labour of saving a
friend's life is not productive, unless the friend is a productive
labourer, and produces more than he consumes. To a religious person the
saving of a soul must appear a far more important service than the
saving of a life; but he will not therefore call a missionary or a
clergyman productive labourers, unless they teach, as the South Sea
Missionaries have in some cases done, the arts of civilization in
addition to the doctrines of their religion. It is, on the contrary,
evident that the greater number of missionaries or clergymen a nation
maintains, the less it has to expend on other things; while the more it
expends judiciously in keeping agriculturists and manufacturers at work,
the more it will have for every other purpose. By the former it
diminishes, caeteris paribus, its stock of material products; by the
latter, it increases them.

Unproductive may be as useful as productive labour; it may be more
useful, even in point of permanent advantage; or its use may consist
only in pleasurable sensation, which when gone leaves no trace; or it
may not afford even this, but may be absolute waste. In any case society
or mankind grow no richer by it, but poorer. All Edition: current; Page:
[50] material products consumed by any one while he produces nothing,
are so much subtracted, for the time, from the material products which
society would otherwise have possessed. But though society grows no
richer by unproductive labour, the individual may. An unproductive
labourer may receive for his labour, from those who derive pleasure or
benefit from it, a remuneration which may be to him a considerable
source of wealth; but his gain is balanced by their loss; they may have
received a full equivalent for their expenditure, but they are so much
poorer by it. When a tailor makes a coat and sells it, there is a
transfer of the price from the customer to the tailor, and a coat
besides which did not previously exist; but what is gained by an actor
is a mere transfer from the spectator's funds to his, leaving no article
of wealth for the spectator's indemnification. Thus the community
collectively gains nothing by the actor's labour; and it loses, of his
receipts, all that portion which he consumes, retaining only that which
he lays by. A community, however, may add to its wealth by unproductive
labour, at the expense of other communities, as an individual may at the
expense of other individuals. The gains of Italian opera singers, German
governesses, French ballet dancers, &c., are a source of wealth, as far
as they go, to their respective countries, if they return thither. The
petty states of Greece, especially the ruder and more backward of those
states, were nurseries of soldiers, who hired themselves to the princes
and satraps of the East to carry on useless and destructive wars, and
returned with their savings to pass their declining years in their own
country: these were unproductive labourers, and the pay they received,
together with the plunder they took, was an outlay without return to the
countries which furnished it; but, though no gain to the world, it was a
gain to Greece. At a later period the same country and its colonies
supplied the Roman empire with another class of adventurers, who, under
the name of philosophers or of rhetoricians, taught to the youth of the
higher classes what were esteemed the most valuable accomplishments:
these were mainly unproductive labourers, but their ample recompense was
a source of wealth to their own country. In none of these cases was
there any accession of wealth to the world. The services of the
labourers, if useful, were obtained at a sacrifice to the world of a
portion of material wealth; if useless, all that these labourers
consumed was to the world waste.

To be wasted, however, is a liability not confined to unproductive
labour. Productive labour may equally be wasted, if more of it is
Edition: current; Page: [51] expended than really conduces to
production. If defect of skill in labourers, or of judgment in those who
direct them, causes a misapplication of productive industry; if a farmer
persists in ploughing with three horses and two men, when experience has
shown that two horses and one man are sufficient, the surplus labour,
though employed for purposes of production, is wasted. If a new process
is adopted which proves no better, or not so good as those before in
use, the labour expended in perfecting the invention and in carrying it
into practice, though employed for a productive purpose, is wasted.
Productive labour may render a nation poorer, if the wealth it produces,
that is, the increase it makes in the stock of useful or agreeable
things, be of a kind not immediately wanted: as when a commodity is
unsaleable, because produced in a quantity beyond the present demand; or
when speculators build docks and warehouses before there is any trade.
Some of the States of North America,1 by making premature railways and
canals, are thought to have made this kind of mistake; and it was for
some time doubtful whether England, in the disproportionate development
of railway enterprise, had not, in some degree, followed the example.
Labour sunk in expectation of a distant return, when the great
exigencies or limited resources of the community require that the return
be rapid, may leave the country not only poorer in the meanwhile, by all
which those labourers consume, but less rich even ultimately than if
immediate returns had been sought in the first instance, and enterprises
for distant profit postponed.

§ 5. The distinction of Productive and Unproductive is applicable to
consumption as well as to labour. All the members of the community are
not labourers, but all are consumers, and consume either unproductively
or productively. Whoever contributes nothing directly or indirectly to
production, is an unproductive consumer. The only productive consumers
are productive labourers; the labour of direction being of course
included, as well as that of execution. But the consumption even of
productive labourers is not all of it productive consumption. There is
unproductive consumption by productive consumers. What they consume in
keeping up or improving their health, strength, and capacities of work,
or in rearing other productive labourers to succeed Edition: current;
Page: [52] them, is productive consumption. But consumption on pleasures
or luxuries, whether by the idle or by the industrious, since production
is neither its object nor is in any way advanced by it, must be reckoned
unproductive: with a reservation perhaps of a certain quantum of
enjoyment which may be classed among necessaries, since anything short
of it would not be consistent with the greatest efficiency of labour.
That alone is productive consumption, which goes to maintain and
increase the productive powers of the community; either those residing
in its soil, in its materials, in the number and efficiency of its
instruments of production, or in its people.

There are numerous products which may be said not to admit of being
consumed otherwise than unproductively. The annual consumption of gold
lace, pine apples, or champagne, must be reckoned unproductive, since
these things give no assistance to production, nor any support to life
or strength, but what would equally be given by things much less costly.
Hence it might be supposed that the labour employed in producing them
ought not to be regarded as productive, in the sense in which the term
is understood by political economists. I grant that no labour tends to
the permanent enrichment of society, which is employed in producing
things for the use of unproductive consumers. The tailor who makes a
coat for a man who produces nothing, is a productive labourer; but in a
few weeks or months the coat is worn out, while the wearer has not
produced anything to replace it, and the community is then no richer by
the labour of the tailor, than if the same sum had been paid for a stall
at the opera. Nevertheless, society has been richer by the labour while
the coat lasted, that is, until society, through one of its unproductive
members, chose to consume the produce of the labour unproductively. The
case of the gold lace or the pine apple is no further different, than
that they are still further removed than the coat from the character of
necessaries. These things also are wealth until they have been consumed.

§ 6. We see, however, by this, that there is a distinction, more
important to the wealth of a community than even that between productive
and unproductive labour; the distinction, namely, between labour for the
supply of productive, and for the supply of unproductive, consumption;
between labour employed in keeping up or in adding to the productive
resources of the country, and that which is employed otherwise. Of the
produce of the country, a part only is destined to be consumed
productively; the remainder Edition: current; Page: [53] supplies the
unproductive consumption of producers, and the entire consumption of the
unproductive classes. Suppose that the proportion of the annual produce
applied to the first purpose amounts to half; then one-half the
productive labourers of the country are all that are employed in the
operations on which the permanent wealth of the country depends. The
other half are occupied from year to year and from generation to
generation in producing things which are consumed and disappear without
return; and whatever this half consume is as completely lost, as to any
permanent effect on the national resources, as if it were consumed
unproductively. Suppose that this second half of the labouring
population ceased to work, and that the government or their parishes
maintained them in idleness for a whole year: the first half would
suffice to produce, as they had done before, their own necessaries and
the necessaries of the second half, and to keep the stock of materials
and implements undiminished: the unproductive classes, indeed, would be
either starved or obliged to produce their own subsistence, and the
whole community would be reduced during a year to bare necessaries; but
the sources of production would be unimpaired, and the next year there
would not necessarily be a smaller produce than if no such interval of
inactivity had occurred; while if the case had been reversed, if the
first half of the labourers had suspended their accustomed occupations,
and the second half had continued theirs, the country at the end of the
twelvemonth would have been entirely impoverished.

It would be a great error to regret the large proportion of the annual
produce, which in an opulent country goes to supply unproductive
consumption. It would be to lament that the community has so much to
spare from its necessities, for its pleasures and for all higher uses.
This portion of the produce is the fund from which all the wants of the
community, other than that of mere living, are provided for; the measure
of its means of enjoyment, and of its power of accomplishing all
purposes not productive. That so great a surplus should be available for
such purposes, and that it should be applied to them, can only be a
subject of congratulation. The things to be regretted, and which are not
incapable of being remedied, are the prodigious inequality with which
this surplus is distributed, the little worth of the objects to which
the greater part of it is devoted, and the large share which falls to
the lot of persons who render no equivalent service in return.1

Edition: current; Page: [54]


CHAPTER IV: of capital

§ 1. It has been seen in the preceding chapters that besides the primary
and universal requisites of production, labour and natural agents, there
is another requisite without which no productive operations, beyond the
rude and scanty beginnings of primitive industry, are possible: namely,
a stock, previously accumulated, of the products of former labour. This
accumulated stock of the produce of labour is termed Capital. The
function of Capital in production it is of the utmost importance
thoroughly to understand, since a number of the erroneous notions with
which our subject is infested originate in an imperfect and confused
apprehension of this point.

Capital, by persons wholly unused to reflect on the subject, is supposed
to be synonymous with money. To expose this misapprehension, would be to
repeat what has been said in the introductory chapter. Money is no more
synonymous with capital than it is with wealth. Money cannot in itself
perform any part of the office of capital, since it can afford no
assistance to production. To do this, it must be exchanged for other
things; and anything, which is susceptible of being exchanged for other
things, is capable of contributing to production in the same degree.
What capital does for production, is to afford the shelter, protection,
tools and materials which the work requires, and to feed and otherwise
maintain the labourers during the process. These are the services which
present labour requires from past, and from the produce of past, labour.
Whatever things are destined for this use—destined to supply productive
labour with these various prerequisites—are Capital.

To familiarize ourselves with the conception, let us consider what is
done with the capital invested in any of the branches of business which
compose the productive industry of a country. A manufacturer, for
example, has one part of his capital in the form Edition: current; Page:
[55] of buildings, fitted and destined for carrying on his branch of
manufacture. Another part he has in the form of machinery. A third
consists, if he be a spinner, of raw cotton, flax, or wool; if a weaver,
of flaxen, woollen, silk, or cotton, thread; and the like, according to
the nature of the manufacture. Food and clothing for his operatives it
is not the custom of the present age that he should directly provide;
and few capitalists, except the producers of food or clothing, have any
portion worth mentioning of their capital in that shape. Instead of
this, each capitalist has money, which he pays to his workpeople, and so
enables them to supply themselves: he has also finished goods in his
warehouses, by the sale of which he obtains more money, to employ in the
same manner, as well as to replenish his stock of materials, to keep his
buildings and machinery in repair, and to replace them when worn out.
His money and finished goods, however, are not wholly capital, for he
does not wholly devote them to these purposes: he employs a part of the
one, and of the proceeds of the other, in supplying his personal
consumption and that of his family, or in hiring grooms and valets, or
maintaining hunters and hounds, or in educating his children, or in
paying taxes, or in charity. What then is his capital? Precisely that
part of his possessions, whatever it be, which is to constitute his fund
for carrying on fresh production. It is of no consequence that a part,
or even the whole of it, is in a form in which it cannot directly supply
the wants of labourers.

Suppose, for instance, that the capitalist is a hardware manufacturer,
and that his stock in trade, over and above his machinery, consists at
present wholly in iron goods. Iron goods cannot feed labourers.
Nevertheless, by a mere change of the destination of these iron goods,
he can cause labourers to be fed. Suppose that with a portion of the
proceeds he intended to maintain a pack of hounds, or an establishment
of servants; and that he changes his intention, and employs it in his
business, paying it in wages to additional workpeople. These workpeople
are enabled to buy and consume the food which would otherwise have been
consumed by the hounds or by the servants; and thus without the
employer's having seen or touched one particle of the food, his conduct
has determined that so much more of the food existing in the country has
been devoted to the use of productive labourers, and so much less
consumed in a manner wholly unproductive. Now vary the hypothesis, and
suppose that what is thus paid in wages would otherwise have been laid
out not in feeding servants or hounds, but in buying plate Edition:
current; Page: [56] and jewels; and in order to render the effect
perceptible, let us suppose that the change takes place on a
considerable scale, and that a large sum is diverted from buying plate
and jewels to employing productive labourers, whom we shall suppose to
have been previously, like the Irish peasantry [1848], only half
employed and half fed. The labourers, on receiving their increased
wages, will not lay them out in plate and jewels, but in food. There is
not, however, additional food in the country; nor any unproductive
labourers or animals, as in the former case, whose food is set free for
productive purposes. Food will therefore be imported if possible; if not
possible, the labourers will remain for a season on their short
allowance: but the consequences of this change in the demand for
commodities, occasioned by the change in the expenditure of capitalists
from unproductive to productive, is that next year more food will be
produced, and less plate and jewellery. So that again, without having
had anything to do with the food of the labourers directly, the
conversion by individuals of a portion of their property, no matter of
what sort, from an unproductive destination to a productive, has had the
effect of causing more food to be appropriated to the consumption of
productive labourers. The distinction, then, between Capital and
Not-capital, does not lie in the kind of commodities, but in the mind of
the capitalist—in his will to employ them for one purpose rather than
another; and all property, however ill adapted in itself for the use of
labourers, is a part of capital, so soon as it, or the value to be
received from it, is set apart for productive reinvestment. The sum of
all the values so destined by their respective possessors, composes the
capital of the country. Whether all those values are in a shape directly
applicable to productive uses, makes no difference. Their shape,
whatever it may be, is a temporary accident: but once destined for
production, they do not fail to find a way of transforming themselves
into things capable of being applied to it.

§ 2. As whatever of the produce of the country is devoted to production
is capital, so, conversely, the whole of the capital of the country is
devoted to production. This second proposition, however, must be taken
with some limitations and explanations. A fund may be seeking for
productive employment, and find none, adapted to the inclinations of its
possessor: it then is capital still, but unemployed capital. Or the
stock may consist of unsold goods, not susceptible of direct application
to productive uses, and not, at the Edition: current; Page: [57] moment,
marketable: these, until sold, are in the condition of unemployed
capital. Again, artificial or accidental circumstances may render it
necessary to possess a larger stock in advance, that is, a larger
capital before entering on production, than is required by the nature of
things. Suppose that the government lays a tax on the production in one
of its earlier stages, as for instance by taxing the material. The
manufacturer has to advance the tax, before commencing the manufacture,
and is therefore under a necessity of having a larger accumulated fund
than is required for, or is actually employed in, the production which
he carries on. He must have a larger capital, to maintain the same
quantity of productive labour; or (what is equivalent) with a given
capital he maintains less labour. This mode of levying taxes, therefore,
limits unnecessarily the industry of the country: a portion of the fund
destined by its owners for production being diverted from its purpose,
and kept in a constant state of advance to the government.

For another example: a farmer may enter on his farm at such a time of
the year, that he may be required to pay one, two, or even three
quarters' rent before obtaining any return from the produce. This,
therefore, must be paid out of his capital. Now rent, when paid for the
land itself, and not for improvements made in it by labour, is not a
productive expenditure. It is not an outlay for the support of labour,
or for the provision of implements or materials the produce of labour.
It is the price paid for the use of an appropriated natural agent. This
natural agent is indeed as indispensable (and even more so) as any
implement: but the having to pay a price for it, is not. In the case of
the implement (a thing produced by labour) a price of some sort is the
necessary condition of its existence: but the land exists by nature. The
payment for it, therefore, is not one of the expenses of production; and
the necessity of making the payment out of capital, makes it requisite
that there should be a greater capital, a greater antecedent
accumulation of the produce of past labour, than is naturally necessary,
or than is needed where land is occupied on a different system. This
extra capital, though intended by its owners for production, is in
reality employed unproductively, and annually replaced, not from any
produce of its own, but from the produce of the labour supported by the
remainder of the farmer's capital.

Finally, that large portion of the productive capital of a country which
is employed in paying the wages and salaries of labourers, Edition:
current; Page: [58] evidently is not, all of it, strictly and
indispensably necessary for production. As much of it as exceeds the
actual necessaries of life and health (an excess which in the case of
skilled labourers is usually considerable) is not expended in supporting
labour, but in remunerating it, and the labourers could wait for this
part of their remuneration until the production is completed; it needs
not necessarily pre-exist as capital: and if they unfortunately had to
forego it altogether, the same amount of production might take place. In
order that the whole remuneration of the labourers should be advanced to
them in daily or weekly payments, there must exist in advance, and be
appropriated to productive use, a greater stock, or capital, than would
suffice to carry on the existing extent of production: greater, by
whatever amount of remuneration the labourers receive, beyond what the
self-interest of a prudent slave-master would assign to his slaves. In
truth, it is only after an abundant capital had already been
accumulated, that the practice of paying in advance any remuneration of
labour beyond a bare subsistence, could possibly have arisen: since
whatever is so paid, is not really applied to production, but to the
unproductive consumption of productive labourers, indicating a fund for
production sufficiently ample to admit of habitually diverting a part of
it to a mere convenience.

It will be observed that I have assumed, that the labourers are always
subsisted from capital: and this is obviously the fact, though the
capital needs not necessarily be furnished by a person called a
capitalist. When the labourer maintains himself by funds of his own, as
when a peasant-farmer or proprietor lives on the produce of his land, or
an artisan works on his own account, they are still supported by
capital, that is, by funds provided in advance. The peasant does not
subsist this year on the produce of this year's harvest, but on that of
the last. The artisan is not living on the proceeds of the work he has
in hand, but on those of work previously executed and disposed of. Each
is supported by a small capital of his own, which he periodically
replaces from the produce of his labour. The large capitalist is, in
like manner, maintained from funds provided in advance. If he personally
conducts his operations, as much of his personal or household
expenditure as does not exceed a fair remuneration of his labour at the
market price must be considered a part of his capital, expended, like
any other capital, for production: and his personal consumption, so far
as it consists of necessaries, is productive consumption.

Edition: current; Page: [59]
§ 3. At the risk of being tedious, I must add a few more illustrations,
to bring out into a still clearer and stronger light the idea of
Capital. As M. Say truly remarks, it is on the very elements of our
subject that illustration is most usefully bestowed, since the greatest
errors which prevail in it may be traced to the want of a thorough
mastery over the elementary ideas. Nor is this surprising: a branch may
be diseased and all the rest healthy, but unsoundness at the root
diffuses unhealthiness through the whole tree.

Let us therefore consider whether, and in what cases, the property of
those who live on the interest of what they possess, without being
personally engaged in production, can be regarded as capital. It is so
called in common language, and, with reference to the individual, not
improperly. All funds from which the possessor derives an income, which
income he can use without sinking and dissipating the fund itself, are
to him equivalent to capital. But to transfer hastily and
inconsiderately to the general point of view, propositions which are
true of the individual, has been a source of innumerable errors in
political economy. In the present instance, that which is virtually
capital to the individual, is or is not capital to the nation, according
as the fund which by the supposition he has not dissipated, has or has
not been dissipated by somebody else.

For example, let property of the value of ten thousand pounds belonging
to A, be lent to B, a farmer or manufacturer, and employed profitably in
B's occupation. It is as much capital as if it belonged to B. A is
really a farmer or manufacturer, not personally, but in respect of his
property. Capital worth ten thousand pounds is employed in production—in
maintaining labourers and providing tools and materials; which capital
belongs to A, while B takes the trouble of employing it, and receives
for his remuneration the difference between the profit which it yields
and the interest he pays to A. This is the simplest case.

Suppose next that A's ten thousand pounds, instead of being lent to B,
are lent on mortgage to C, a landed proprietor, by whom they are
employed in improving the productive powers of his estate, by fencing,
draining, road-making, or permanent manures. This is productive
employment. The ten thousand pounds are sunk, but not dissipated. They
yield a permanent return; the land now affords an increase of produce,
sufficient, in a few years, if the outlay has been judicious, to replace
the amount, and in time to multiply it manifold. Here, then, is a value
of ten thousand pounds, employed in increasing the produce of the
country. This constitutes Edition: current; Page: [60] a capital, for
which C, if he lets his land, receives the returns in the nominal form
of increased rent; and the mortgage entitles A to receive from these
returns, in the shape of interest, such annual sum as has been agreed
on. We will now vary the circumstances, and suppose that C does not
employ the loan in improving his land, but in paying off a former
mortgage or in making a provision for children. Whether the ten thousand
pounds thus employed are capital or not, will depend on what is done
with the amount by the ultimate receiver. If the children invest their
fortunes in a productive employment, or the mortgagee on being paid off
lends the amount to another landholder to improve his land, or to a
manufacturer to extend his business, it is still capital, because
productively employed.

Suppose, however, that C, the borrowing landlord, is a spendthrift, who
burdens his land not to increase his fortune but to squander it,
expending the amount in equipages and entertainments. In a year or two
it is dissipated, and without return. A is as rich as before; he has no
longer his ten thousand pounds, but he has a lien on the land, which he
could still sell for that amount. C, however, is 10,000l. poorer than
formerly; and nobody is richer. It may be said that those are richer who
have made profit out of the money while it was being spent. No doubt if
C lost it by gaming, or was cheated of it by his servants, that is a
mere transfer, not a destruction, and those who have gained the amount
may employ it productively. But if C has received the fair value for his
expenditure in articles of subsistence or luxury, which he has consumed
on himself, or by means of his servants or guests, these articles have
ceased to exist, and nothing has been produced to replace them: while if
the same sum had been employed in farming or manufacturing, the
consumption which would have taken place would have been more than
balanced at the end of the year by new products, created by the labour
of those who would in that case have been the consumers. By C's
prodigality, that which would have been consumed with a return, is
consumed without return. C's tradesmen may have made a profit during the
process; but if the capital had been expended productively, an
equivalent profit would have been made by builders, fencers,
tool-makers, and the tradespeople who supply the consumption of the
labouring classes; while at the expiration of the time (to say nothing
of any increase), C would have had the ten thousand pounds or its value
replaced to him, which now he has not. There is, therefore, on the
general result, a difference to the disadvantage of the community, of
Edition: current; Page: [61] at least ten thousand pounds, being the
amount of C's unproductive expenditure. To A, the difference is not
material, since his income is secured to him, and while the security is
good, and the market rate of interest the same, he can always sell the
mortgage at its original value. To A, therefore, the lien of ten
thousand pounds on C's estate, is virtually a capital of that amount;
but is it so in reference to the community? It is not. A had a capital
of ten thousand pounds, but this has been extinguished—dissipated and
destroyed by C's prodigality. A now receives his income, not from the
produce of his capital, but from some other source of income belonging
to C, probably from the rent of his land, that is, from payments made to
him by farmers out of the produce of their capital. The national capital
is diminished by ten thousand pounds, and the national income by all
which those ten thousand pounds, employed as capital, would have
produced. The loss does not fall on the owner of the destroyed capital,
since the destroyer has agreed to indemnify him for it. But his loss is
only a small portion of that sustained by the community, since what was
devoted to the use and consumption of the proprietor was only the
interest; the capital itself was, or would have been, employed in the
perpetual maintenance of an equivalent number of labourers, regularly
reproducing what they consumed: and of this maintenance they are
deprived without compensation.

Let us now vary the hypothesis still further, and suppose that the money
is borrowed, not by a landlord, but by the State. A lends his capital to
Government to carry on a war: he buys from the State what are called
government securities; that is, obligations on the government to pay a
certain annual income. If the government employed the money in making a
railroad, this might be a productive employment, and A's property would
still be used as capital; but since it is employed in war, that is, in
the pay of officers and soldiers who produce nothing, and in destroying
a quantity of gunpowder and bullets without return, the government is in
the situation of C, the spendthrift landlord, and A's ten thousand
pounds are so much national capital which once existed, but exists no
longer: virtually thrown into the sea, as far as wealth or production is
concerned; though for other reasons the employment of it may have been
justifiable. A's subsequent income is derived, not from the produce of
his own capital, but from taxes drawn from the produce of the remaining
capital of the community; to whom his capital is not yielding any
return, to indemnify them for the payment; Edition: current; Page: [62]
it is lost and gone, and what he now possesses is a claim on the returns
to other people's capital and industry. This claim he can sell, and get
back the equivalent of his capital, which he may afterwards employ
productively. True; but he does not get back his own capital, or
anything which it has produced; that, and all its possible returns, are
extinguished: what he gets is the capital of some other person, which
that person is willing to exchange for his lien on the taxes. Another
capitalist substitutes himself for A as a mortgagee of the public, and A
substitutes himself for the other capitalist as the possessor of a fund
employed in production, or available for it. By this exchange the
productive powers of the community are neither increased nor diminished.
The breach in the capital of the country was made when the government
spent A's money: whereby a value of ten thousand pounds was withdrawn or
withheld from productive employment, placed in the fund for unproductive
consumption, and destroyed without equivalent.1

Edition: current; Page: [63]


CHAPTER V: fundamental propositions respecting capital

§ 1. If the preceding explanations have answered their purpose, they
have given not only a sufficiently complete possession of the idea of
Capital according to its definition, but a sufficient familiarity with
it in the concrete, and amidst the obscurity with which the complication
of individual circumstances surrounds it, to have prepared even the
unpractised reader for certain elementary propositions or theorems
respecting capital, the full comprehension of which is already a
considerable step out of darkness into light.

The first of these propositions is, That industry is limited by capital.
This is so obvious as to be taken for granted in many common forms of
speech; but to see a truth occasionally is one thing, to recognise it
habitually, and admit no propositions inconsistent with it, is another.
The axiom was until lately almost universally disregarded by legislators
and political writers; and doctrines irreconcileable with it are still
very commonly professed and inculcated.

The following are common expressions, implying its truth. The act of
directing industry to a particular employment is described by the phrase
“applying capital” to the employment. To employ industry on the land is
to apply capital to the land. To employ labour in a manufacture is to
invest capital in the manufacture. This implies that industry cannot be
employed to any greater extent than there is capital to invest. The
proposition, indeed, must be assented to as soon as it is distinctly
apprehended. The expression “applying capital” is of course
metaphorical: what is really applied is labour; capital being an
indispensable condition. Again, we often speak of the “productive powers
of capital.” This expression is not literally correct. The only
productive powers are those of labour and natural agents; or if any
portion of capital can by a stretch of language be said to have a
productive power of its own, it is only tools and machinery, which, like
wind or water, Edition: current; Page: [64] may be said to co-operate
with labour. The food of labourers and the materials of production have
no productive power; but labour cannot exert its productive power unless
provided with them. There can be no more industry than is supplied with
materials to work up and food to eat. Self-evident as the thing is, it
is often forgotten that the people of a country are maintained and have
their wants supplied, not by the produce of present labour, but of past.
They consume what has been produced, not what is about to be produced.
Now, of what has been produced, a part only is allotted to the support
of productive labour; and there will not and cannot be more of that
labour than the portion so allotted (which is the capital of the
country) can feed, and provide with the materials and instruments of
production.

Yet, in disregard of a fact so evident, it long continued to be believed
that laws and governments, without creating capital, could create
industry. Not by making the people more laborious, or increasing the
efficiency of their labour; these are objects to which the government
can, in some degree, indirectly contribute. But without any increase in
the skill or energy of the labourers, and without causing any persons to
labour who had previously been maintained in idleness, it was still
thought that the government, without providing additional funds, could
create additional employment. A government would, by prohibitory laws,
put a stop to the importation of some commodity; and when by this it had
caused the commodity to be produced at home, it would plume itself upon
having enriched the country with a new branch of industry, would parade
in statistical tables the amount of produce yielded and labour employed
in the production, and take credit for the whole of this as a gain to
the country, obtained through the prohibitory law. Although this sort of
political arithmetic has fallen a little into discredit in England, it
still flourishes in the nations of Continental Europe. Had legislators
been aware that industry is limited by capital, they would have seen
that, the aggregate capital of the country not having been increased,
any portion of it which they by their laws had caused to be embarked in
the newly-acquired branch of industry must have been withdrawn or
withheld from some other; in which it gave, or would have given,
employment to probably about the same quantity of labour which it
employs in its new occupation.∗

Edition: current; Page: [65]
§ 2. Because industry is limited by capital, we are not however to infer
that it always reaches that limit. Capital may be temporarily
unemployed, as in the case of unsold goods, or funds that have not yet
found an investment: during this interval it does not set in motion any
industry. Or there may not be as many labourers obtainable, as the
capital would maintain and employ. This has been known to occur in new
colonies, where capital has sometimes perished uselessly for want of
labour: the Swan River settlement (now called Western Australia), in the
first years after its foundation, was an instance. There are many
persons maintained from existing capital, who produce nothing, or who
might produce much more than they do. If the labourers were reduced to
lower wages, or induced to work more hours for the same wages, or if
their families, who are already maintained from capital, were employed
to a greater extent than they now are in adding to the produce, a given
capital would afford employment to more industry. The unproductive
consumption of productive labourers, the whole of which is now supplied
by capital, might cease, or be postponed until the produce came in; and
additional productive labourers might be maintained with the amount. By
such means society might obtain from its existing resources a greater
quantity of produce: and to such means it has been driven, when the
sudden destruction of some large portion of its capital rendered the
employment of the remainder with the greatest possible effect, a matter
of paramount consideration for the time.

When industry has not come up to the limit imposed by capital,
governments may, in various ways, for example by importing additional
labourers, bring it nearer to that limit: as by the importation Edition:
current; Page: [66] of Coolies and free Negroes into the West Indies.
There is another way in which governments can create additional
industry. They can create capital. They may lay on taxes, and employ the
amount productively. They may do what is nearly equivalent; they may lay
taxes on income or expenditure, and apply the proceeds towards paying
off the public debts. The fundholder, when paid off, would still desire
to draw an income from his property, most of which therefore would find
its way into productive employment, while a great part of it would have
been drawn from the fund for unproductive expenditure, since people do
not wholly pay their taxes from what they would have saved, but partly,
if not chiefly, from what they would have spent. It may be added, that
any increase in the productive power of capital (or, more properly
speaking, of labour) by improvement in the arts of life, or otherwise,
tends to increase the employment for labour; since, when there is a
greater produce altogether, it is always probable that some portion of
the increase will be saved and converted into capital; especially when
the increased returns to productive industry hold out an additional
temptation to the conversion of funds from an unproductive destination
to a productive.

§ 3. While, on the one hand, industry is limited by capital, so on the
other, every increase of capital gives, or is capable of giving,
additional employment to industry; and this without assignable limit. I
do not mean to deny that the capital, or part of it, may be so employed
as not to support labourers, being fixed in machinery, buildings,
improvement of land, and the like. In any large increase of capital a
considerable portion will generally be thus employed, and will only
co-operate with labourers, not maintain them. What I do intend to assert
is, that the portion which is destined to their maintenance, may
(supposing no alteration in anything else) be indefinitely increased,
without creating an impossibility of finding them employment: in other
words, that if there are human beings capable of work, and food to feed
them, they may always be employed in producing something. This
proposition requires to be somewhat dwelt upon, being one of those which
it is exceedingly easy to assent to when presented in general terms, but
somewhat difficult to keep fast hold of, in the crowd and confusion of
the actual facts of society. It is also very much opposed to common
doctrines. There is not an opinion more general among mankind than this,
that the unproductive expenditure of the rich Edition: current; Page:
[67] is necessary to the employment of the poor. Before Adam Smith, the
doctrine had hardly been questioned; and even since his time, authors of
the highest name and of great merit∗ have contended, that if consumers
were to save and convert into capital more than a limited portion of
their income, and were not to devote to unproductive consumption an
amount of means bearing a certain ratio to the capital of the country,
the extra accumulation would be merely so much waste, since there would
be no market for the commodities which the capital so created would
produce. I conceive this to be one of the many errors arising in
political economy, from the practice of not beginning with the
examination of simple cases, but rushing at once into the complexity of
concrete phenomena.

Every one can see that if a benevolent government possessed all the
food, and all the implements and materials, of the community, it could
exact productive labour from all capable of it, to whom it allowed a
share in the food, and could be in no danger of wanting a field for the
employment of this productive labour, since as long as there was a
single want unsaturated (which material objects could supply), of any
one individual, the labour of the community could be turned to the
production of something capable of satisfying that want. Now, the
individual possessors of capital, when they add to it by fresh
accumulations, are doing precisely the same thing which we suppose to be
done by a benevolent government. As it is allowable to put any case by
way of hypothesis, let us imagine the most extreme case conceivable.
Suppose that every capitalist came to be of opinion that not being more
meritorious than a well-conducted labourer, he ought not to fare better;
and accordingly laid by, from conscientious motives, the surplus of his
profits; or suppose this abstinence not spontaneous, but imposed by law
or opinion upon all capitalists, and upon landowners likewise.
Unproductive expenditure is now reduced to its lowest limit: and it is
asked, how is the increased capital to find employment? Who is to buy
the goods which it will produce? There are no longer customers even for
those which were produced before. The goods, therefore, (it is said)
will remain unsold; they will perish in the warehouses; until capital is
brought down to what it was originally, or rather to as much less, as
the demand of the consumers has lessened. But this is seeing only
one-half of the matter. In the case supposed, there would no longer be
any demand for luxuries, Edition: current; Page: [68] on the part of
capitalists and landowners. But when these classes turn their income
into capital, they do not thereby annihilate their power of consumption;
they do but transfer it from themselves to the labourers to whom they
give employment. Now, there are two possible suppositions in regard to
the labourers; either there is, or there is not, an increase of their
numbers, proportional to the increase of capital. If there is, the case
offers no difficulty. The production of necessaries for the new
population, takes the place of the production of luxuries for a portion
of the old, and supplies exactly the amount of employment which has been
lost. But suppose that there is no increase of population. The whole of
what was previously expended in luxuries, by capitalists and landlords,
is distributed among the existing labourers, in the form of additional
wages. We will assume them to be already sufficiently supplied with
necessaries. What follows? That the labourers become consumers of
luxuries; and the capital previously employed in the production of
luxuries, is still able to employ itself in the same manner: the
difference being, that the luxuries are shared among the community
generally, instead of being confined to a few. The increased
accumulation and increased production, might, rigorously speaking,
continue, until every labourer had every indulgence of wealth,
consistent with continuing to work; supposing that the power of their
labour were physically sufficient to produce all this amount of
indulgences for their whole number. Thus the limit of wealth is never
deficiency of consumers, but of producers and productive power. Every
addition to capital gives to labour either additional employment, or
additional remuneration; enriches either the country, or the labouring
class. If it finds additional hands to set to work, it increases the
aggregate produce: if only the same hands, it gives them a larger share
of it; and perhaps even in this case, by stimulating them to greater
exertion, augments the produce itself.

§ 4. A second fundamental theorem respecting Capital relates to the
source from which it is derived. It is the result of saving. The
evidence of this lies abundantly in what has been already said on the
subject. But the proposition needs some further illustration.

If all persons were to expend in personal indulgences all that they
produce, and all the income they receive from what is produced by
others, capital could not increase. All capital, with a trifling
exception, was originally the result of saving. I say, with a trifling
exception; because a person who labours on his own account, may Edition:
current; Page: [69] spend on his own account all he produces, without
becoming destitute; and the provision of necessaries on which he
subsists until he has reaped his harvest, or sold his commodity, though
a real capital, cannot be said to have been saved, since it is all used
for the supply of his own wants, and perhaps as speedily as if it had
been consumed in idleness. We may imagine a number of individuals or
families settled on as many separate pieces of land, each living on what
their own labour produces, and consuming the whole produce. But even
these must save (that is, spare from their personal consumption) as much
as is necessary for seed. Some saving, therefore, there must have been,
even in this simplest of all states of economical relations; people must
have produced more than they used, or used less than they produced.
Still more must they do so before they can employ other labourers, or
increase their production beyond what can be accomplished by the work of
their own hands. All that any one employs in supporting and carrying on
any other labour than his own, must have been originally brought
together by saving; somebody must have produced it and forborne to
consume it. We may say, therefore, without material inaccuracy, that all
capital, and especially all addition to capital, is the result of
saving.

In a rude and violent state of society, it continually happens that the
person who has capital is not the very person who has saved it, but some
one who, being stronger, or belonging to a more powerful community, has
possessed himself of it by plunder. And even in a state of things in
which property was protected, the increase of capital has usually been,
for a long time, mainly derived from privations which, though
essentially the same with saving, are not generally called by that name,
because not voluntary. The actual producers have been slaves, compelled
to produce as much as force could extort from them, and to consume as
little as the self-interest or the usually very slender humanity of
their taskmasters would permit. This kind of compulsory saving, however,
would not have caused any increase of capital, unless a part of the
amount had been saved over again, voluntarily, by the master. If all
that he made his slaves produce and forbear to consume, had been
consumed by him on personal indulgences, he would not have increased his
capital, nor been enabled to maintain an increasing number of slaves. To
maintain any slaves at all, implied a previous saving; a stock, at least
of food, provided in advance. This saving may not, however, have been
made by any self-imposed privation of the master; but more probably by
that of the slaves themselves while free; the Edition: current; Page:
[70] rapine or war, which deprived them of their personal liberty,
having transferred also their accumulations to the conqueror.

There are other cases in which the term saving, with the associations
usually belonging to it, does not exactly fit the operation by which
capital is increased. If it were said, for instance, that the only way
to accelerate the increase of capital is by increase of saving, the idea
would probably be suggested of greater abstinence, and increased
privation. But it is obvious that whatever increases the productive
power of labour creates an additional fund to make savings from, and
enables capital to be enlarged not only without additional privation,
but concurrently with an increase of personal consumption. Nevertheless,
there is here an increase of saving, in the scientific sense. Though
there is more consumed, there is also more spared. There is a greater
excess of production over consumption. It is consistent with correctness
to call this a greater saving. Though the term is not unobjectionable,
there is no other which is not liable to as great objections. To consume
less than is produced, is saving; and that is the process by which
capital is increased; not necessarily by consuming less, absolutely. We
must not allow ourselves to be so much the slaves of words, as to be
unable to use the word saving in this sense, without being in danger of
forgetting that to increase capital there is another way besides
consuming less, namely, to produce more.

§ 5. A third fundamental theorem respecting Capital, closely connected
with the one last discussed, is, that although saved, and the result of
saving, it is nevertheless consumed. The word saving does not imply that
what is saved is not consumed, nor even necessarily that its consumption
is deferred; but only that, if consumed immediately, it is not consumed
by the person who saves it. If merely laid by for future use, it is said
to be hoarded; and while hoarded, is not consumed at all. But if
employed as capital, it is all consumed; though not by the capitalist.
Part is exchanged for tools or machinery, which are worn out by use;
part for seed or materials, which are destroyed as such by being sown or
wrought up, and destroyed altogether by the consumption of the ultimate
product. The remainder is paid in wages to productive labourers, who
consume it for their daily wants; or if they in their turn save any
part, this also is not, generally speaking, hoarded, but (through
savings banks, benefit clubs, or some other channel) re-employed as
capital, and consumed.

Edition: current; Page: [71] The principle now stated is a strong
example of the necessity of attention to the most elementary truths of
our subject: for it is one of the most elementary of them all, and yet
no one who has not bestowed some thought on the matter is habitually
aware of it, and most are not even willing to admit it when first
stated. To the vulgar, it is not at all apparent that what is saved is
consumed. To them, every one who saves, appears in the light of a person
who hoards: they may think such conduct permissible, or even laudable,
when it is to provide for a family, and the like; but they have no
conception of it as doing good to other people: saving is to them
another word for keeping a thing to oneself; while spending appears to
them to be distributing it among others. The person who expends his
fortune in unproductive consumption, is looked upon as diffusing
benefits all around; and is an object of so much favour, that some
portion of the same popularity attaches even to him who spends what does
not belong to him; who not only destroys his own capital, if he ever had
any, but under pretence of borrowing, and on promise of repayment,
possesses himself of capital belonging to others, and destroys that
likewise.

This popular error comes from attending to a small portion only of the
consequences that flow from the saving or the spending; all the effects
of either which are out of sight, being out of mind. The eye follows
what is saved, into an imaginary strong-box, and there loses sight of
it; what is spent, it follows into the hands of tradespeople and
dependents; but without reaching the ultimate destination in either
case. Saving (for productive investment), and spending, coincide very
closely in the first stage of their operations. The effects of both
begin with consumption; with the destruction of a certain portion of
wealth; only the things consumed, and the persons consuming, are
different. There is, in the one case, a wearing out of tools, a
destruction of material, and a quantity of food and clothing supplied to
labourers, which they destroy by use: in the other case, there is a
consumption, that is to say, a destruction, of wines, equipages, and
furniture. Thus far, the consequence to the national wealth has been
much the same; an equivalent quantity of it has been destroyed in both
cases. But in the spending, this first stage is also the final stage;
that particular amount of the produce of labour has disappeared, and
there is nothing left; while, on the contrary, the saving person, during
the whole time that the destruction was going on, has had labourers at
work repairing it; who are ultimately found to have replaced, with an
increase, Edition: current; Page: [72] the equivalent of what has been
consumed. And as this operation admits of being repeated indefinitely
without any fresh act of saving, a saving once made becomes a fund to
maintain a corresponding number of labourers in perpetuity, reproducing
annually their own maintenance with a profit.

It is the intervention of money which obscures, to an unpractised
apprehension, the true character of these phenomena. Almost all
expenditure being carried on by means of money, the money comes to be
looked upon as the main feature in the transaction; and since that does
not perish, but only changes hands, people overlook the destruction
which takes place in the case of unproductive expenditure. The money
being merely transferred, they think the wealth also has only been
handed over from the spendthrift to other people. But this is simply
confounding money with wealth. The wealth which has been destroyed was
not the money, but the wines, equipages, and furniture which the money
purchased; and these having been destroyed without return, society
collectively is poorer by the amount. It may be said, perhaps, that
wines, equipages, and furniture, are not subsistence, tools, and
materials, and could not in any case have been applied to the support of
labour; that they are adapted for no other than unproductive
consumption, and that the detriment to the wealth of the community was
when they were produced, not when they were consumed. I am willing to
allow this, as far as is necessary for the argument, and the remark
would be very pertinent if these expensive luxuries were drawn from an
existing stock, never to be replenished. But since, on the contrary,
they continue to be produced as long as there are consumers for them,
and are produced in increased quantity to meet an increased demand; the
choice made by a consumer to expend five thousand a year in luxuries,
keeps a corresponding number of labourers employed from year to year in
producing things which can be of no use to production; their services
being lost so far as regards the increase of the national wealth, and
the tools, materials, and food which they annually consume being so much
subtracted from the general stock of the community applicable to
productive purposes. In proportion as any class is improvident or
luxurious, the industry of the country takes the direction of producing
luxuries for their use; while not only the employment for productive
labourers is diminished, but the subsistence and instruments which are
the means of such employment do actually exist in smaller quantity.

Saving, in short, enriches, and spending impoverishes, the Edition:
current; Page: [73] community along with the individual; which is but
saying in other words, that society at large is richer by what it
expends in maintaining and aiding productive labour, but poorer by what
it consumes in its enjoyments.∗

§ 6. To return to our fundamental theorem. Everything which is produced
is consumed both what is saved and what is said to be spent; and the
former quite as rapidly as the latter. All the ordinary forms of
language tend to disguise this. When people talk of the ancient wealth
of a count, of riches inherited Edition: current; Page: [74] from
ancestors, and similar expressions, the idea suggested is that the
riches so transmitted were produced long ago, at the time when they are
said to have been first acquired, and that no portion of the capital of
the country was produced this year, except as much as may have been this
year added to the total amount. The fact is far otherwise. The greater
part, in value, of the wealth now existing in England has been produced
by human hands within the last twelve months. A very small proportion
indeed of that large aggregate was in existence ten years ago;—of the
present productive capital of the country scarcely any part, except
farm-houses and manufactories, and a few ships and machines; and even
these would not in most cases have survived so long, if fresh labour had
not been employed within that period in putting them into repair. The
land subsists, and the land is almost the only thing that subsists.
Everything which is produced perishes, and most things very quickly.
Most kinds of capital are not fitted by their nature to be long
preserved. There are a few, and but a few productions, capable of a very
prolonged existence. Westminster Abbey has lasted many centuries, with
occasional repairs; some Grecian sculptures have existed above two
thousand years; the Pyramids perhaps double or treble that time. But
these were objects devoted to unproductive use. If we except bridges and
aqueducts (to which may in some countries be added tanks and
embankments), there are few instances of any edifice applied to
industrial purposes which has been of great duration; such buildings do
not hold out against wear and tear, nor is it good economy to construct
them of the solidity necessary for permanency. Capital is kept in
existence from age to age not by preservation, but by perpetual
reproduction: every part of it is used and destroyed, generally very
soon after it is produced, but those who consume it are employed
meanwhile in producing more. The growth of capital is similar to the
growth of population. Every individual who is born, dies, but in each
year the number born exceeds the number who die: the population,
therefore, always increases, though not one person of those composing it
was alive until a very recent date.

§ 7. This perpetual consumption and reproduction of capital affords the
explanation of what has so often excited wonder, the great rapidity with
which countries recover from a state of devastation; the disappearance,
in a short time, of all traces of the mischiefs done by earthquakes,
floods, hurricanes, and the ravages of war. Edition: current; Page: [75]
An enemy lays waste a country by fire and sword, and destroys or carries
away nearly all the moveable wealth existing in it: all the inhabitants
are ruined, and yet in a few years after, everything is much as it was
before. This vis medicatrix naturae has been a subject of sterile
astonishment, or has been cited to exemplify the wonderful strength of
the principle of saving, which can repair such enormous losses in so
brief an interval. There is nothing at all wonderful in the matter. What
the enemy have destroyed, would have been destroyed in a little time by
the inhabitants themselves: the wealth which they so rapidly reproduce,
would have needed to be reproduced and would have been reproduced in any
case, and probably in as short a time. Nothing is changed, except that
during the reproduction they have not now the advantage of consuming
what had been produced previously. The possibility of a rapid repair of
their disasters mainly depends on whether the country has been
depopulated. If its effective population have not been extirpated at the
time, and are not starved afterwards; then, with the same skill and
knowledge which they had before, with their land and its permanent
improvements undestroyed, and the more durable buildings probably
unimpaired, or only partially injured, they have nearly all the
requisites for their former amount of production. If there is as much of
food left to them, or of valuables to buy food, as enables them by any
amount of privation to remain alive and in working condition, they will
in a short time have raised as great a produce, and acquired
collectively as great wealth and as great a capital, as before; by the
mere continuance of that ordinary amount of exertion which they are
accustomed to employ in their occupations. Nor does this evince any
strength in the principle of saving, in the popular sense of the term,
since what takes place is not intentional abstinence, but involuntary
privation.

Yet so fatal is the habit of thinking though the medium of only one set
of technical phrases, and so little reason have studious men to value
themselves on being exempt from the very same mental infirmities which
beset the vulgar, that this simple explanation was never given (so far
as I am aware) by any political economist before Dr. Chalmers; a writer
many of whose opinions I think erroneous, but who has always the merit
of studying phenomena at first hand, and expressing them in a language
of his own, which often uncovers aspects of the truth that the received
phraseologies only tend to hide.

Edition: current; Page: [76]
§ 8. The same author carries out this train of thought to some important
conclusions on another closely connected subject, that of government
loans for war purposes or other unproductive expenditure. These loans,
being drawn from capital (in lieu of taxes, which would generally have
been paid from income, and made up in part or altogether by increased
economy) must, according to the principles we have laid down, tend to
impoverish the country: yet the years in which expenditure of this sort
has been on the greatest scale, have often been years of great apparent
prosperity: the wealth and resources of the country, instead of
diminishing, have given every sign of rapid increase during the process,
and of greatly expanded dimensions after its close. This was confessedly
the case with Great Britain during the last long Continental war; and it
would take some space to enumerate all the unfounded theories in
political economy, to which that fact gave rise, and to which it secured
temporary credence; almost all tending to exalt unproductive
expenditure, at the expense of productive. Without entering into all the
causes which operated, and which commonly do operate, to prevent these
extraordinary drafts on the productive resources of a country from being
so much felt as it might seem reasonable to expect, we will suppose the
most unfavourable case possible: that the whole amount borrowed and
destroyed by the government, was abstracted by the lender from a
productive employment in which it had actually been invested. The
capital, therefore, of the country, is this year diminished by so much.
But unless the amount abstracted is something enormous, there is no
reason in the nature of the case why next year the national capital
should not be as great as ever. The loan cannot have been taken from
that portion of the capital of the country which consists of tools,
machinery, and buildings. It must have been wholly drawn from the
portion employed in paying labourers: and the labourers will suffer
accordingly. But if none of them are starved; if their wages can bear
such an amount of reduction, or if charity interposes between them and
absolute destitution, there is no reason that their labour should
produce less in the next year than in the year before. If they produce
as much as usual, having been paid less by so many millions sterling,
these millions are gained by their employers. The breach made in the
capital of the country is thus instantly repaired, but repaired by the
privations and often the real misery of the labouring class. Here is
ample reason why such periods, even in the most unfavourable
circumstances, may easily be times of great gain Edition: current; Page:
[77] to those whose prosperity usually passes, in the estimation of
society, for national prosperity.∗

This leads to the vexed question to which Dr. Chalmers has very
particularly adverted; whether the funds required by a government for
extraordinary unproductive expenditure, are best raised by loans, the
interest only being provided by taxes, or whether taxes should be at
once laid on to the whole amount; which is called in the financial
vocabulary, raising the whole of the supplies within the year. Dr.
Chalmers is strongly for the latter method. He says, the common notion
is that in calling for the whole amount in one year, you require what is
either impossible, or very inconvenient; that the people cannot, without
great hardship, pay the whole at once out of their yearly income; and
that it is much better to require of them a small payment every year in
the shape of interest, than so great a sacrifice once for all. To which
his answer is, that the sacrifice is made equally in either case.
Whatever is spent, cannot but be drawn from yearly income. The whole and
every part of the wealth produced in the country, forms, or helps to
form, the yearly income of somebody. The privation which it is supposed
must result from taking the amount in the shape of taxes is not avoided
by taking it in a loan. The suffering is not averted, but only thrown
upon the labouring classes, the least able, and who Edition: current;
Page: [78] least ought, to bear it: while all the inconveniences,
physical, moral, and political, produced by maintaining taxes for the
perpetual payment of the interest, are incurred in pure loss. Whenever
capital is withdrawn from production, or from the fund destined for
production, to be lent to the State, and expended unproductively, that
whole sum is withheld from the labouring classes: the loan, therefore,
is in truth paid off the same year; the whole of the sacrifice necessary
for paying it off is actually made: only it is paid to the wrong
persons, and therefore does not extinguish the claim; and paid by the
very worst of taxes, a tax exclusively on the labouring class. And after
having, in this most painful and unjust way, gone through the whole
effort necessary for extinguishing the debt, the country remains charged
with it, and with the payment of its interest in perpetuity.

These views appear to me strictly just, in so far as the value absorbed
in loans would otherwise have been employed in productive industry
within the country. The practical state of the case, however, seldom
exactly corresponds with this supposition. The loans of the less wealthy
countries are made chiefly with foreign capital, which would not,
perhaps, have been brought in to be invested on any less security than
that of the government: while those of rich and prosperous countries are
generally made, not with funds withdrawn from productive employment, but
with the new accumulations constantly making from income, and often with
a part of them which, if not so taken, would have migrated to colonies,
or sought other investments abroad. In these cases (which will be more
particularly examined hereafter∗), the sum wanted may be obtained by
loan without detriment to the labourers, or derangement of the national
industry, and even perhaps with advantage to both, in comparison with
raising the amount by taxation, since taxes, especially when heavy, are
almost always partly paid at the expense of what would otherwise have
been saved and added to capital. Besides, in a country which makes so
great yearly additions to its wealth that a part can be taken and
expended unproductively without diminishing capital, or even preventing
a considerable increase, it is evident that even if the whole of what is
so taken would have become capital, and obtained employment in the
country, the effect on the labouring classes is far less prejudicial,
and the case against the loan system much less strong, than in the case
first supposed. This brief anticipation of a discussion which Edition:
current; Page: [79] will find its proper place elsewhere, appeared
necessary to prevent false inferences from the premises previously laid
down.

§ 9. We now pass to a fourth fundamental theorem respecting Capital,
which is, perhaps, oftener overlooked or misconceived than even any of
the foregoing. What supports and employs productive labour, is the
capital expended in setting it to work, and not the demand of purchasers
for the produce of the labour when completed. Demand for commodities is
not demand for labour. The demand for commodities determines in what
particular branch of production the labour and capital shall be
employed; it determines the direction of the labour; but not the more or
less of the labour itself, or of the maintenance or payment of the
labour. These depend on the amount of the capital, or other funds
directly devoted to the sustenance and remuneration of labour.

Suppose, for instance, that there is a demand for velvet; a fund ready
to be laid out in buying velvet, but no capital to establish the
manufacture. It is of no consequence how great the demand may be; unless
capital is attracted into the occupation, there will be no velvet made,
and consequently none bought; unless, indeed, the desire of the
intending purchaser for it is so strong, that he employs part of the
price he would have paid for it, in making advances to work-people, that
they may employ themselves in making velvet; that is, unless he converts
part of his income into capital, and invests that capital in the
manufacture. Let us now reverse the hypothesis, and suppose that there
is plenty of capital ready for making velvet, but no demand. Velvet will
not be made; but there is no particular preference on the part of
capital for making velvet. Manufacturers and their labourers do not
produce for the pleasure of their customers, but for the supply of their
own wants, and having still the capital and the labour which are the
essentials of production, they can either produce something else which
is in demand, or if there be no other demand, they themselves have one,
and can produce the things which they want for their own consumption. So
that the employment afforded to labour does not depend on the
purchasers, but on the capital.1 I am, of course, not taking into
consideration the effects of a sudden change. If the demand ceases
unexpectedly, after the commodity to supply it is already produced, this
introduces a different element into the Edition: current; Page: [80]
question: the capital has actually been consumed in producing something
which nobody wants or uses, and it has therefore perished, and the
employment which it gave to labour is at an end, not because there is no
longer a demand, but because there is no longer a capital. This case
therefore does not test the principle. The proper test is, to suppose
that the change is gradual and foreseen, and is attended with no waste
of capital, the manufacture being discontinued by merely not replacing
the machinery as it wears out, and not reinvesting the money as it comes
in from the sale of the produce. The capital is thus ready for a new
employment, in which it will maintain as much labour as before. The
manufacturer and his work-people lose the benefit of the skill and
knowledge which they had acquired in the particular business, and which
can only be partially of use to them in any other; and that is the
amount of loss to the community by the change. But the labourers can
still work, and the capital which previously employed them will, either
in the same hands, or by being lent to others, employ either those
labourers or an equivalent number in some other occupation.

This theorem, that to purchase produce is not to employ labour; that the
demand for labour is constituted by the wages which precede the
production, and not by the demand which may exist for the commodities
resulting from the production; is a proposition which greatly needs all
the illustration it can receive. It is, to common apprehension, a
paradox; and even among political economists of reputation, I can hardly
point to any, except Mr. Ricardo and M. Say, who have kept it constantly
and steadily in view. Almost all others occasionally express themselves
as if a person who buys commodities, the produce of labour, was an
employer of labour, and created a demand for it as really, and in the
same sense, as if he bought the labour itself directly, by the payment
of wages. It is no wonder that political economy advances slowly, when
such a question as this still remains open at its very threshold. 1 I
apprehend, that if by demand for labour be meant the demand by which
wages are raised, or the number of labourers in employment increased,
demand for commodities does not constitute demand for labour. Edition:
current; Page: [81] I conceive that a person who buys commodities and
consumes them himself, does no good to the labouring classes; and that
it is only by what he abstains from consuming, and expends in direct
payments to labourers in exchange for labour, that he benefits the
labouring classes, or adds anything to the amount of their employment.

For the better illustration of the principle, let us put the following
case. A consumer may expend his income either in buying services, or
commodities. He may employ part of it in hiring journeymen bricklayers
to build a house, or excavators to dig artificial lakes, or labourers to
make plantations and lay out pleasure grounds; or, instead of this, he
may expend the same value in buying velvet and lace. The question is,
whether the difference between these two modes of expending his income
affects the interest of the labouring classes. It is plain that in the
first of the two cases he employs labourers, who will be out of
employment, or at least out of that employment, in the opposite case.
But those from whom I differ say that this is of no consequence, because
in buying velvet and lace he equally employs labourers, namely, those
who make the velvet and lace. I contend, however, that in this last case
he does not employ labourers; but merely decides in what kind of work
some other person shall employ them. The consumer does not with his own
funds pay to the weavers and lacemakers their day's wages. He buys the
finished commodity, which has been produced by labour and capital, the
labour not being paid nor the capital furnished by him, but by the
manufacturer. Suppose that he had been in the habit of expending this
portion of his income in hiring journeymen bricklayers, who laid out the
amount of their wages in food and clothing, which were also produced by
labour and capital. He, however, determines to prefer velvet, for which
he thus creates an extra demand. This demand cannot be satisfied without
an extra supply, nor can the supply be produced without an extra
capital: where, then, is the capital to come from? There is nothing in
the consumer's change of purpose which makes the capital of the country
greater than it otherwise was. It appears, then, that the increased
demand for velvet could not for the present be supplied, were it not
that the very circumstance which gave rise to it has set at liberty a
capital of the exact amount required. The very sum which the consumer
now employs in buying velvet, formerly passed into the hands of
journeymen bricklayers, who expended it in food and necessaries, which
they now either go without, or squeeze by their competition, from the
Edition: current; Page: [82] shares of other labourers. The labour and
capital, therefore, which formerly produced necessaries for the use of
these bricklayers, are deprived of their market, and must look out for
other employment; and they find it in making velvet for the new demand.
I do not mean that the very same labour and capital which produced the
necessaries turn themselves to producing the velvet; but, in some one or
other of a hundred modes, they take the place of that which does. There
was capital in existence to do one of two things—to make the velvet, or
to produce necessaries for the journeymen bricklayers; but not to do
both. It was at the option of the consumer which of the two should
happen; and if he chooses the velvet, they go without the necessaries.

1 For further illustration, let us suppose the same case reversed. The
consumer has been accustomed to buy velvet, but resolves to discontinue
that expense, and to employ the same annual sum in hiring bricklayers.
If the common opinion be correct, this change in the mode of his
expenditure gives no additional employment to labour, but only transfers
employment from velvet-makers to bricklayers. On closer inspection,
however, it will be seen that there is an increase of the total sum
applied to the remuneration of labour. The velvet manufacturer,
supposing him aware of the diminished demand for his commodity,
diminishes the production, and sets at liberty a corresponding portion
of the capital employed in the manufacture. This capital, thus withdrawn
from the maintenance of velvet-makers, is not the same fund with that
which the customer employs in maintaining bricklayers; it is a second
fund. There are, therefore, two funds to be employed in the maintenance
and remuneration of labour, where before there was only one. There is
not a transfer of employment from velvet-makers to bricklayers; there is
a new employment created for bricklayers, and a transfer of employment
from velvet-makers to some other labourers, most probably those who
produce the food and other things which the bricklayers consume.

In answer to this it is said, that though money laid out in buying
velvet is not capital, it replaces a capital; that though it does not
create a new demand for labour, it is the necessary means of enabling
the existing demand to be kept up. The funds (it may be said) of the
manufacturer, while locked up in velvet, cannot be directly Edition:
current; Page: [83] applied to the maintenance of labour; they do not
begin to constitute a demand for labour until the velvet is sold, and
the capital which made it replaced from the outlay of the purchaser; and
thus, it may be said, the velvet-maker and the velvet-buyer have not two
capitals, but only one capital between them, which by the act of
purchase the buyer transfers to the manufacturer, and if instead of
buying velvet he buys labour, he simply transfers this capital
elsewhere, extinguishing as much demand for labour in one quarter as he
creates in another.

The premises of this argument are not denied. To set free a capital
which would otherwise be locked up in a form useless for the support of
labour, is, no doubt, the same thing to the interests of labourers as
the creation of a new capital. It is perfectly true that if I expend
1000l. in buying velvet, I enable the manufacturer to employ 1000l. in
the maintenance of labour, which could not have been so employed while
the velvet remained unsold: and if it would have remained unsold for
ever unless I bought it, then by changing my purpose, and hiring
bricklayers instead, I undoubtedly create no new demand for labour: for
while I employ 1000l. in hiring labour on the one hand, I annihilate for
ever 1000l. of the velvet-maker's capital on the other. But this is
confounding the effects arising from the mere suddenness of a change
with the effects of the change itself. If when the buyer ceased to
purchase, the capital employed in making velvet for his use necessarily
perished, then his expending the same amount in hiring bricklayers would
be no creation, but merely a transfer, of employment. The increased
employment which I contend is given to labour, would not be given unless
the capital of the velvet-maker could be liberated, and would not be
given until it was liberated. But every one knows that the capital
invested in an employment can be withdrawn from it, if sufficient time
be allowed. If the velvet-maker had previous notice, by not receiving
the usual order, he will have produced 1000l. less velvet, and an
equivalent portion of his capital will have been already set free. If he
had no previous notice, and the article consequently remains on his
hands, the increase of his stock will induce him next year to suspend or
diminish his production until the surplus is carried off. When this
process is complete, the manufacturer will find himself as rich as
before, with undiminished power of employing labour in general, though a
portion of his capital will now be employed in maintaining some other
kind of Edition: current; Page: [84] it. Until this adjustment has taken
place, the demand for labour will be merely changed, not increased: but
as soon as it has taken place, the demand for labour is increased. Where
there was formerly only one capital employed in maintaining weavers to
make 1000l. worth of velvet, there is now that same capital employed in
making something else, and 1000l. distributed among bricklayers besides.
There are now two capitals employed in remunerating two sets of
labourers; while before, one of those capitals, that of the customer,
only served as a wheel in the machinery by which the other capital, that
of the manufacturer, carried on its employment of labour from year to
year.

The proposition for which I am contending is in reality equivalent to
the following, which to some minds will appear a truism, though to
others it is a paradox: that a person does good to labourers, not by
what he consumes on himself, but solely by what he does not so consume.
If instead of laying out 100l. in wine or silk, I expend it in wages,
the demand for commodities is precisely equal in both cases: in the one,
it is a demand for 100l. worth of wine or silk, in the other, for the
same value of bread, beer, labourers' clothing, fuel, and indulgences:
but the labourers of the community have in the latter case the value of
100l. more of the produce of the community distributed among them. I
have consumed that much less, and made over my consuming power to them.
If it were not so, my having consumed less would not leave more to be
consumed by others; which is a manifest contradiction. When less is not
produced, what one person forbears to consume is necessarily added to
the share of those to whom he transfers his power of purchase. In the
case supposed I do not necessarily consume less ultimately, since the
labourers whom I pay may build a house for me, or make something else
for my future consumption. But I have at all events postponed my
consumption, and have turned over part of my share of the present
produce of the community to the labourers. If after an interval I am
indemnified, it is not from the existing produce, but from a subsequent
addition made to it. I have therefore left more of the existing produce
to be consumed by others; and have put into the possession of labourers
the power to consume it.

1 There cannot be a better reductio ad absurdum of the opposite doctrine
than that afforded by the Poor Law. If it be equally for the benefit of
the labouring classes whether I consume my means Edition: current; Page:
[85] in the form of things purchased for my own use, or set aside a
portion in the shape of wages or alms for their direct consumption, on
what ground can the policy be justified of taking my money from me to
support paupers? since my unproductive expenditure would have equally
benefited them, while I should have enjoyed it too. If society can both
eat its cake and have it, why should it not be allowed the double
indulgence? But common sense tells every one in his own case (though he
does not see it on the larger scale), that the poor rate which he pays
is really subtracted from his own consumption, and that no shifting of
payment backwards and forwards will enable two persons to eat the same
food. If he had not been required to pay the rate, and had consequently
laid out the amount on himself, the poor would have had as much less for
their share of the total produce of the country, as he himself would
have consumed more.∗

Edition: current; Page: [86]
It appears, then, that a demand delayed until the work is completed, and
furnishing no advances, but only reimbursing advances made by others,
contributes nothing to the demand for labour; and that what is so
expended, is, in all its effects, so far as Edition: current; Page: [87]
regards the employment of the labouring class, a mere nullity; it does
not and cannot create any employment except at the expense of other
employment which existed before.

But though a demand for velvet does nothing more in regard to the
employment for labour and capital, than to determine so much of the
employment which already existed, into that particular channel instead
of any other; still, to the producers already engaged in the velvet
manufacture, and not intending to quit it, this is of the utmost
importance. To them, a falling off in the demand is a real loss, and one
which, even if none of their goods finally perish unsold, may mount to
any height, up to that which would make them choose, as the smaller
evil, to retire from the business. On the contrary, an increased demand
enables them to extend their transactions—to make a profit on a larger
capital, if they have it, or can borrow it; and, turning over their
capital more rapidly, they will employ their labourers more constantly,
or employ a greater number than before. So that an increased demand for
a commodity does really, in the particular department, often cause a
greater employment to be given to labour by the same capital. The
mistake lies in not perceiving that in the cases supposed, this
advantage is given to labour and capital in one department, only by
being withdrawn from another; and that when the change has produced its
natural effect of attracting into the employment additional capital
proportional to the increased demand, the advantage itself ceases.

The grounds of a proposition, when well understood, usually give a
tolerable indication of the limitations of it. The general principle,
now stated, is that demand for commodities determines merely the
direction of labour, and the kind of wealth produced, but not the
quantity or efficiency of the labour, or the aggregate of wealth. But to
this there are two exceptions. First, when labour is supported, but not
fully occupied, a new demand for something which it can produce, may
stimulate the labour thus supported to increased exertions, of which the
result may be an increase of wealth, to the advantage of the labourers
themselves and of others. Work which can be done in the spare hours of
persons subsisted from some other source, can (as before remarked) be
undertaken without withdrawing capital from other occupations, beyond
the amount (often very small) required to cover the expense of tools and
materials, and even this will often be provided by savings made
expressly for the purpose. The reason of our theorem thus failing, the
theorem itself fails, and employment of this kind Edition: current;
Page: [88] may, by the springing up of a demand for the commodity, be
called into existence without depriving labour of an equivalent amount
of employment in any other quarter. The demand does not, even in this
case, operate on labour any otherwise than through the medium of an
existing capital, but it affords an inducement which causes that capital
to set in motion a greater amount of labour than it did before.

1 The second exception, of which I shall speak at length in a subsequent
chapter, consists in the known effect of an extension of the market for
a commodity, in rendering possible an increased development of the
division of labour, and hence a more effective distribution of the
productive forces of society. This, like the former, is more an
exception. in appearance than it is in reality. It is not the money paid
by the purchaser, which remunerates the labour; it is the capital of the
producer: the demand only determines in what manner that capital shall
be employed, and what kind of labour it shall remunerate; but if it
determines that the commodity shall be produced on a large scale, it
enables the same capital to produce more of the commodity, and may by an
indirect effect in causing an increase of capital, produce an eventual
increase of the remuneration of the labourer.

The demand for commodities is a consideration of importance rather in
the theory of exchange, than in that of production. Looking at things in
the aggregate, and permanently, the remuneration of the producer is
derived from the productive power of his own capital. The sale of the
produce for money, and the subsequent expenditure of the money in buying
other commodities, are a mere exchange of equivalent values for mutual
accommodation. It is true that, the division of employments being one of
the principal means of increasing the productive power of labour, the
power of exchanging gives rise to a great increase of the produce; but
even then it is production, not exchange, which remunerates labour and
capital. We cannot too strictly represent to ourselves the operation of
exchange, whether conducted by barter or through the medium of money, as
the mere mechanism by which each person transforms the remuneration of
his labour or of his capital into the particular shape in which it is
most convenient to him to possess it; but in no wise the source of the
remuneration itself.

§ 10. The preceding principles demonstrate the fallacy of Edition:
current; Page: [89] many popular arguments and doctrines, which are
continually reproducing themselves in new forms. For example, it has
been contended, and by some from whom better things might have been
expected, that the argument for the income-tax, grounded on its falling
on the higher and middle classes only, and sparing the poor, is an
error; some have gone so far as to say, an imposture; because in taking
from the rich what they would have expended among the poor, the tax
injures the poor as much as if it had been directly levied from them. Of
this doctrine we now know what to think. So far, indeed, as what is
taken from the rich in taxes, would, if not so taken, have been saved
and converted into capital, or even expended in the maintenance and
wages of servants or of any class of unproductive labourers, to that
extent the demand for labour is no doubt diminished, and the poor
injuriously affected, by the tax on the rich; and as these effects are
almost always produced in a greater or less degree, it is impossible so
to tax the rich as that no portion whatever of the tax can fall on the
poor. But even here the question arises, whether the government, after
receiving the amount, will not lay out as great a portion of it in the
direct purchase of labour, as the taxpayers would have done. In regard
to all that portion of the tax, which, if not paid to the government,
would have been consumed in the form of commodities (or even expended in
services if the payment has been advanced by a capitalist), this,
according to the principles we have investigated, falls definitively on
the rich, and not at all on the poor. There is exactly the same demand
for labour, so far as this portion is concerned, after the tax, as
before it. The capital which hitherto employed the labourers of the
country, remains, and is still capable of employing the same number.
There is the same amount of produce paid in wages, or allotted to defray
the feeding and clothing of labourers.

If those against whom I am now contending were in the right, it would be
impossible to tax anybody except the poor. If it is taxing the
labourers, to tax what is laid out in the produce of labour, the
labouring classes pay all the taxes. The same argument, however, equally
proves, that it is impossible to tax the labourers at all; since the
tax, being laid out either in labour or in commodities, comes all back
to them; so that taxation has the singular property of falling on
nobody. On the same showing, it would do the labourers no harm to take
from them all they have, and distribute it among the other members of
the community. It would all be “spent Edition: current; Page: [90] among
them,” which on this theory comes to the same thing. The error is
produced by not looking directly at the realities of the phenomena, but
attending only to the outward mechanism of paying and spending. If we
look at the effects produced not on the money, which merely changes
hands, but on the commodities which are used and consumed, we see that,
in consequence of the income-tax, the classes who pay it do really
diminish their consumption. Exactly so far as they do this, they are the
persons on whom the tax falls. It is defrayed out of what they would
otherwise have used and enjoyed. So far, on the other hand, as the
burthen falls, not on what they would have consumed, but on what they
would have saved to maintain production, or spent in maintaining or
paying unproductive labourers, to that extent the tax forms a deduction
from what would have been used and enjoyed by the labouring classes. But
if the government, as is probably the fact, expends fully as much of the
amount as the tax-payers would have done in the direct employment of
labour, as in hiring sailors, soldiers, and policemen, or in paying off
debt, by which last operation it even increases capital; the labouring
classes not only do not lose any employment by the tax, but may possibly
gain some, and the whole of the tax falls exclusively where it was
intended.

All that portion of the produce of the country which any one, not a
labourer,1 actually and literally consumes for his own use, does not
contribute in the smallest degree to the maintenance of labour. No one
is benefited by mere consumption, except the person who consumes. And a
person cannot both consume his income himself, and make it over to be
consumed by others. Taking away a certain portion by taxation cannot
deprive both him and them of it, but only him or them. To know which is
the sufferer, we must understand whose consumption will have to be
retrenched in consequence: this, whoever it be, is the person on whom
the tax really falls.2

Edition: current; Page: [91]


CHAPTER VI: on circulating and fixed capital

§ 1. To complete our explanations on the subject of capital, it is
necessary to say something of the two species into which it is usually
divided. The distinction is very obvious, and though not named, has been
often adverted to, in the two preceding chapters: but it is now proper
to define it accurately, and to point out a few of its consequences.

Of the capital engaged in the production of any commodity, there is a
part which, after being once used, exists no longer as capital; is no
longer capable of rendering service to production, or at least not the
same service, nor to the same sort of production. Such, for example, is
the portion of capital which consists of materials. The tallow and
alkali of which soap is made, once used in the manufacture, are
destroyed as alkali and tallow; and cannot be employed any further in
the soap manufacture, though in their altered condition, as soap, they
are capable of being used as a material or an instrument in other
branches of manufacture. In the same division must be placed the portion
of capital which is paid as the wages, or consumed as the subsistence,
of labourers. The part of the capital of a cotton-spinner which he pays
away to his work-people, once so paid, exists no longer as his capital,
or as a cotton-spinner's capital: such portion of it as the workmen
consume, no longer exists as capital at all: even if they save any part,
it may now be more properly regarded as a fresh capital, the result of a
second act of accumulation. Capital which in this manner fulfils the
whole of its office in the production in which it is engaged, by a
single use, is called Circulating Capital. The term, which is not very
appropriate, is derived from the circumstance, that this portion of
capital requires to be constantly renewed by the sale of the finished
product, and when renewed is perpetually parted with in buying materials
and paying wages; so that it does its work, not by being kept, but by
changing hands.

Edition: current; Page: [92]
Another large portion of capital, however, consists in instruments of
production, of a more or less permanent character; which produce their
effect not by being parted with, but by being kept; and the efficacy of
which is not exhausted by a single use. To this class belong buildings,
machinery, and all or most things known by the name of implements or
tools. The durability of some of these is considerable, and their
function as productive instruments is prolonged through many repetitions
of the productive operation. In this class must likewise be included
capital sunk (as the expression is) in permanent improvements of land.
So also the capital expended once for all, in the commencement of an
undertaking, to prepare the way for subsequent operations: the expense
of opening a mine, for example: of cutting canals, of making roads or
docks. Other examples might be added, but these are sufficient. Capital
which exists in any of these durable shapes, and the return to which is
spread over a period of corresponding duration, is called Fixed Capital.

Of fixed capital, some kinds require to be occasionally or periodically
renewed. Such are all implements and buildings: they require, at
intervals, partial renewal by means of repairs, and are at last entirely
worn out, and cannot be of any further service as buildings and
implements, but fall back into the class of materials. In other cases,
the capital does not, unless as a consequence of some unusual accident,
require entire renewal: but there is always some outlay needed, either
regularly or at least occasionally, to keep it up. A dock or a canal,
once made, does not require, like a machine, to be made again, unless
purposely destroyed, or unless an earthquake or some similar catastrophe
has filled it up: but regular and frequent outlays are necessary to keep
it in repair. The cost of opening a mine needs not be incurred a second
time; but unless some one goes to the expense of keeping the mine clear
of water, it is soon rendered useless. The most permanent of all kinds
of fixed capital is that employed in giving increased productiveness to
a natural agent, such as land. The draining of marshy or inundated
tracts like the Bedford Level, the reclaiming of land from the sea, or
its protection by embankments, are improvements calculated for
perpetuity; but drains and dykes require frequent repairs. The same
character of perpetuity belongs to the improvement of land by subsoil
draining, which adds so much to the productiveness of the clay soils; or
by permanent manures, that is, by the addition to the soil, not of the
substances which enter into Edition: current; Page: [93] the composition
of vegetables, and which are therefore consumed by vegetation, but of
those which merely alter the relation of the soil to air and water; as
sand and lime on the heavy soils, clay and marl on the light. Even such
works, however, require some, though it may be very little, occasional
outlay to maintain their full effect.

These improvements, however, by the very fact of their deserving that
title, produce an increase of return, which, after defraying all
expenditure necessary for keeping them up, still leaves a surplus. This
surplus forms the return to the capital sunk in the first instance, and
that return does not, as in the case of machinery, terminate by the
wearing out of the machine, but continues for ever. The land, thus
increased in productiveness, bears a value in the market, proportional
to the increase: and hence it is usual to consider the capital which was
invested, or sunk, in making the improvement, as still existing in the
increased value of the land. There must be no mistake, however. The
capital, like all other capital, has been consumed. It was consumed in
maintaining the labourers who executed the improvement, and in the wear
and tear of the tools by which they were assisted. But it was consumed
productively, and has left a permanent result in the improved
productiveness of an appropriated natural agent, the land. We may call
the increased produce the joint result of the land and of a capital
fixed in the land. But as the capital, having in reality been consumed,
cannot be withdrawn, its productiveness is thenceforth indissolubly
blended with that arising from the original qualities of the soil; and
the remuneration for the use of it thenceforth depends, not upon the
laws which govern the returns to labour and capital, but upon those
which govern the recompense for natural agents. What these are, we shall
see hereafter.∗

§ 2. There is a great difference between the effects of circulating and
those of fixed capital, on the amount of the gross produce of the
country. Circulating capital being destroyed as such, or at any rate
finally lost to the owner, by a single use; and the product resulting
from that one use being the only source from which the owner can replace
the capital, or obtain any remuneration for its productive employment;
the product must of course be sufficient for those purposes, or in other
words, the result of a single use must be a reproduction equal to the
whole amount of the circulating capital used, and a profit besides.
This, however, is by no means Edition: current; Page: [94] necessary in
the case of fixed capital. Since machinery, for example, is not wholly
consumed by one use, it is not necessary that it should be wholly
replaced from the product of that use. The machine answers the purpose
of its owner if it brings in, during each interval of time, enough to
cover the expense of repairs, and the deterioration in value which the
machine has sustained during the same time, with a surplus sufficient to
yield the ordinary profit on the entire value of the machine.

From this it follows that all increase of fixed capital, when taking
place at the expense of circulating, must be, at least temporarily,
prejudicial to the interests of the labourers. This is true, not of
machinery alone, but of all improvements by which capital is sunk; that
is, rendered permanently incapable of being applied to the maintenance
and remuneration of labour. Suppose that a person farms his own land,
with a capital of two thousand quarters of corn, employed in maintaining
labourers during one year (for simplicity we omit the consideration of
seed and tools), whose labour produces him annually two thousand four
hundred quarters, being a profit of twenty per cent. This profit we
shall suppose that he annually consumes, carrying on his operations from
year to year on the original capital of two thousand quarters. Let us
now suppose that by the expenditure of half his capital he effects a
permanent improvement of his land, which is executed by half his
labourers, and occupies them for a year, after which he will only
require, for the effectual cultivation of his land, half as many
labourers as before. The remainder of his capital he employs as usual.
In the first year there is no difference in the condition of the
labourers, except that part of them have received the same pay for an
operation on the land, which they previously obtained for ploughing,
sowing, and reaping. At the end of the year, however, the improver has
not, as before, a capital of two thousand quarters of corn. Only one
thousand quarters of his capital have been reproduced in the usual way:
he has now only those thousand quarters and his improvement. He will
employ, in the next and in each following year, only half the number of
labourers, and will divide among them only half the former quantity of
subsistence. The loss will soon be made up to them if the improved land,
with the diminished quantity of labour, produces two thousand four
hundred quarters as before, because so enormous an accession of gain
will probably induce the improver to save a part, add it to his capital,
and become a larger employer of labour. But it is conceivable that this
may not Edition: current; Page: [95] be the case1; for (supposing, as we
may do, that the improvement will last indefinitely, without any outlay
worth mentioning to keep it up) the improver will have gained largely by
his improvement if the land now yields, not two thousand four hundred,
but one thousand five hundred quarters; since this will replace the one
thousand quarters forming his present circulating capital, with a profit
of twenty-five per cent (instead of twenty as before) on the whole
capital, fixed and circulating together. The improvement, therefore, may
be a very profitable one to him, and yet very injurious to the
labourers.

2 The supposition, in the terms in which it has been stated, is purely
ideal; or at most applicable only to such a case as that of the
conversion of arable land into pasture, which, though formerly a
frequent practice, is regarded [1849] by modern agriculturists as the
reverse of an improvement.∗ But this does not affect the substance of
the argument. Suppose that the improvement does not operate in the
manner supposed—does not enable a part of the labour previously employed
on the land to be dispensed with—but only enables the same labour to
raise a greater produce. Suppose, too, that the greater produce, which
by means of the improvement can be raised from the soil with the same
labour, is all wanted, and will find purchasers. The improver will in
that case require the same number of labourers as before, at the same
wages. But where will he find the means of paying them? He has no longer
his original capital of two thousand quarters disposable for the
purpose. One thousand of them are lost and gone—consumed in making the
improvement. If he is to employ as many labourers as before, and pay
them as highly, he must borrow, or obtain from some other source, a
thousand quarters to supply the deficit. But these thousand quarters
already maintained, or were destined to maintain, Edition: current;
Page: [96] an equivalent quantity of labour. They are not a fresh
creation; their destination is only changed from one productive
employment to another; and though the agriculturist has made up the
deficiency in his own circulating capital, the breach in the circulating
capital of the community remains unrepaired.

The argument relied on by most of those who contend that machinery can
never be injurious to the labouring class, is, that by cheapening
production it creates such an increased demand for the commodity, as
enables, ere long, a greater number of persons than ever to find
employment in producing it. This argument does not seem to me to have
the weight commonly ascribed to it. The fact, though too broadly stated,
is, no doubt, often true. The copyists who were thrown out of employment
by the invention of printing, were doubtless soon outnumbered by the
compositors and pressmen who took their place; and the number of
labouring persons now occupied in the cotton manufacture is many times
greater than were so occupied previously to the inventions of Hargreaves
and Arkwright, which shows that besides the enormous fixed capital now
embarked in the manufacture, it also employs a far larger circulating
capital than at any former time. But if this capital was drawn from
other employments; if the funds which took the place of the capital sunk
in costly machinery, were supplied not by any additional saving
consequent on the improvements, but by drafts on the general capital of
the community; what better were the labouring classes for the mere
transfer? In what manner was the loss they sustained by the conversion
of circulating into fixed capital made up to them by a mere shifting of
part of the remainder of the circulating capital from its old
employments to a new one?

All attempts to make out that the labouring classes as a collective body
cannot suffer temporarily by the introduction of machinery, or by the
sinking of capital in permanent improvements, are, I conceive,
necessarily fallacious. That they would suffer in the particular
department of industry to which the change applies, is generally
admitted, and obvious to common sense; but it is often said, that though
employment is withdrawn from labour in one department, an exactly
equivalent employment is opened for it in others, because what the
consumers save in the increased cheapness of one particular article
enables them to augment their consumption of others, thereby increasing
the demand for other kinds of labour. This is plausible, but, as was
shown in the last chapter, involves a fallacy; demand for commodities
being a totally different thing from demand for Edition: current; Page:
[97] labour. It is true, the consumers have now additional means of
buying other things; but this will not create the other things, unless
there is capital to produce them, and the improvement has not set at
liberty any capital, if even it has not absorbed some from other
employments. The supposed increase of production and of employment for
labour in other departments therefore will not take place; and the
increased demand for commodities by some consumers, will be balanced by
a cessation of demand on the part of others, namely, the labourers who
were superseded by the improvement, and who will now be maintained, if
at all, by sharing, either in the way of competition or of charity, in
what was previously consumed by other people.

§ 3. Nevertheless, I do not believe that as things are actually
transacted, improvements in production are often, if ever, injurious,
even temporarily, to the labouring classes in the aggregate. They would
be so if they took place suddenly to a great amount, because much of the
capital sunk must necessarily in that case be provided from funds
already employed as circulating capital. But improvements are always
introduced very gradually, and are seldom or never made by withdrawing
circulating capital from actual production, but are made by the
employment of the annual increase. There are few if any examples of a
great increase of fixed capital, at a time and place where circulating
capital was not rapidly increasing likewise. It is not in poor or
backward countries that great and costly improvements in production are
made. To sink capital in land for a permanent return—to introduce
expensive machinery—are acts involving immediate sacrifice for distant
objects; and indicate, in the first place, tolerably complete security
of property; in the second, considerable activity of industrial
enterprise; and in the third, a high standard of what has been called
the “effective desire of accumulation:” which three things are the
elements of a society rapidly progressive in its amount of capital.
Although, therefore, the labouring classes must suffer, not only if the
increase of fixed capital takes place at the expense of circulating, but
even if it is so large and rapid as to retard that ordinary increase to
which the growth of population has habitually adapted itself; yet, in
point of fact, this is very unlikely to happen, since there is probably
no country whose fixed capital increases in a ratio more than
proportional to its circulating. If the whole of the railways which,
during the speculative madness of 1845, obtained the sanction of
Edition: current; Page: [98] Parliament, had been constructed in the
times fixed for the completion of each, this improbable contingency
would, most likely, have been realized; but this very case has afforded
a striking example of the difficulties which oppose the diversion into
new channels, of any considerable portion of the capital that supplies
the old: difficulties generally much more than sufficient to prevent
enterprises that involve the sinking of capital, from extending
themselves with such rapidity as to impair the sources of the existing
employment for labour.

To these considerations must be added, that even if improvements did for
a time decrease the aggregate produce and the circulating capital of the
community, they would not the less tend in the long run to augment both.
They increase the return to capital; and of this increase the benefit
must necessarily accrue either to the capitalist in greater profits, or
to the customer in diminished prices; affording, in either case, an
augmented fund from which accumulation may be made, while enlarged
profits also hold out an increased inducement to accumulation. In the
case we before selected, in which the immediate result of the
improvement was to diminish the gross produce from two thousand four
hundred quarters to one thousand five hundred, yet the profit of the
capitalist being now five hundred quarters instead of four hundred, the
extra one hundred quarters, if regularly saved, would in a few years
replace the one thousand quarters subtracted from his circulating
capital. Now the extension of business which almost certainly follows in
any department in which an improvement has been made, affords a strong
inducement to those engaged in it to add to their capital; and hence, at
the slow pace at which improvements are usually introduced, a great part
of the capital which the improvement ultimately absorbs, is drawn from
the increased profits and increased savings which it has itself called
forth.

This tendency of improvements in production to cause increased
accumulation, and thereby ultimately to increase the gross produce, even
if temporarily diminishing it, will assume a still more decided
character if it should appear that there are assignable limits both to
the accumulation of capital, and to the increase of production from the
land, which limits once attained, all further increase of produce must
stop; but that improvements in production, whatever may be their other
effects, tend to throw one or both of these limits farther off. Now,
these are truths which will appear in the clearest light in a subsequent
stage of our investigation. It will be seen, that the Edition: current;
Page: [99] quantity of capital which will, or even which can, be
accumulated in any country, and the amount of gross produce which will,
or even which can, be raised, bear a proportion to the state of the arts
of production there existing; and that every improvement, even if for
the time it diminish the circulating capital and the gross produce,
ultimately makes room for a larger amount of both, than could possibly
have existed otherwise. It is this which is the conclusive answer to the
objections against machinery; and the proof thence arising of the
ultimate benefit to labourers of mechanical inventions even in the
existing state of society, will hereafter be seen to be conclusive.∗ But
this does not discharge governments from the obligation of alleviating,
and if possible preventing, the evils of which this source of ultimate
benefit is or may be productive to an existing generation. If the
sinking or fixing of capital in machinery or useful works were ever to
proceed at such a pace as to impair materially the funds for the
maintenance of labour, it would be incumbent on legislators to take
measures for moderating its rapidity: and since improvements which do
not diminish employment on the whole, almost always throw some
particular class of labourers out of it, there cannot be a more
legitimate object of the legislator's care than the interests of those
who are thus sacrificed to the gains of their fellow-citizens and of
posterity.

To return to the theoretical distinction between fixed and circulating
capital. Since all wealth which is destined to be employed for
reproduction comes within the designation of capital, there are parts of
capital which do not agree with the definition of either species of it;
for instance, the stock of finished goods which a manufacturer or dealer
at any time possesses unsold in his warehouses. But this, though capital
as to its destination, is not yet capital in actual exercise: it is not
engaged in production, but has first to be sold or exchanged, that is,
converted into an equivalent value of some other commodities; and
therefore is not yet either fixed or circulating capital; but will
become either one or the other, or be eventually divided between them.
With the proceeds of his finished goods, a manufacturer will partly pay
his work-people, partly replenish his stock of the materials of his
manufacture, and partly provide new buildings and machinery, or repair
the old; but how much will be devoted to one purpose, and how much to
another, depends on the nature of the manufacture, and the requirements
of the particular moment.

Edition: current; Page: [100]
It should be observed further, that the portion of capital consumed in
the form of seed or material, though, unlike fixed capital, it requires
to be at once replaced from the gross produce, stands yet in the same
relation to the employment of labour, as fixed capital does. What is
expended in materials is as much withdrawn from the maintenance and
remuneration of labourers, as what is fixed in machinery; and if capital
now expended in wages were diverted to the providing of materials, the
effect on the labourers would be as prejudicial as if it were converted
into fixed capital. This, however, is a kind of change which seldom, if
ever, takes place. The tendency of improvements in production is always
to economize, never to increase, the expenditure of seed or material for
a given produce; and the interest of the labourers has no detriment to
apprehend from this source.

Edition: current; Page: [101]


CHAPTER VII: on what depends the degree of productiveness of productive agents

§ 1. We have concluded our general survey of the requisites of
production. We have found that they may be reduced to three: labour,
capital, and the materials and motive forces afforded by nature. Of
these, labour and the raw material of the globe are primary and
indispensable. Natural motive powers may be called in to the assistance
of labour, and are a help, but not an essential, of production. The
remaining requisite, capital, is itself the product of labour: its
instrumentality in production is therefore, in reality, that of labour
in an indirect shape. It does not the less require to be specified
separately. A previous application of labour to produce the capital
required for consumption during the work, is no less essential than the
application of labour to the work itself. Of capital, again, one, and by
far the largest, portion, conduces to production only by sustaining in
existence the labour which produces: the remainder, namely the
instruments and materials, contribute to it directly, in the same manner
with natural agents, and the materials supplied by nature.

We now advance to the second great question in political economy; on
what the degree of productiveness of these agents depends. For it is
evident that their productive efficacy varies greatly at various times
and places. With the same population and extent of territory, some
countries have a much lager amount of production than others, and the
same country at one time a greater amount than itself at another.
Compare England either with a similar extent of territory in Russia, or
with an equal population of Russians. Compare England now with England
in the Middle Ages; Sicily, Northern Africa, or Syria at present, with
the same countries at the time of their greatest prosperity, before the
Roman Conquest. Some of the causes which contribute to this difference
of productiveness Edition: current; Page: [102] are obvious; others not
so much so. We proceed to specify several of them.

§ 2. The most evident cause of superior productiveness is what are
called natural advantages. These are various. Fertility of soil is one
of the principal. In this there are great varieties, from the deserts of
Arabia to the alluvial plains of the Ganges, the Niger, and the
Mississippi. A favourable climate is even more important than a rich
soil. There are countries capable of being inhabited, but too cold to be
compatible with agriculture. Their inhabitants cannot pass beyond the
nomadic state; they must live, like the Laplanders, by the domestication
of the rein-deer, if not by hunting or fishing, like the miserable
Esquimaux. There are countries where oats will ripen, but not wheat,
such as the North of Scotland; others where wheat can be grown, but from
excess of moisture and want of sunshine, affords but a precious crop; as
in parts of Ireland. With each advance towards the south, or, in the
European temperate region, towards the east, some new branch of
agriculture becomes first possible, then advantageous; the vine, maize,
silk, figs, olives, rice, dates, successively present themselves, until
we come to the sugar, coffee, cotton, spices, &c. of climates which also
afford, of the more common agricultural products, and with only a slight
degree of cultivation, two or even three harvests in a year. Nor is it
in agriculture alone that differences of climate are important. Their
influence is felt in many other branches of production: in the
durability of all work which is exposed to the air; of buildings, for
example. If the temples of Karnac and Luxor had not been injured by men,
they might have subsisted in their original perfection almost for ever,
for the inscriptions on some of them, though anterior to all authentic
history, are fresher than is in our climate an inscription fifty years
old: while at St. Petersburg, the most massive works, solidly executed
in granite hardly a generation ago, are already, as travellers tell us,
almost in a state to require reconstruction, from alternate exposure to
summer heat and intense frost. The superiority of the woven fabrics of
Southern Europe over those of England in the richness and clearness of
many of their colours, is ascribed to the superior quality of the
atmosphere, for which neither the knowledge of chemists nor the skill of
dyers has been able to provide, in our hazy and damp climate, a complete
equivalent.

Another part of the influence of climate consists in lessening the
physical requirements of the producers. In hot regions, Edition:
current; Page: [103] mankind can exist in comfort with less perfect
housing, less clothing; fuel, that absolute necessary of life in cold
climates, they can almost dispense with, except for industrial uses.
They also require less aliment; as experience had proved, long before
theory had accounted for it by ascertaining that most of what we consume
as food is not required for the actual nutrition of the organs, but for
keeping up the animal heat, and for supplying the necessary stimulus to
the vital functions, which in hot climates is almost sufficiently
supplied by air and sunshine. Much, therefore, of the labour elsewhere
expended to procure the mere necessaries of life, not being required,
more remains disposable for its higher uses and its enjoyments; if the
character of the inhabitants does not rather induce them to use up these
advantages in over-population, or in the indulgence of repose.

Among natural advantages, besides soil and climate, must be mentioned
abundance of mineral productions, in convenient situations, and capable
of being worked with moderate labour. Such are the coal-fields of Great
Britain, which do so much to compensate its inhabitants for the
disadvantages of climate; and the scarcely inferior resource possessed
by this country and the United States, in a copious supply of an easily
reduced iron ore, at no great depth below the earth's surface, and in
close proximity to coal deposits available for working it. In mountain
and hill districts, the abundance of natural water-power makes
considerable amends for the usually inferior fertility of those regions.
But perhaps a greater advantage than all these is a maritime situation,
especially when accompanied with good natural harbours; and, next to it,
great navigable rivers. These advantages consist indeed wholly in saving
of cost of carriage. But few who have not considered the subject, have
any adequate notion how great an extent of economical advantage this
comprises; nor, without having considered the influence exercised on
production by exchanges, and by what is called the division of labour,
can it be fully estimated. So important is it, that it often does more
than counterbalance sterility of soil, and almost every other natural
inferiority; especially in that early stage of industry in which labour
and science have not yet provided artificial means of communication
capable of rivalling the natural. In the ancient world, and in the
Middle Ages, the most prosperous communities were not those which had
the largest territory, or the most fertile soil, but rather those which
had been forced by natural sterility to make the utmost use of a
convenient maritime situation; Edition: current; Page: [104] as Athens,
Tyre, Marseilles, Venice, the free cities on the Baltic, and the like.

§ 3. So much for natural advantages; the value of which, caeteris
paribus, is too obvious to be ever underrated. But experience testifies
that natural advantages scarcely ever do for a community, no more than
fortune and station do for an individual, anything like what it lies in
their nature, or in their capacity, to do. Neither now nor in former
ages have the nations possessing the best climate and soil, been either
the richest or the most powerful; but (in so far as regards the mass of
the people) generally among the poorest, though, in the midst of
poverty, probably on the whole the most enjoying. Human life in those
countries can be supported on so little, that the poor seldom suffer
from anxiety, and in climates in which mere existence is a pleasure, the
luxury which they prefer is that of repose. Energy, at the call of
passion, they possess in abundance, but not that which is manifested in
sustained and persevering labour: and as they seldom concern themselves
enough about remote objects to establish good political institutions,
the incentives to industry are further weakened by imperfect protection
of its fruits. Successful production, like most other kinds of success,
depends more on the qualities of the human agents, than on the
circumstances in which they work: and it is difficulties, not
facilities, that nourish bodily and mental energy. accordingly the
tribes of mankind who have overrun and conquered others, and compelled
them to labour for their benefit, have been mostly reared amidst
hardship. They have either been bred in the forests of northern
climates, or the deficiency of natural hardships has been supplied, as
among the Greeks and Romans, by the artificial ones of a rigid military
discipline. From the time when the circumstances of modern society
permitted the discontinuance of that discipline, the South has no longer
produced conquering nations; military vigour, as well as speculative
thought and industrial energy, have all had their principal seats in the
less favoured North.

As the second, therefore, of the causes of superior productiveness, we
may rank the greater energy of labour. By this is not to be understood
occasional, but regular and habitual energy. No one undergoes, without
murmuring, a greater amount of occasional fatigue and hardship, or has
his bodily powers, and such faculties of mind as he possesses, kept
longer at their utmost stretch, than the North American Indian; yet his
is indolence proverbial, whenever Edition: current; Page: [105] he has a
brief respite from the pressure of present wants. Individuals, or
nations, do not differ so much in the efforts they are able and willing
to make under strong immediate incentives, as in their capacity of
present exertion for a distant object; and in the thoroughness of their
application to work on ordinary occasions.1 Some amount of these
qualities is a necessary condition of any great improvement among
mankind. To civilize a savage, he must be inspired with new wants and
desires, even if not of a very elevated kind, provided that their
gratification can be a motive to steady and regular bodily and mental
exertion. If the negroes of Jamaica and Demerara, after their
emancipation, had contented themselves, as it was predicted they would
do, with the necessaries of life, and abandoned all labour beyond the
little which in a tropical climate, with a thin population and abundance
of the richest land, is sufficient to support existence, they would have
sunk into a condition more barbarous, though less unhappy, than their
previous state of slavery. Edition: current; Page: [106] The motive
which was most relied on for inducing them to work was their love of
fine clothes and personal ornaments. No one will stand up for this taste
as worthy of being cultivated, and in most societies its indulgence
tends to impoverish rather than to enrich; but in the state of mind of
the negroes it might have been the only incentive that could make them
voluntarily undergo systematic labour, and so acquire or maintain habits
of voluntary industry which may be converted to more valuable ends. In
England, it is not the desire of wealth that needs to be taught, but the
use of wealth, and appreciation of the objects of desire which wealth
cannot purchase, or for attaining which it is not required. Every real
improvement in the character of the English, whether it consist in
giving them higher aspirations, or only a juster estimate of the value
of their present objects of desire, must necessarily moderate the ardour
of their devotion to the pursuit of wealth. There is no need, however,
that it should diminish the strenuous and business-like application to
the matter at hand, which is found in the best English workmen, and is
their most valuable quality.1

Edition: current; Page: [107]
The desirable medium is one which mankind have not often known how to
hit: when they labour, to do it with all their might, and especially
with all their mind; but to devote to labour, for mere pecuniary gain,
fewer hours in the day, fewer days in the year, and fewer years of life.

§ 4. The third element which determines the productiveness of the labour
of a community, is the skill and knowledge therein existing; whether it
be the skill and knowledge of the labourers themselves, or of those who
direct their labour. No illustration is requisite to show how the
efficacy of industry is promoted by the manual dexterity of those who
perform mere routine processes; by the intelligence of those engaged in
operations in which the mind has a considerable part; and by the amount
of knowledge of natural powers and of the properties of objects, which
is turned to the purposes of industry. That the productiveness of the
labour of a people is limited by their knowledge of the arts of life, is
self-evident; and that any progress in those arts, any improved
application of the objects or powers of nature to industrial uses,
enables the same quantity and intensity of labour to raise a greater
produce.

One principal department of these improvements consists in the invention
and use of tools and machinery. The manner in which these serve to
increase production and to economize labour, needs not be specially
detailed in a work like the present: it will be found explained and
exemplified, in a manner at once scientific and popular, in Mr.
Babbage's well-known Economy of Machinery and Manufactures. An entire
chapter of Mr. Babbage's book is composed of instances of the efficacy
of machinery in “exerting forces too great for human power, and
executing operations too delicate for human touch.” But to find examples
of work which could not be performed at all by unassisted labour, we
need not go so far. Without pumps, worked by steam-engines or otherwise,
the water which collects in mines could not in many situations be got
rid of at all, and the mines, after being worked to a little depth,
Edition: current; Page: [108] must be abandoned: without ships or boats
the sea could never have been crossed; without tools of some sort, trees
could not be cut down, nor rocks excavated; a plough, or at least a hoe,
is necessary to any tillage of the ground. Very simple and rude
instruments, however, are sufficient to render literally possible most
works hitherto executed by mankind; and subsequent inventions have
chiefly served to enable the work to be performed in greater perfection,
and, above all, with a greatly diminished quantity of labour: the labour
thus saved becoming disposable for other employments.

The use of machinery is far from being the only mode in which the
effects of knowledge in aiding production are exemplified. In
agriculture and horticulture, machinery is only now [1852] beginning to
show that it can do anything of importance, beyond the invention and
progressive improvement of the plough and a few other simple
instruments. The greatest agricultural inventions have consisted in the
direct application of more judicious processes to the land itself, and
to the plants growing on it; such as rotation of crops, to avoid the
necessity of leaving the land for one season in every two or three;
improved manures, to renovate its fertility when exhausted by cropping;
ploughing and draining the subsoil as well as the surface; conversion of
bogs and marshes into cultivable land; such modes of pruning, and of
training and propping up plants and trees, as experience has shown to
deserve the preference; in the case of the more expensive cultures,
planting the roots or seeds further apart, and more completely
pulverizing the soil in which they are placed, &c. In manufactures and
commerce, some of the most important improvements consist in economizing
time; in making the return follow more speedily upon the labour and
outlay. There are others of which the advantage consists in economy of
material.

§ 5. But the effects of the increased knowledge of a community in
increasing its wealth, need the less illustration as they have become
familiar to the most uneducated, from such conspicuous instances as
railways and steam-ships. A thing not yet so well understood and
recognised, is the economical value of the general diffusion of
intelligence among the people. The number of persons fitted to direct
and superintend any industrial enterprise, or even to execute any
process which cannot be reduced almost to an affair of memory and
routine, is always far short of the demand; as is evident from the
enormous difference between the salaries paid to such persons, and the
wages of ordinary labour. The deficiency of practical Edition: current;
Page: [109] good sense, which renders the majority of the labouring
class such bad calculators—which makes, for instance, their domestic
economy so improvident, lax, and irregular—must disqualify them for any
but a low grade of intelligent labour, and render their industry far
less productive than with equal energy it otherwise might be. The
importance, even in this limited aspect, of popular education, is well
worthy of the attention of politicians, especially in England; since
competent observers, accustomed to employ labourers of various nations,
testify that in the workmen of other countries they often find great
intelligence wholly apart from instruction, but that if an English
labourer is anything but a hewer of wood and a drawer of water, he is
indebted for it to education, which in his case is almost always
self-education. Mr. Escher, of Zurich (an engineer and cotton
manufacturer employing nearly two thousand working men of many different
nations), in his evidence annexed to the Report of the Poor Law
Commissioners, in 1840, on the training of pauper children, gives a
character of English as contrasted with Continental workmen, which all
persons of similar experience will, I believe, confirm.

“The Italians' quickness of perception is shown in rapidly comprehending
any new descriptions of labour put into their hands, in a power of
quickly comprehending the meaning of their employer, of adapting
themselves to new circumstances, much beyond what any other classes
have. The French workmen have the like natural characteristics, only in
a somewhat lower degree. The English, Swiss, German, and Dutch workmen,
we find, have all much slower natural comprehension. As workmen only,
the preference is undoubtedly due to the English; because, as we find
them, they are all trained to special branches, on which they have had
comparatively superior training, and have concentrated all their
thoughts. As men of business or of general usefulness, and as men with
whom an employer would best like to be surrounded, I should, however,
decidedly prefer the Saxons and the Swiss, but more especially the
Saxons, because they have had a very careful general education, which
has extended their capacities beyond any special employment, and
rendered them fit to take up, after a short preparation, any employment
to which they may be called. If I have an English workman engaged in the
erection of a steam-engine, he will understand that, and nothing else;
and for other circumstances or other branches of mechanics, however
closely allied, he will be comparatively helpless to adapt himself to
all the circumstances that may arise, to make arrangements for them, and
give sound advice Edition: current; Page: [110] or write clear
statements and letters on his work in the various related branches of
mechanics.”

On the connexion between mental cultivation and moral trustworthiness in
the labouring class, the same witness says, “The better educated
workmen, we find, are distinguished by superior moral habits in every
respect. In the first place, they are entirely sober; they are discreet
in their enjoyments, which are of a more rational and refined kind; they
have a taste for much better society, which they approach respectfully,
and consequently find much readier admittance to it; they cultivate
music; they read; they enjoy the pleasures of scenery, and make parties
for excursions into the country; they are economical, and their economy
extends beyond their own purse to the stock of their master; they are,
consequently, honest and trustworthy.” And in answer to a question
respecting the English workmen, “Whilst in respect to the work to which
they have been specially trained they are the most skilful, they are in
conduct the most disorderly, debauched, and unruly, and least
respectable and trustworthy of any nation whatsoever whom we have
employed; and in saying this, I express the experience of every
manufacturer on the Continent to whom I have spoken, and especially of
the English manufacturers, who make the loudest complaints. These
characteristics of depravity do not apply to the English workmen who
have received an education, but attach to the others in the degree in
which they are in want of it. When the uneducated English workmen are
released from the bonds of iron discipline in which they have been
restrained by their employers in England, and are treated with the
urbanity and friendly feeling which the more educated workmen on the
Continent expect and receive from their employers, they, the English
workmen, completely lose their balance: they do not understand their
position, and after a certain time become totally unmanageable and
useless.”∗ This result of observation is borne out by experience in
England itself. As soon as any idea of equality enters the mind of an
uneducated English working man, his head is turned by it.1 When he
ceases to be servile, he becomes insolent.

The moral qualities of the labourers are fully as important to the
efficiency and worth of their labour, as the intellectual. Independently
of the effects of intemperance upon their bodily and Edition: current;
Page: [111] mental faculties, and of flighty, unsteady habits upon the
energy and continuity of their work (points so easily understood as not
to require being insisted upon), it is well worthy of meditation, how
much of the aggregate effect of their labour depends on their
trustworthiness. All the labour now expended in watching that they
fulfil their engagement, or in verifying that they have fulfilled it, is
so much withdrawn from the real business of production, to be devoted to
a subsidiary function rendered needful not by the necessity of things,
but by the dishonesty of men. Nor are the greatest outward precautions
more than very imperfectly efficacious, where, as is now almost
invariably the case with hired labourers, the slightest relaxation of
vigilance is an opportunity eagerly seized for eluding performance of
their contract.1 The advantage to mankind of being able to trust one
another, penetrates into every crevice and cranny of human life: the
economical is perhaps the smallest part of it, yet even this is
incalculable. To consider only the most obvious part of the waste of
wealth occasioned to society by human improbity; there is in all rich
communities a predatory population, who live by pillaging or
overreaching other people; their numbers cannot be authentically
ascertained, but on the lowest estimate, in a country like England, it
is very large. The support of these persons is a direct burthen on the
national industry. The police, and the whole apparatus of punishment,
and of criminal and partly of civil justice, are a second burthen
rendered necessarity by the first. The exorbitantly-paid profession of
lawyers, so far as their work is not created by defects in the law, of
their own contriving, are required and supported principally by the
dishonesty of mankind. As the standard of integrity in a community rises
higher, all these expenses become less. But this positive saving would
be far outweighed by the immense increase in the produce of all kinds of
labour, and saving of time and expenditure, which would be obtained if
the labourers honestly performed what they undertake; and by the
increased spirit, the feeling of power and confidence, with which works
of all sorts would be planned and carried on by those who felt that all
whose aid was required would do their part faithfully according to their
contracts. Conjoint action is possible just in proportion as human
beings can rely on each other. There are countries in Europe, of
first-rate industrial Edition: current; Page: [112] capabilities, where
the most serious impediment to conducting business concerns on a large
scale, is the rarity of persons who are supposed fit to be trusted with
the receipt and expenditure of large sums of money. There are nations
whose commodities are looked shily upon by merchants, because they
cannot depend on finding the quality of the article conformable to that
of the sample. Such short-sighted frauds are far from unexampled in
English exports. Every one has heard of “devil's dust:” and among other
instances given by Mr. Babbage, is one in which a branch of export trade
was for a long time actually stopped by the forgeries and frauds which
had occurred in it. On the other hand, the substantial advantage derived
in business transactions from proved trustworthiness, is not less
remarkably exemplified in the same work. “At one of our largest towns,
sales and purchases on a very extensive scale are made daily in the
course of business without any of the parties ever exchanging a written
document.” Spread over a year's transactions, how great a return, in
saving of time, trouble, and expense, is brought in to the producers and
dealers of such a town from their own integrity. “The influence of
established character in producing confidence operated in a very
remarkable manner at the time of the exclusion of British manufactures
from the Continent during the last war. One of our largest
establishments had been in the habit of doing extensive business with a
house in the centre of Germany; but on the closing of the Continental
ports against our manufactures, heavy penalties were inflicted on all
those who contravened the Berlin and Milan decrees. The English
manufacturer continued, nevertheless, to receive orders, with directions
how to consign them, and appointments for the time and mode of payment,
in letters, the handwriting of which was known to him, but which were
never signed except by the Christian name of one of the firm, and even
in some instances they were without any signature at all. These orders
were executed, and in no instance was there the least irregularity in
the payments.”∗

Edition: current; Page: [113]
§ 6. Among the secondary causes which determine the productiveness of
productive agents, the most important is Security. By security I mean
the completeness of the protection which society affords to its members.
This consists of protection by the government, and protection against
the government. The latter is the more important. Where a person known
to possess anything worth taking away, can expect nothing but to have it
torn from him, with every circumstance of tyrannical violence, by the
agents of a rapacious government, it is not likely that many will exert
themselves to produce much more than necessaries. This is the
acknowledged explanation of the poverty of many fertile tracts of Asia,
which were once prosperous and populous. From this to the degree of
security enjoyed in the best governed parts of Europe, there are
numerous gradations. In many provinces of France, before the Revolution,
a vicious system of taxation on the land, and still more the absence of
redress against the arbitrary exactions which were made under colour of
the taxes, rendered it the interest of every cultivator to appear poor,
and therefore to cultivate badly. The only insecurity which is
altogether paralysing Edition: current; Page: [114] to the active
energies of producers, is that arising from the government, or from
persons invested with its authority. Against all other depredators there
is a hope of defending oneself. Greece and the Greek colonies in the
ancient world, Flanders and Italy in the Middle Ages, by no means
enjoyed what any one with modern ideas would call security: the state of
society was most unsettled and turbulent; person and property were
exposed to a thousand dangers. But they were free countries; they were
in general neither arbitrarily oppressed, nor systematically plundered
by their governments. Against other enemies the individual energy which
their institutions called forth, enabled them to make successful
resistance: their labour, therefore, was eminently productive, and their
riches, while they remained free, were constantly on the increase. The
Roman despotism, putting an end to wars and internal conflicts
throughout the empire, relieved the subject population from much of the
former insecurity: but because it left them under the grinding yoke of
its own rapacity, they became enervated and impoverished, until they
were an easy prey to barbarous but free invaders. They would neither
fight nor labour, because they were no longer suffered to enjoy that for
which they fought and laboured.

Edition: current; Page: [115] Much of the security of person and
property in modern nations is the effect of manners and opinion rather
than of law. There are, or lately were, countries in Europe where the
monarch was nominally absolute, but where, from the restraints imposed
by established usage, no subject felt practically in the smallest danger
of having his possessions arbitrarily seized or a contribution levied on
them by the government. There must, however, be in such governments much
petty plunder and other tyranny by subordinate agents, for which redress
is not obtained, owing to the want of publicity which is the ordinary
character of absolute governments. In England the people are tolerably
well protected, both by institutions and manners, against the agents of
government; but, for the security they enjoy against other evil-doers,
they are [1848] very little indebted to their institutions. The laws
cannot be said to afford protection to property, when they afford it
only at such a cost as renders submission to injury in general the
better calculation. The security of property in England is owing (except
as regards open violence) to opinion, and the fear of exposure, much
more than to the direct operation of the law and the courts of justice.

Independently of all imperfection in the bulwarks which society
purposely throws round what it recognises as property, there are various
other modes in which defective institutions impede the employment of the
productive resources of a country to the best advantage. We shall have
occasion for noticing many of these in the progress of our subject. It
is sufficient here to remark, that the efficiency of industry may be
expected to be great, in proportion as the fruits of industry are
insured to the person exerting it: and that all social arrangements are
conducive to useful exertion, according as they provide that the reward
of every one for his labour shall be proportioned as much as possible to
the benefit which it produces. All laws or usages which favour one class
or sort of persons to the disadvantage of others; which chain up the
efforts of any part of the community in pursuit of their own good, or
stand between those efforts and their natural fruits—are (independently
of all other grounds of condemnation) violations of the fundamental
principles of economical policy; tending to make the aggregate
productive powers of the community productive in a less degree than they
would otherwise be.

Edition: current; Page: [116]


CHAPTER VIII: of co-operation, or the combination of labour

§ 1. In the enumeration of the circumstances which promote the
productiveness of labour, we have left one untouched, which, because of
its importance, and of the many topics of discussion which it involves,
requires to be treated apart. This is, co-operation, or the combined
action of numbers. Of this great aid to production, a single department,
known by the name of Division of Labour, has engaged a large share of
the attention of political economists; most deservedly indeed, but to
the exclusion of other cases and exemplifications of the same
comprehensive law. Mr. Wakefield was, I believe, the first to point out,
that a part of the subject had, with injurious effect, been mistaken for
the whole; that a more fundamental principle lies beneath that of the
division of labour, and comprehends it.

Co-operation, he observes,∗ is “of two distinct kinds: first, such
co-operation as takes place when several persons help each other in the
same employment; secondly, such co-operation as takes place when several
persons help each other in different employments. These may be termed
Simple Co-operation and Complex Co-operation.

“The advantage of simple co-operation is illustrated by the case of two
greyhounds running together, which, it is said, will kill more hares
than four greyhounds running separately. In a vast number of simple
operations performed by human exertion, it is quite obvious that two men
working together will do more than four, or four times four men, each of
whom should work alone. In the lifting of heavy weights, for example, in
the felling of trees, in the sawing of timber, in the gathering of much
hay or corn during a short period of fine weather, in draining a large
extent of land during the short season when such a work may be properly
conducted, Edition: current; Page: [117] in the pulling of ropes on
board ship, in the rowing of large boats, in some mining operations, in
the erection of a scaffolding for building, and in the breaking of
stones for the repair of a road, so that the whole of the road shall
always be kept in good order: in all these simple operations, and
thousands more, it is absolutely necessary that many persons should work
together, at the same time, in the same place, and in the same way. The
savages of New Holland never help each other, even in the most simple
operations; and their condition is hardly superior, in some respects it
is inferior, to that of the wild animals which they now and then catch.
Let any one imagine that the labourers of England should suddenly desist
from helping each other in simple employments, and he will see at once
the prodigious advantages of simple co-operation. In a countless number
of employments, the produce of labour is, up to a certain point, in
proportion to such mutual assistance amongst the workmen. This is the
first step in social improvement.” The second is, when “one body of men
having combined their labour to raise more food than they require,
another body of men are induced to combine their labour for the purpose
of producing more clothes than they require, and with those surplus
clothes buying the surplus food of the other body of labourers; while,
if both bodies together have produced more food and clothes than they
both require, both bodies obtain, by means of exchange, a proper capital
for setting more labourers to work in their respective occupations.” To
simple co-operation is thus superadded what Mr. Wakefield terms Complex
Co-operation. The one is the combination of several labourers to help
each other in the same set of operations; the other is the combination
of several labourers to help one another by a division of operations.

There is “an important distinction between simple and complex
co-operation. Of the former, one is always conscious at the time of
practising it: it is obvious to the most ignorant and vulgar eye. Of the
latter, but a very few of the vast numbers who practise it are in any
degree conscious. The cause of this distinction is easily seen. When
several men are employed in lifting the same weight, or pulling the same
rope, at the same time, and in the same place, there can be no sort of
doubt that they co-operate with each other; the fact is impressed on the
mind by the mere sense of sight; but when several men, or bodies of men,
are employed at different times and places, and in different pursuits,
their co-operation with each other, though it may be quite as certain,
is not so readily perceived Edition: current; Page: [118] as in the
other case: in order to perceive it, a complex operation of the mind is
required.”

In the present state of society the breeding and feeding of sheep is the
occupation of one set of people, dressing the wool to prepare it for the
spinner is that of another, spinning it into thread of a third, weaving
the thread into broadcloth of a fourth, dyeing the cloth of a fifth,
making it into a coat of a sixth, without counting the multitude of
carriers, merchants, factors, and retailers, put in requisition at the
successive stages of this progress. All these persons, without knowledge
of one another or previous understanding, co-operate in the production
of the ultimate result, a coat. But these are far from being all who
co-operate in it; for each of these persons requires food, and many
other articles of consumption, and unless he could have relied that
other people would produce these for him, he could not have devoted his
whole time to one step in the succession of operations which produces
one single commodity, a coat. Every person who took part in producing
food or erecting houses for this series of producers, has, however
unconsciously on his part, combined his labour with theirs. It is by a
real, though unexpressed, concert, “that the body who raise more food
than they want, can exchange with the body who raise more clothes than
they want; and if the two bodies were separated, either by distance or
disinclination—unless the two bodies should virtually form themselves
into one, for the common object of raising enough food and clothes for
the whole—they could not divide into two distinct parts the whole
operation of producing a sufficient quantity of food and clothes.”

§ 2. The influence exercised on production by the separation of
employments, is more fundamental than, from the mode in which the
subject is usually treated, a reader might be induced to suppose. It is
not merely that when the production of different things becomes the sole
or principal occupation of different persons, a much greater quantity of
each kind of article is produced. The truth is much beyond this. Without
some separation of employments, very few things would be produced at
all.

Suppose a set of persons, or a number of families, all employed
precisely in the same manner; each family settled on a piece of its own
land, on which it grows by its labour the food required for its own
sustenance, and as there are no persons to buy any surplus produce where
all are producers, each family has to produce within Edition: current;
Page: [119] itself whatever other articles it consumes. In such
circumstances, if the soil was tolerably fertile, and population did not
tread too closely on the heels of subsistence, there would be, no doubt,
some kind of domestic manufactures; clothing for the family might
perhaps be spun and woven within it, by the labour probably of the women
(a first step in the separation of employments); and a dwelling of some
sort would be erected and kept in repair by their united labour. But
beyond simple food (precarious, too, from the variations of the
seasons), coarse clothing, and very imperfect lodging, it would be
scarcely possible that the family should produce anything more. They
would, in general, require their utmost exertions to accomplish so much.
Their power even of extracting food from the soil would be kept within
narrow limits by the quality of their tools, which would necessarily be
of the most wretched description. To do almost anything in the way of
producing for themselves articles of convenience or luxury, would
require too much time, and, in many cases, their presence in a different
place. Very few kinds of industry, therefore, would exist; and that
which did exist, namely the production of necessaries, would be
extremely inefficient, not solely from imperfect implements, but
because, when the ground and the domestic industry fed by it had been
made to supply the necessaries of a single family in tolerable
abundance, there would be little motive, while the numbers of the family
remained the same, to make either the land or the labour produce more.

But suppose an event to occur, which would amount to a revolution in the
circumstances of this little settlement. Suppose that a company of
artificers, provided with tools, and with food sufficient to maintain
them for a year, arrive in the country and establish themselves in the
midst of the population. These new settlers occupy themselves in
producing articles of use or ornament adapted to the taste of a simple
people; and before their food is exhausted they have produced these in
considerable quantity, and are ready to exchange them for more food. The
economical position of the landed population is now most materially
altered. They have an opportunity given them of acquiring comforts and
luxuries. Things which, while they depended solely on their own labour,
they never could have obtained, because they could not have produced,
are now accessible to them if they can succeed in producing an
additional quantity of food and necessaries. They are thus incited to
increase the productiveness of their industry. Among the conveniences
for the first time made accessible to them, better tools are probably
Edition: current; Page: [120] one: and apart from this, they have a
motive to labour more assiduously, and to adopt contrivances for making
their labour more effectual. By these means they will generally succeed
in compelling their land to produce, not only food for themselves, but a
surplus for the new comers, wherewith to buy from them the products of
their industry. The new settlers constitute what is called a market for
surplus agricultural produce: and their arrival has enriched the
settlement not only by the manufactured article which they produce, but
by the food which would not have been produced unless they had been
there to consume it.

There is no inconsistency between this doctrine, and the proposition we
before maintained, that a market for commodities does not constitute
employment for labour.∗ The labour of the agriculturists was already
provided with employment; they are not indebted to the demand of the new
comers for being able to maintain themselves. What that demand does for
them is, to call their labour into increased vigour and efficiency; to
stimulate them, by new motives, to new exertions. Neither do the new
comers owe their maintenance and employment to the demand of the
agriculturists: with a year's subsistence in store, they could have
settled side by side with the former inhabitants, and produced a similar
scanty stock of food and necessaries. Nevertheless we see of what
supreme importance to the productiveness of the labour of producers, is
the existence of other producers within reach, employed in a different
kind of industry. The power of exchanging the products of one kind of
labour for those of another, is a condition, but for which, there would
almost always be a smaller quantity of labour altogether. When a new
market is opened for any product of industry, and a greater quantity of
the article is consequently produced, the increased production is not
always obtained at the expense of some other product; it is often a new
creation, the result of labour which would otherwise have remained
unexerted; or of assistance rendered to labour by improvements or by
modes of co-operation to which recourse would not have been had if an
inducement had not been offered for raising a larger produce.

§ 3. From these considerations it appears that a country will seldom
have a productive agriculture, unless it has a large town population, or
the only available substitute, a large export trade in agricultural
produce to supply a population elsewhere. I use Edition: current; Page:
[121] the phrase town population for shortness, to imply a population
non-agricultural; which will generally be collected in towns or large
villages, for the sake of combination of labour. The application of this
truth by Mr. Wakefield to the theory of colonization, has excited much
attention, and is doubtless destined to excite much more. It is one of
those great practical discoveries, which, once made, appears so obvious
that the merit of making them seems less than it is. Mr. Wakefield was
the first to point out that the mode of planting new settlements, then
commonly practised—setting down a number of families side by side, each
on its piece of land, all employing themselves in exactly the same
manner,—though in favourable circumstances it may assure to those
families a rude abundance of mere necessaries, can never be other than
unfavourable to great production or rapid growth: and his system
consists of arrangements for securing that every colony shall have from
the first a town population bearing due proportion to its agricultural,
and that the cultivators of the soil shall not be so widely scattered as
to be deprived by distance, of the benefit of that town population as a
market for their produce. The principle on which the scheme is founded,
does not depend on any theory respecting the superior productiveness of
land held in large portions, and cultivated by hired labour. Supposing
it true that land yields the greatest produce when divided into small
properties and cultivated by peasant proprietors, a town population will
be just as necessary to induce those proprietors to raise that larger
produce: and if they were too far from the nearest seat of
nonagricultural industry to use it as a market for disposing of their
surplus, and thereby supplying their other wants, neither that surplus
nor any equivalent for it would, generally speaking, be produced.

It is, above all, the deficiency of town population which limits [1848]
the productiveness of the industry of a country like India. The
agriculture of India is conducted entirely on the system of small
holdings. There is, however, a considerable amount of combination of
labour. The village institutions and customs, which are the real
framework of Indian society, make provision for joint action in the
cases in which it is seen to be necessary; or where they fail to do so,
the government (when tolerably well administered) steps in, and by an
outlay from the revenue, executes by combined labour the tanks,
embankments, and works of irrigation, which are indispensable. The
implements and processes of agriculture are however so wretched, that
the produce of the soil, in spite of great natural fertility and a
Edition: current; Page: [122] climate highly favourable to vegetation,
is miserably small: and the land might be made to yield food in
abundance for many more than the present number of inhabitants, without
departing from the system of small holdings. But to this the stimulus is
wanting, which a large town population, connected with the rural
districts by easy and unexpensive means of communication, would afford.
That town population, again, does not grow up, because the few wants and
unaspiring spirit of the cultivators (joined until lately with great
insecurity of property, from military and fiscal rapacity) prevent them
from attempting to become consumers of town produce. In these
circumstances the best chance of an early development of the productive
resources of India, consists in the rapid1 growth of its export of
agricultural produce (cotton, indigo, sugar, coffee, &c.) to the markets
of Europe. The producers of these articles are consumers of food
supplied by their fellow-agriculturists in India; and the market thus
opened for surplus food will, if accompanied by good government, raise
up by degrees more extended wants and desires, directed either towards
European commodities, or towards things which will require for their
production in India a larger manufacturing population.

§ 4. Thus far of the separation of employments, a form of the
combination of labour without which there cannot be the first rudiments
of industrial civilization. But when this separation is thoroughly
established; when it has become the general practice for each producer
to supply many others with one commodity, and to be supplied by others
with most of the things which he consumes; reasons not less real, though
less imperative, invite to a further extension of the same principle. It
is found that the productive power of labour is increased by carrying
the separation further and further; by breaking down more and more every
process of industry into parts, so that each labourer shall confine
himself to an ever smaller number of simple operations. And thus, in
time, arise those remarkable cases of what is called the division of
labour, with which all readers on subjects of this nature are familiar.
Adam Smith's illustration from pin-making, though so well known, is so
much to the point, that I will venture once more to transcribe it. “The
business of making a pin is divided into about eighteen distinct
operations. One man draws out the wire, another straights it, a third
cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving
Edition: current; Page: [123] the head; to make the head requires two or
three distinct operations; to put it on, is a peculiar business; to
whiten the pins is another; it is even a trade by itself to put them
into the paper.... I have seen a small manufactory where ten men only
were employed, and where some of them, consequently, performed two or
three distinct operations. But though they were very poor, and therefore
but indifferently accommodated with the necessary machinery, they could,
when they exerted themselves, make among them about twelve pounds of
pins in a day. There are in a pound upwards of four thousand pins of a
middling size. Those ten persons, therefore, could make among them
upwards of forty-eight thousand pins in a day. Each person, therefore,
making a tenth part of forty-eight thousand pins, might be considered as
making four thousand eight hundred pins in a day. But if they had all
wrought separately and independently, and without any of them having
been educated to this peculiar business, they certainly could not each
of them have made twenty, perhaps not one pin in a day.”

M. Say furnishes a still stronger example of the effects of division of
labour—from a not very important branch of industry certainly, the
manufacture of playing cards. “It is said by those engaged in the
business, that each card, that is, a piece of pasteboard of the size of
the hand, before being ready for sale, does not undergo fewer than
seventy operations, every one of which might be the occupation of a
distinct class of workmen. And if there are not seventy classes of
work-people in each card manufactory, it is because the division of
labour is not carried so far as it might be; because the same workman is
charged with two, three, or four distinct operations. The influence of
this distribution of employment is immense. I have seen a card
manufactory where thirty workmen produced daily fifteen thousand five
hundred cards, being above five hundred cards for each labourer; and it
may be presumed that if each of these workmen were obliged to perform
all the operations himself, even supposing him a practised hand, he
would not perhaps complete two cards in a day: and the thirty workmen,
instead of fifteen thousand five hundred cards, would make only sixty.”∗

In watchmaking, as Mr. Babbage observes, “it was stated in evidence
before a Committee of the House of Commons, that there Edition: current;
Page: [124] are a hundred and two distinct branches of this art, to each
of which a boy may be put apprentice; and that he only learns his
master's department, and is unable, after his apprenticeship has
expired, without subsequent instruction, to work at any other branch.
The watch-finisher, whose business it is to put together the scattered
parts, is the only one, out of the hundred and two persons, who can work
in any other department than his own.”∗

5. The causes of the increased efficiency given to labour by the
division of employments are some of them too familiar to require
specification; but it is worth while to attempt a complete enumeration
of them. By Adam Smith they are reduced to three. “First, the increase
of dexterity in every particular workman; secondly, the saving of the
time which is commonly lost in passing from one species of work to
another; and lastly, the invention of a great number of machines which
facilitate and abridge labour, and enable one man to do the work of
many.”

Of these, the increase of dexterity of the individual workman is the
most obvious and universal. It does not follow that because a thing has
been done oftener it will be done better. That depends on the
intelligence of the workman, and on the degree in which his mind works
along with his hands. But it will be done more easily. The organs
themselves acquire greater power: the muscles employed grow stronger by
frequent exercise, the sinews more pliant, and the mental powers more
efficient, and less sensible of fatigue. What can be done easily has at
least a better chance of being done well, and is sure to be done more
expeditiously. What was at first done slowly comes to be done quickly;
what was at first done slowly with accuracy is at last done quickly with
equal accuracy. This is as true of mental operations as of bodily. Even
a child, after much practice, sums up a column of figures with a
rapidity which resembles intuition. The act of speaking any language, of
reading fluently, of playing music at sight, are cases as remarkable as
they are familiar. Among bodily acts, dancing, gymnastic exercises, ease
and brilliancy of execution on a musical instrument, are examples of the
rapidity and facility acquired by repetition. In simpler manual
operations the effect is of course still sooner produced. “The
rapidity,” Adam Smith observes, “with which some of the operations of
certain manufactures are performed, exceeds what the human hand could,
by those who had never seen them, be Edition: current; Page: [125]
supposed capable of acquiring.”∗ This skill is, naturally, attained
after shorter practice, in proportion as the division of labour is more
minute; and will not be attained in the same degree at all, if the
workman has a greater variety of operations to execute than allows of a
sufficiently frequent repetition of each. The advantage is not confined
to the greater efficiency ultimately attained, but includes also the
diminished loss of time, and waste of material, in learning the art. “A
certain quantity of material,” says Mr. Babbage,† “will in all cases be
consumed unprofitably, or spoiled, by every person who learns an art;
and as he applies himself to each new process, he will waste some of the
raw material, or of the partly manufactured commodity. But if each man
commit this waste in acquiring successively every process, the quantity
of waste will be much greater than if each person confine his attention
to one process.” And in general each will be much sooner qualified to
execute his one process, if he be not distracted while learning it, by
the necessity of learning others.

The second advantage enumerated by Adam Smith as arising from the
division of labour, is one on which I cannot help thinking that more
stress is laid by him and others than it deserves. To do full justice to
his opinion, I will quote his own exposition of it. “The advantage which
is gained by saving the time commonly lost in passing from one sort of
work to another, is much greater than we should at first view be apt to
imagine it. It is impossible to pass very quickly from one kind of work
to another, that is carried on in a different place, and with quite
different tools. A country weaver, who cultivates a small farm, must
lose a good deal of time in passing from his loom to the field, and from
the field to his loom. When the two trades can be carried on in the same
workhouse, the loss of time is no doubt much less. It is even in this
case, however, very considerable. A man commonly saunters a little in
turning his hand Edition: current; Page: [126] from one sort of
employment to another. When he first begins the new work, he is seldom
very keen and hearty; his mind, as they say, does not go to it, and for
some time he rather trifles than applies to good purpose. The habit of
sauntering and of indolent careless application, which is naturally, or
rather necessarily acquired by every country workman who is obliged to
change his work and his tools every half hour, and to apply his hand in
twenty different ways almost every day of his life, renders him almost
always slothful and lazy, and incapable of any vigorous application even
on the most pressing occasions.” This is surely a most exaggerated
description of the inefficiency of country labour, where it has any
adequate motive to exertion. Few workmen change their work and their
tools oftener than a gardener; is he usually incapable of vigorous
application? Many of the higher description of artisans have to perform
a great multiplicity of operations with a variety of tools. They do not
execute each of these with the rapidity with which a factory workman
performs his single operation; but they are, except in a merely manual
sense, more skilful labourers, and in all senses whatever more
energetic.

Mr. Babbage, following in the track of Adam Smith, says, “When the human
hand, or the human head, has been for some time occupied in any kind of
work, it cannot instantly change its employment with full effect. The
muscles of the limbs employed have acquired a flexibility during their
exertion, and those not in action a stiffness during rest, which renders
every change slow and unequal in the commencement. Long habit also
produces in the muscles exercised a capacity for enduring fatigue to a
much greater degree than they could support under other circumstances. A
similar result seems to take place in any change of mental exertion; the
attention bestowed on the new subject not being so perfect at first as
it becomes after some exercise. The employment of different tools in the
successive processes, is another cause of the loss of time in changing
from one operation to another. If these tools are simple, and the change
is not frequent, the loss of time is not considerable; but in many
processes of the arts, the tools are of great delicacy, requiring
accurate adjustment every time they are used; and in many cases, the
time employed in adjusting bears a large proportion to that employed in
using the tool. The sliding-rest, the dividing and the drilling engine
are of this kind: and hence, in manufactories of sufficient extent, it
is found to be good economy to keep one machine constantly employed in
one kind of work: Edition: current; Page: [127] one lathe, for example,
having a screw motion to its sliding-rest along the whole length of its
bed, is kept constantly making cylinders; another, having a motion for
equalizing the velocity of the work at the point at which it passes the
tool, is kept for facing surfaces; whilst a third is constantly employed
in cutting wheels.”

I am very far from implying that these different considerations are of
no weight; but I think there are counter-considerations which are
overlooked. If one kind of muscular or mental labour is different from
another, for that very reason it is to some extent a rest from that
other; and if the greatest vigour is not at once obtained in the second
occupation, neither could the first have been indefinitely prolonged
without some relaxation of energy. It is a matter of common experience
that a change of occupation will often afford relief where complete
repose would otherwise be necessary, and that a person can work many
more hours without fatigue at a succession of occupations, than if
confined during the whole time to one. Different occupations employ
different muscles, or different energies of the mind, some of which rest
and are refreshed while others work. Bodily labour itself rests from
mental, and conversely. The variety itself has an invigorating effect on
what, for want of a more philosophical appellation, we must term the
animal spirits; so important to the efficiency of all work not
mechanical, and not unimportant even to that. The comparative weight due
to these considerations is different with different individuals; some
are more fitted than others for persistency in one occupation, and less
fit for change; they require longer to get the steam up (to use a
metaphor now common); the irksomeness of setting to work lasts longer,
and it requires more time to bring their faculties into full play, and
therefore when this is once done, they do not like to leave off, but go
on long without intermission, even to the injury of their health.
Temperament has something to do with these differences. There are people
whose faculties seem by nature to come slowly into action, and to
accomplish little until they have been a long time employed. Others,
again, get into action rapidly, but cannot, without exhaustion, continue
long. In this, however, as in most other things, though natural
differences are something, habit is much more. The habit of passing
rapidly from one occupation to another may be acquired, like other
habits, by early cultivation; and when it is acquired, there is none of
the sauntering which Adam Smith speaks of, after each change; no want of
energy and interest, but the workman comes to each part of his
occupation with a freshness and a spirit which he Edition: current;
Page: [128] does not retain if he persists in any one part (unless in
case of unusual excitement) beyond the length of time to which he is
accustomed. Women are usually (at least in their present social
circumstances) of far greater versatility than men; and the present
topic is an instance among multitudes, how little the ideas and
experience of women have yet counted for, in forming the opinions of
mankind. There are few women who would not reject the idea that work is
made vigorous by being protracted, and is inefficient for some time
after changing to a new thing. Even in this case, habit, I believe, much
more than nature, is the cause of the difference. The occupations of
nine out of every ten men are special, those of nine out of every ten
women general, embracing a multitude of details, each of which requires
very little time. Women are in the constant practice of passing quickly
from one manual, and still more from one mental operation to another,
which therefore rarely costs them either effort or loss of time, while a
man's occupation generally consists in working steadily for a long time
at one thing, or one very limited class of things. But the situations
are sometimes reversed, and with them the characters. Women are not
found less efficient than men for the uniformity of factory work, or
they would not so generally be employed for it; and a man who has
cultivated the habit of turning his hand to many things, far from being
the slothful and lazy person described by Adam Smith, is usually
remarkably lively and active. It is true, however, that change of
occupation may be too frequent even for the most versatile. Incessant
variety is even more fatiguing than perpetual sameness.

The third advantage attributed by Adam Smith to the division of labour,
is, to a certain extent, real. Inventions tending to save labour in a
particular operation, are more likely to occur to any one in proportion
as his thoughts are intensely directed to that occupation, and
continually employed upon it. A person is not so likely to make
practical improvements in one department of things, whose attention is
very much diverted to others. But, in this, much more depends on general
intelligence and habitual activity of mind, than on exclusiveness of
occupation; and if that exclusiveness is carried to a degree
unfavourable to the cultivation of intelligence, there will be more lost
in this kind of advantage, than gained. We may add, that whatever may be
the cause of making inventions, when they are once made, the increased
efficiency of labour is owing to the invention itself, and not to the
division of labour.

The greatest advantage (next to the dexterity of the workmen) Edition:
current; Page: [129] derived from the minute division of labour which
takes place in modern manufacturing industry, is one not mentioned by
Adam Smith, but to which attention has been drawn by Mr. Babbage; the
more economical distribution of labour, by classing the work-people
according to their capacity. Different parts of the same series of
operations require unequal degrees of skill and bodily strength; and
those who have skill enough for the most difficult, or strength enough
for the hardest parts of the labour, are made much more useful by being
employed solely in them; the operations which everybody is capable of,
being left to those who are fit for no others. Production is most
efficient when the precise quantity of skill and strength, which is
required for each part of the process, is employed in it, and no more.
The operation of pin-making requires, it seems, in its different parts,
such different degrees of skill, that the wages earned by the persons
employed vary from fourpence halfpenny a day to six shillings; and if
the workman who is paid at that highest rate had to perform the whole
process, he would be working a part of his time with a waste per day
equivalent to the difference between six shillings and fourpence
halfpenny. Without reference to the loss sustained in quantity of work
done, and supposing even that he could make a pound of pins in the same
time in which ten workmen combining their labour can make ten pounds,
Mr. Babbage computes that they would cost, in making, three times and
three-quarters as much as they now do by means of the division of
labour. In needle-making, he adds, the difference would be still
greater, for in that, the scale of remuneration for different parts of
the process varies from sixpence to twenty shillings a day.

To the advantage which consists in extracting the greatest possible
amount of utility from skill, may be added the analogous one, of
extracting the utmost possible utility from tools. “If any man,” says an
able writer,∗ “had all the tools which many different occupations
require, at least three-fourths of them would constantly be idle and
useless. It were clearly then better, were any society to exist where
each man had all these tools, and alternately carried on each of these
occupations, that the members of it should, if possible, divide them
amongst them, each restricting himself to some particular employment.
The advantages of the change to the whole community, and therefore to
every individual in it, are Edition: current; Page: [130] great. In the
first place, the various implements being in constant employment, yield
a better return for what has been laid out in procuring them. In
consequence their owners can afford to have them of better quality and
more complete construction. The result of both events is, that a larger
provision is made for the future wants of the whole society.”

§ 6. The division of labour, as all writers on the subject have
remarked, is limited by the extent of the market. If, by the separation
of pin-making into ten distinct employments, forty-eight thousand pins
can be made in a day, this separation will only be advisable if the
number of accessible consumers is such as to require, every day,
something like forty-eight thousand pins. If there is only a demand for
twenty-four thousand, the division of labour can only be advantageously
carried to the extent which will every day produce that smaller number.
This, therefore, is a further mode in which an accession of demand for a
commodity tends to increase the efficiency of the labour employed in its
production. The extent of the market may be limited by several causes:
too small a population; the population too scattered and distant to be
easily accessible; deficiency of roads and water carriage; or, finally,
the population too poor, that is, their collective labour too little
effective, to admit of their being large consumers. Indolence, want of
skill, and want of combination of labour, among those who would
otherwise be buyers of a commodity, limit, therefore, the practical
amount of combination of labour among its producers. In an early stage
of civilization, when the demand of any particular locality was
necessarily small, industry only flourished among those who by their
command of the sea-coast or of a navigable river, could have the whole
world, or all that part of it which lay on coasts or navigable rivers,
as a market for their productions. The increase of the general riches of
the world, when accompanied with freedom of commercial intercourse,
improvements in navigation, and inland communication by roads, canals,
or railways, tends to give increased productiveness to the labour of
every nation in particular, by enabling each locality to supply with its
special products so much larger a market, that a great extension of the
division of labour in their production is an ordinary consequence.

The division of labour is also limited, in many cases, by the nature of
the employment. Agriculture, for example, is not Edition: current; Page:
[131] susceptible of so great a division of occupations as many branches
of manufactures, because its different operations cannot possibly be
simultaneous. One man cannot be always ploughing, another sowing, and
another reaping. A workman who only practised one agricultural operation
would be idle eleven months of the year. The same person may perform
them all in succession, and have, in most climates, a considerable
amount of unoccupied time. To execute a great agricultural improvement,
it is often necessary that many labourers should work together; but in
general, except the few whose business is superintendence, they all work
in the same manner. A canal or a railway embankment cannot be made
without a combination of many labourers; but they are all excavators,
except the engineers and a few clerks.1

Edition: current; Page: [132]


CHAPTER IX: of production on a large, and production on a small scale

§ 1. From the importance of combination of labour, it is an obvious
conclusion, that there are many cases in which production is made much
more effective by being conducted on a large scale. Whenever it is
essential to the greatest efficiency of labour that many labourers
should combine, even though only in the way of Simple Co-operation, the
scale of the enterprise must be such as to bring many labourers
together, and the capital must be large enough to maintain them. Still
more needful is this when the nature of the employment allows, and the
extent of the possible market encourages, a considerable division of
labour. The larger the enterprise, the farther the division of labour
may be carried. This is one of the principal causes of large
manufactories. Even when no additional subdivision of the work would
follow an enlargement of the operations, there will be good economy in
enlarging them to the point at which every person to whom it is
convenient to assign a special occupation, will have full employment in
that occupation. This point is well illustrated by Mr. Babbage.∗

“If machines be kept working through the twenty-four hours,” (which is
evidently the only economical mode of employing them,) “it is necessary
that some person shall attend to admit the workmen at the time they
relieve each other; and whether the porter or other person so employed
admit one person or twenty, his rest will be equally disturbed. It will
also be necessary occasionally to adjust or repair the machine; and this
can be done much better by a workman accustomed to machine-making, than
by the person who uses it. Now, since the good performance and the
duration of machines depend, to a very great extent, upon correcting
every shake or imperfection in their parts as soon as they appear, the
Edition: current; Page: [133] prompt attention of a workman resident on
the spot will considerably reduce the expenditure arising from the wear
and tear of the machinery. But in the case of a single lace-frame, or a
single loom, this would be too expensive a plan. Here then arises
another circumstance which tends to enlarge the extent of a factory. It
ought to consist of such a number of machines as shall occupy the whole
time of one workman in keeping them in order: if extended beyond that
number, the same principle of economy would point out the necessity of
doubling or tripling the number of machines, in order to employ the
whole time of two or three skilful workmen.

“When one portion of the workman's labour consists in the exertion of
mere physical force, as in weaving, and in many similar arts, it will
soon occur to the manufacturer, that if that part were executed by a
steam-engine, the same man might, in the case of weaving, attend to two
or more looms at once: and, since we already suppose that one or more
operative engineers have been employed, the number of looms may be so
arranged that their time shall be fully occupied in keeping the
steam-engine and the looms in order.

“Pursuing the same principles, the manufactory becomes gradually so
enlarged, that the expense of lighting during the night amounts to a
considerable sum: and as there are already attached to the establishment
persons who are up all night, and can therefore constantly attend to it,
and also engineers to make and keep in repair any machinery, the
addition of an apparatus for making gas to light the factory leads to a
new extension, at the same time that it contributes, by diminishing the
expense of lighting, and the risk of accidents from fire, to reduce the
cost of manufacturing.

“Long before a factory has reached this extent, it will have been found
necessary to establish an accountant's department, with clerks to pay
the workmen, and to see that they arrive at their stated times; and this
department must be in communication with the agents who purchase the raw
produce, and with those who sell the manufactured article.” It will cost
these clerks and accountants little more time and trouble to pay a large
number of workmen than a small number; to check the accounts of large
transactions, than of small. If the business doubled itself, it would
probably be necessary to increase, but certainly not to double, the
number either of accountants, or of buying and selling agents. Every
increase of business would enable the whole to be carried on with a
proportionately smaller amount of labour.

Edition: current; Page: [134]
As a general rule, the expenses of a business do not increase by any
means proportionally to the quantity of business. Let us take as an
example, a set of operations which we are accustomed to see carried on
by one great establishment, that of the Post Office. Suppose that the
business, let us say only of the London letter-post, instead of being
centralized in a single concern, were divided among five or six
competing companies. Each of these would be obliged to maintain almost
as large an establishment as is now sufficient for the whole. Since each
must arrange for receiving and delivering letters in all parts of the
town, each must send letter-carriers into every street, and almost every
alley, and this too as many times in the day as is now done by the Post
Office, if the service is to be as well performed. Each must have an
office for receiving letters in every neighbourhood, with all subsidiary
arrangements for collecting the letters from the different offices and
re-distributing them. To this must be added the much greater number of
superior officers who would be required to check and control the
subordinates, implying not only a greater cost in salaries for such
responsible officers, but the necessity, perhaps, of being satisfied in
many instances with an inferior standard of qualification, and so
failing in the object.

Whether or not the advantages obtained by operating on a large scale
preponderate in any particular case over the more watchful attention,
and greater regard to minor gains and losses, usually found in small
establishments, can be ascertained, in a state of free competition, by
an unfailing test. Wherever there are large and small establishments in
the same business, that one of the two which in existing circumstances
carries on the production at greatest advantage will be able to
undersell the other. The power of permanently underselling can only,
generally speaking, be derived from increased effectiveness of labour;
and this, when obtained by a more extended division of employment, or by
a classification tending to a better economy of skill, always implies a
greater produce from the same labour, and not merely the same produce
from less labour: it increases not the surplus only, but the gross
produce of industry. If an increased quantity of the particular article
is not required, and part of the labourers in consequence lose their
employment, the capital which maintained and employed them is also set
at liberty; and the general produce of the country is increased by some
other application of their labour.

Edition: current; Page: [135] Another of the causes of large
manufactories, however, is the introduction of processes requiring
expensive machinery. Expensive machinery supposes a large capital; and
is not resorted to except with the intention of producing, and the hope
of selling, as much of the article as comes up to the full powers of the
machine. For both these reasons, wherever costly machinery is used, the
large system of production is inevitable. But the power of underselling
is not in this case so unerring a test as in the former, of the
beneficial effect on the total production of the community. The power of
underselling does not depend on the absolute increase of produce, but on
its bearing an increased proportion to the expenses; which, as was shown
in a former chapter,∗ it may do, consistently with even a diminution of
the gross annual produce. By the adoption of machinery, a circulating
capital, which was perpetually consumed and reproduced, has been
converted into a fixed capital, requiring only a small annual expense to
keep it up: and a much smaller produce will suffice for merely covering
that expense, and replacing the remaining circulating capital of the
producer. The machinery therefore might answer perfectly well to the
manufacturer, and enable him to undersell his competitors, though the
effect on the production of the country might be not an increase but a
diminution. It is true, the article will be sold cheaper, and therefore,
of that single article, there will probably be not a smaller, but a
greater quantity sold; since the loss to the community collectively has
fallen upon the work-people, and they are not the principal customers,
if customers at all, of most branches of manufacture. But though that
particular branch of industry may extend itself, it will be by
replenishing its diminished circulating capital from that of the
community generally; and if the labourers employed in that department
escape loss of employment, it is because the loss will spread itself
over the labouring people at large. If any of them are reduced to the
condition of unproductive labourers, supported by voluntary or legal
charity, the gross produce of the country is to that extent permanently
diminished, until the ordinary progress of accumulation makes it up; but
if the condition of the labouring classes enables them to bear a
temporary reduction of wages, and the superseded labourers become
absorbed in other employments, their labour is still productive, and the
breach in the gross produce of the community is repaired, though not the
detriment to the labourers. I have restated this exposition, which has
already been made in a Edition: current; Page: [136] former place, to
impress more strongly the truth, that a mode of production does not of
necessity increase the productive effect of the collective labour of a
community, because it enables a particular commodity to be sold cheaper.
The one consequence generally accompanies the other, but not
necessarily. I will not here repeat the reasons I formerly gave, nor
anticipate those which will be given more fully hereafter, for deeming
the exception to be rather a case abstractedly possible, than one which
is frequently realized in fact.

A considerable part of the saving of labour effected by substituting the
large system of production for the small, is the saving in the labour of
the capitalists themselves. If a hundred producers with small capitals
carry on separately the same business, the superintendence of each
concern will probably require the whole attention of the person
conducting it, sufficiently at least to hinder his time or thoughts from
being disposable for anything else: while a single manufacturer
possessing a capital equal to the sum of theirs, with ten or a dozen
clerks, could conduct the whole of their amount of business, and have
leisure too for other occupations. The small capitalist, it is true,
generally combines with the business of direction some portion of the
details, which the other leaves to his subordinates: the small farmer
follows his own plough, the small tradesman serves in his own shop, the
small weaver plies his own loom. But in this very union of functions
there is, in a great proportion of cases, a want of economy. The
principal in the concern is either wasting, in the routine of a
business, qualities suitable for the direction of it, or he is only fit
for the former, and then the latter will be ill done. I must observe,
however, that I do not attach, to this saving of labour, the importance
often ascribed to it. There is undoubtedly much more labour expended in
the superintendence of many small capitals than in that of one large
capital. For this labour however the small producers have generally a
full compensation, in the feeling of being their own masters, and not
servants of an employer. It may be said, that if they value this
independence they will submit to pay a price for it, and to sell at the
reduced rates occasioned by the competition of the great dealer or
manufacturer. But they cannot always do this and continue to gain a
living. They thus gradually disappear from society. After having
consumed their little capital in prolonging the unsuccessful struggle,
they either sink into the condition of hired labourers, or become
dependent on others for support.

Edition: current; Page: [137]
§ 2. Production on a large scale is greatly promoted by the practice of
forming a large capital by the combination of many small contributions;
or, in other words, by the formation of joint stock companies. The
advantages of the joint stock principle are numerous and important.

In the first place, many undertakings require an amount of capital
beyond the means of the richest individual or private partnership. No
individual could have made a railway from London to Liverpool; it is
doubtful if any individual could even work the traffic on it, now when
it is made. The government indeed could have done both; and in countries
where the practice of co-operation is only in the earlier stages of its
growth, the government can alone be looked to for any of the works for
which a great combination of means is requisite; because it can obtain
those means by compulsory taxation, and is already accustomed to the
conduct of large operations. For reasons, however, which are tolerably
well known, and of which we shall treat fully hereafter, government
agency for the conduct of industrial operations is generally one of the
least eligible of resources, when any other is available.

Next, there are undertakings which individuals are not absolutely
incapable of performing, but which they cannot perform on the scale and
with the continuity which are ever more and more required by the
exigencies of a society in an advancing state. Individuals are quite
capable of despatching ships from England to any or every part of the
world, to carry passengers and letters; the thing was done before joint
stock companies for the purpose were heard of. But when, from the
increase of population and transactions, as well as of means of payment,
the public will no longer content themselves with occasional
opportunities, but require the certainty that packets shall start
regularly, for some places once or even twice a day, for others once a
week, for others that a steam ship of great size and expensive
construction shall depart on fixed days twice in each month, it is
evident that to afford an assurance of keeping up with punctuality such
a circle of costly operations, requires a much larger capital and a much
larger staff of qualified subordinates than can be commanded by an
individual capitalist. There are other cases, again, in which though the
business might be perfectly well transacted with small or moderate
capitals, the guarantee of a great subscribed stock is necessary or
desirable as a security to the public for the fulfilment of pecuniary
engagements. This is especially the case when the nature of the Edition:
current; Page: [138] business requires that numbers of persons should be
willing to trust the concern with their money: as in the business of
banking, and that of insurance: to both of which the joint stock
principle is eminently adapted. It is an instance of the folly and
jobbery of the rulers of mankind, that until a late period the joint
stock principle, as a general resort, was in this country interdicted by
law to these two modes of business; to banking altogether, and to
insurance in the department of sea risks; in order to bestow a lucrative
monopoly on particular establishments which the government was pleased
exceptionally to license, namely the Bank of England, and two insurance
companies, the London and the Royal Exchange.

1 Another advantage of joint stock or associated management, is its
incident of publicity. This is not an invariable, but it is a natural
consequence of the joint stock principle, and might be, as in some
important cases it already is, compulsory. In banking, insurance, and
other businesses which depend wholly on confidence, publicity is a still
more important element of success than a large subscribed capital. A
heavy loss occurring in a private bank may be kept secret; even though
it were of such magnitude as to cause the ruin of the concern, the
banker may still carry it on for years, trying to retrieve its position,
only to fall in the end with a greater crash: but this cannot so easily
happen in the case of a joint stock company, whose accounts are
published periodically. The accounts, even if cooked, still exercise
some check; and the suspicions of shareholders, breaking out at the
general meetings, put the public on their guard.

These are some of the advantages of joint stock over individual
management. But if we look to the other side of the question, we shall
find that individual management has also very great advantages over
joint stock. The chief of these is the much keener interest of the
managers in the success of the undertaking.

The administration of a joint stock association is, in the main,
administration by hired servants. Even the committee, or board of
directors, who are supposed to superintend the management, and who do
really appoint and remove the managers, have no pecuniary interest in
the good working of the concern beyond the shares they individually
hold, which are always a very small part of the capital of the
association, and in general but a small part of the fortunes of the
directors themselves; and the part they take in the management usually
divides their time with many Edition: current; Page: [139] other
occupations, of as great or greater importance to their own interest;
the business being the principal concern of no one except those who are
hired to carry it on. But experience shows, and proverbs, the expression
of popular experience, attest, how inferior is the quality of hired
servants, compared with the ministration of those personally interested
in the work, and how indispensable, when hired service must be employed,
is “the master's eye” to watch over it.

The successful conduct of an industrial enterprise requires two quite
distinct qualifications: fidelity, and zeal. The fidelity of the hired
managers of a concern it is possible to secure. When their work admits
of being reduced to a definite set of rules, the violation of these is a
matter on which conscience cannot easily blind itself, and on which
responsibility may be enforced by the loss of employment. But to carry
on a great business successfully, requires a hundred things which, as
they cannot be defined beforehand, it is impossible to convert into
distinct and positive obligations. First and principally, it requires
that the directing mind should be incessantly occupied with the subject;
should be continually laying schemes by which greater profit may be
obtained, or expense saved. This intensity of interest in the subject it
is seldom to be expected that any one should feel, who is conducting a
business as the hired servant and for the profit of another. There are
experiments in human affairs which are conclusive on the point. Look at
the whole class of rulers, and ministers of state. The work they are
entrusted with, is among the most interesting and exciting of all
occupations; the personal share which they themselves reap of the
national benefits or misfortunes which befall the state under their
rule, is far from trifling, and the rewards and punishments which they
may expect from public estimation are of the plain and palpable kind
which are most keenly felt and most widely appreciated. Yet how rare a
thing is it to find a statesman in whom mental indolence is not stronger
than all these inducements. How infinitesimal is the proportion who
trouble themselves to form, or even to attend to, plans of public
improvement, unless when it is made still more troublesome to them to
remain inactive; or who have any other real desire than that of rubbing
on, so as to escape general blame. On a smaller scale, all who have ever
employed hired labour have had ample experience of the efforts made to
give as little labour in exchange for the wages, as is compatible with
not being turned off. The universal neglect by domestic servants of
their employer's interests, wherever these are Edition: current; Page:
[140] not protected by some fixed rule, is matter of common remark;
unless where long continuance in the same service, and reciprocal good
offices, have produced either personal attachment, or some feeling of a
common interest.

Another of the disadvantages of joint stock concerns, which is in some
degree common to all concerns on a large scale, is disregard of small
gains and small savings. In the management of a great capital and great
transactions, especially when the managers have not much interest in it
of their own, small sums are apt to be counted for next to nothing; they
never seem worth the care and trouble which it costs to attend to them,
and the credit of liberality and openhandedness is cheaply bought by a
disregard of such trifling considerations. But small profits and small
expenses often repeated, amount to great gains and losses: and of this a
large capitalist is often a sufficiently good calculator to be
practically aware; and to arrange his business on a system, which if
enforced by a sufficiently vigilant superintendence, precludes the
possibility of the habitual waste, otherwise incident to a great
business. But the managers of a joint stock concern seldom devote
themselves sufficiently to the work, to enforce unremittingly, even if
introduced, through every detail of the business, a really economical
system.

From considerations of this nature, Adam Smith was led to enunciate as a
principle, that joint stock companies could never be expected to
maintain themselves without an exclusive privilege, except in branches
of business which, like banking, insurance, and some others, admit of
being, in a considerable degree, reduced to fixed rules. This, however,
is one of those over-statements of a true principle, often met with in
Adam Smith. In his days there were few instances of joint stock
companies which had been permanently successful without a monopoly,
except the class of cases which he referred to; but since his time there
have been many; and the regular increase both of the spirit of
combination and of the ability to combine, will doubtless produce many
more. Adam Smith fixed his observation too exclusively on the superior
energy and more unremitting attention brought to a business in which the
whole stake and the whole gain belong to the persons conducting it; and
he overlooked various countervailing considerations which go a great way
towards neutralizing even that great point of superiority.

Of these one of the most important is that which relates to the
intellectual and active qualifications of the directing head. The
stimulus of individual interest is some security for exertion, but
Edition: current; Page: [141] exertion is of little avail if the
intelligence exerted is of an inferior order, which it must necessity be
in the majority of concerns carried on by the persons chiefly interested
in them. Where the concern is large, and can afford a remuneration
sufficient to attract a class of candidates superior to the common
average, it is possible to select for the general management, and for
all the skilled employments of a subordinate kind, persons of a degree
of acquirement and cultivated intelligence which more than compensates
for their inferior interest in the result. Their greater perspicacity
enables them, with even a part of their minds, to see probabilities of
advantage which never occur to the ordinary run of men by the continued
exertion of the whole of theirs; and their superior knowledge, and
habitual rectitude of perception and of judgment, guard them against
blunders, the fear of which would prevent the others from hoarding their
interests in any attempt out of the ordinary routine.

It must be further remarked, that it is not a necessary consequence of
joint stock management, that the persons employed, whether in superior
or in subordinate offices, should be paid wholly by fixed salaries.
There are modes of connecting more or less intimately the interest of
the employés with the pecuniary success of the concern. There is a long
series of intermediate positions, between working wholly on one's own
account, and working by the day, week, or year for an invariable
payment. Even in the case of ordinary unskilled labour, there is such a
thing as task-work, or working by the piece: and the superior efficiency
of this is so well known, that judicious employers always resort to it
when the work admits of being put out in definite portions, without the
necessity of too troublesome a surveillance to guard against inferiority
in the execution. In the case of the managers of joint stock companies,
and of the superintending and controlling officers in many private
establishments, it is a common enough practice to connect their
pecuniary interest with the interest of their employers, by giving them
part of their remuneration in the form of a percentage on the profits.
The personal interest thus given to hired servants is not comparable in
intensity to that of the owner of the capital; but it is sufficient to
be a very material stimulus to zeal and carefulness, and, when added to
the advantage of superior intelligence, often raises the quality of the
service much above that which the generality of masters are capable of
rendering to themselves. The ulterior extensions of which this principle
of remuneration is susceptible, Edition: current; Page: [142] being of
great social as well as economical importance, will be more particularly
adverted to in a subsequent stage of the present inquiry.

As I have already remarked of large establishments generally, when
compared with small ones, whenever competition is free its results will
show whether individual or joint stock agency is best adapted to the
particular case, since that which is most efficient and most economical
will always in the end succeed in underselling the other.

§ 3. The possibility of substituting the large system of production for
the small, depends of course, in the first place, on the extent of the
market. The large system can only be advantageous when a large amount of
business is to be done: it implies, therefore, either a populous and
flourishing community, or a great opening for exportation. Again, this
as well as every other change in the system of production is greatly
favoured by a progressive condition of capital. It is chiefly when the
capital of a country is receiving a great annual increase, that there is
a large amount of capital seeking for investment: and a new enterprise
is much sooner and more easily entered upon by new capital, than by
withdrawing capital from existing employments. The change is also much
facilitated by the existence of large capitals in few hands. It is true
that the same amount of capital can be raised by bringing together many
small sums. But this (besides that it is not equally well suited to all
branches of industry) supposes a much greater degree of commercial
confidence and enterprise diffused through the community, and belongs
altogether to a more advanced stage of industrial progress.

In the countries in which there are the largest markets, the widest
diffusion of commercial confidence and enterprise, the greatest annual
increase of capital, and the greatest number of large capitals owned by
individuals, there is a tendency to substitute more and more, in one
branch of industry after another, large establishments for small ones.
In England, the chief type of all these characteristics, there is a
perpetual growth not only of large manufacturing establishments, but
also, wherever a sufficient number of purchasers are assembled, of shops
and warehouses for conducting retail business on a large scale. These
are almost always able to undersell the smaller tradesmen, partly, it is
understood, by means of division of labour, and the economy occasioned
by limiting the employment of skilled agency to cases where skill is
required; and partly, no doubt, by the saving of labour arising from the
great scale of the Edition: current; Page: [143] transactions; as it
costs no more time, and not much more exertion of mind, to make a large
purchase, for example, than a small one, and very much less than to make
a number of small ones.

With a view merely to production, and to the greatest efficiency of
labour, this change is wholly beneficial. In some cases it is attended
with drawbacks, rather social than economical, the nature of which has
been already hinted at. But whatever disadvantages may be supposed to
attend on the change from a small to a large system of production, they
are not applicable to the change from a large to a still larger. When,
in any employment, the régime of independent small producers has either
never been possible, or has been superseded, and the system of many
work-people under one management has become fully established, from that
time any further enlargement in the scale of production is generally an
unqualified benefit. It is obvious, for example, how great an economy of
labour would be obtained if London were supplied by a single gas or
water company instead of the existing plurality. While there are even as
many as two, this implies double establishments of all sorts, when one
only, with a small increase, could probably perform the whole operation
equally well; double sets of machinery and works, when the whole of the
gas or water required could generally be produced by one set only; even
double sets of pipes, if the companies did not prevent this needless
expense by agreeing upon a division of the territory. Were there only
one establishment, it could make lower charges, consistently with
obtaining the rate of profit now realized. But would it do so? Even if
it did not, the community in the aggregate would still be a gainer:
since the shareholders are a part of the community, and they would
obtain higher profits while the consumers paid only the same. It is,
however, an error to suppose that the prices are ever permanently kept
down by the competition of these companies. Where competitors are so
few, they always end by agreeing not to compete. They may run a race of
cheapness to ruin a new candidate, but as soon as he has established his
footing they come to terms with him. When, therefore, a business of real
public importance can only be carried on advantageously upon so large a
scale as to render the liberty of competition almost illusory, it is an
unthrifty dispensation of the public resources that several costly sets
of arrangements should be kept up for the purpose of rendering to the
community this one service. It is much better to treat it at once as a
public function; and if it be not such as the government itself could
Edition: current; Page: [144] beneficially undertake, it should be made
over entire to the company or association which will perform it on the
best terms for the public. In the case of railways, for example, no one
can desire to see the enormous waste of capital and land (not to speak
of increased nuisance) involved in the construction of a second railway
to connect the same places already united by an existing one; while the
two would not do the work better than it could be done by one, and after
a short time would probably be amalgamated. Only one such line ought to
be permitted, but the control over that line never ought to be parted
with by the State, unless on a temporary concession, as in France; and
the vested right which Parliament has allowed to be acquired by the
existing companies, like all other proprietary rights which are opposed
to public utility, is morally valid only as a claim to compensation.

§ 4. The question between the large and the small systems of production
as applied to agriculture—between large and small farming, the grande
and the petite culture—stands, in many respects, on different grounds
from the general question between great and small industrial
establishments. In its social aspect, and as an element in the
Distribution of Wealth, this question will occupy us hereafter: but even
as a question of production, the superiority of the large system in
agriculture is by no means so clearly established as in manufactures.

I have already remarked, that the operations of agriculture are little
susceptible of benefit from the division of labour. There is but little
separation of employments even on the largest farm. The same persons may
not in general attend to the live stock, to the marketing, and to the
cultivation of the soil; but much beyond that primary and simple
classification the subdivision is not carried. The combination of labour
of which agriculture is susceptible, is chiefly that which Mr. Wakefield
terms Simple Co-operation; several persons helping one another in the
same work, at the same time and place. But I confess it seems to me that
this able writer attributes more importance to that kind of
co-operation, in reference to agriculture properly so called, than it
deserves. None of the common farming operations require much of it.
There is no particular advantage in setting a great number of people to
work together in ploughing or digging or sowing the same field, or even
in mowing or reaping it unless time presses. A single family can
generally supply all the combination of labour necessary for these
purposes. And Edition: current; Page: [145] in the works in which an
union of many efforts is really needed, there is seldom found any
impracticability in obtaining it where farms are small.

The waste of productive power by subdivision of the land often amounts
to a great evil, but this applies chiefly to a subdivision so minute,
that the cultivators have not enough land to occupy their time. Up to
that point the same principles which recommend large manufactories are
applicable to agriculture. For the greatest productive efficiency, it is
generally desirable (though even this proposition must be received with
qualifications) that no family who have any land, should have less than
they could cultivate, or than will fully employ their cattle and tools.
These, however, are not the dimensions of large farms, but of what are
reckoned in England very small ones. The large farmer has some advantage
in the article of buildings. It does not cost so much to house a great
number of cattle in one building, as to lodge them equally well in
several buildings. There is also some advantage in implements. A small
farmer is not so likely to possess expensive instruments. But the
principal agricultural implements, even when of the best construction,
are not expensive. It may not answer to a small farmer to own a
threshing machine, for the small quantity of corn he has to thresh; but
there is no reason why such a machine should not in every neighbourhood
be owned in common, or provided by some person to whom the others pay a
consideration for its use; especially as, when worked by steam, they are
so constructed as to be moveable.∗1 The large farmer can make some
saving in cost of carriage. There is nearly as much trouble in carrying
a small portion of produce to market, as a much greater produce; in
bringing home a small, as a much larger quantity of manures, and
articles of daily consumption. There is also the greater cheapness of
buying things in large quantities. These various advantages must count
for something, but it does not seem that they ought to count for very
much. In England, for some generations, there has been little experience
of small farms; but in Ireland the experience has been ample, not merely
under the worst but under the best Edition: current; Page: [146]
management; and the highest Irish authorities may be cited in opposition
to the opinion which on this subject commonly prevails in England. Mr.
Blacker, for example, one of the most experienced agriculturists and
successful improvers in the North of Ireland, whose experience was
chiefly in the best cultivated, which are also the most minutely
divided, parts of the country, was of opinion, that tenants holding
farms not exceeding from five to eight or ten acres, could live
comfortably and pay as high a rent as any large farmer whatever. “I am
firmly persuaded,” (he says,∗) “that the small farmer who holds his own
plough and digs his own ground, if he follows a proper rotation of
crops, and feeds his cattle in the house, can undersell the large
farmer, or in other words can pay a rent which the other cannot afford;
and in this I am confirmed by the opinion of many practical men who have
well considered the subject... The English farmer of 700 to 800 acres is
a kind of man approaching to what is known by the name of a gentleman
farmer. He must have his horse to ride, and his gig, and perhaps an
overseer to attend to his labourers; he certainly cannot superintend
himself the labour going on in a farm of 800 acres.” After a few other
remarks, he adds, “Besides all these drawbacks, which the small farmer
knows little about, there is the great expense of carting out the manure
from the homestead to such a great distance, and again carting home the
crop. A single horse will consume the produce of more land than would
feed a small farmer and his wife and two children. And what is more than
all, the large farmer says to his labourers, go to your work; but when
the small farmer has occasion to hire them, he says, come; the
intelligent reader will, I dare say, understand the difference.”

One of the objections most urged against small farms is, that they do
not and cannot maintain, proportionally to their extent, so great a
number of cattle as large farms, and that this occasions such a
deficiency of manure, that a soil much subdivided must always be
impoverished. It will be found, however, that subdivision only produces
this effect when it throws the land into the hands of cultivators so
poor as not to possess the amount of live stock suitable to the size of
their farms. A small farm and a badly stocked farm are not synonymous.
To make the comparison fairly, we must suppose the same amount of
capital which is possessed by the large farmers to be disseminated among
the small ones. Edition: current; Page: [147] When this condition, or
even any approach to it, exists, and when stall feeding is practised
(and stall feeding now begins to be considered good economy even on
large farms), experience, far from bearing out the assertion that small
farming is unfavourable to the multiplication of cattle, conclusively
establishes the very reverse. The abundance of cattle, and copious use
of manure, on the small farms of Flanders, are the most striking
features in that Flemish agriculture which is the admiration of all
competent judges, whether in England or on the Continent.∗

Edition: current; Page: [148]
The disadvantage, when disadvantage there is, of small or rather of
peasant farming, as compared with capitalist farming, must chiefly
consist in inferiority of skill and knowledge; but it is not true, as a
general fact, that such inferiority exists. Countries of small farms and
peasant farming, Flanders and Italy, had a good agriculture many
generations before England, and theirs is still [1848], as a whole,
probably the best agriculture in the world. The empirical skill, which
is the effect of daily and close observation, Edition: current; Page:
[149] peasant farmers often possess in an eminent degree. The
traditional knowledge, for example, of the culture of the vine,
possessed by the peasantry of the countries where the best wines are
produced, is extraordinary. There is no doubt an absence of science, or
at least of theory; and to some extent a deficiency of the spirit of
improvement, so far as relates to the introduction of new processes.
There is also a want of means to make experiments, which can seldom be
made with advantage except by rich proprietors or capitalists. As for
those systematic improvements which operate on a large tract of country
at once (such as great works of draining or irrigation) or which for any
other reasons do really require large numbers of workmen combining their
labour, these are not in general to be expected from small farmers, or
even small proprietors, though combination among them for such purposes
is by no means unexampled, and will become more common as their
intelligence is more developed.

Against these disadvantages is to be placed, where the tenure of land is
of the requisite kind, an ardour of industry absolutely unexampled in
any other condition of agriculture. This is a subject on which the
testimony of competent witnesses is unanimous. The working of the petite
culture cannot be fairly judged where the small cultivator is merely a
tenant, and not even a tenant on fixed conditions, but (as until lately
in Ireland) at a nominal rent greater than can be paid, and therefore
practically at a varying rent always amounting to the utmost that can be
paid. To understand the subject, it must be studied where the cultivator
is the proprietor, or at least a métayer with a permanent tenure; where
the labour he exerts to increase the produce and value of the land
avails wholly, or at least partly, to his own benefit and that of his
descendants. In another division of our subject, we shall discuss at
some length the important subject of tenures of land, and I defer till
then any citation of evidence on the marvellous industry of peasant
proprietors. It may suffice here to appeal to the immense amount of
gross produce which, even without a permanent tenure, English labourers
generally obtain from their little allotments; a produce beyond
comparison greater than a large farmer extracts, or would find it his
interest to extract, from the same piece of land.

And this I take to be the true reason why large cultivation is generally
most advantageous as a mere investment for profit. Land occupied by a
large farmer is not, in one sense of the word, farmed so highly. There
is not nearly so much labour expended on it. This Edition: current;
Page: [150] is not on account of any economy arising from combination of
labour, but because, by employing less, a greater return is obtained in
proportion to the outlay. It does not answer to any one to pay others
for exerting all the labour which the peasant, or even the
allotment-holder, gladly undergoes when the fruits are to be wholly
reaped by himself. This labour, however, is not unproductive: it all
adds to the gross produce. With anything like equality of skill and
knowledge, the large farmer does not obtain nearly so much from the soil
as the small proprietor, or the small farmer with adequate motives to
exertion: but though his returns are less, the labour is less in a still
greater degree, and as whatever labour he employs must be paid for, it
does not suit his purpose to employ more.

But although the gross produce of the land is greatest, caeteris
paribus,under small cultivation, and although, therefore, a country is
able on that system to support a larger aggregate population, it is
generally assumed by English writers that what is termed the net
produce, that is, the surplus after feeding the cultivators, must be
smaller; that therefore, the population disposable for all other
purposes, for manufactures, for commerce and navigation, for national
defence, for the promotion of knowledge, for the liberal professions,
for the various functions of government, for the arts and literature,
all of which are dependent on this surplus for their existence as
occupations, must be less numerous; and that the nation, therefore
(waiving all question as to the condition of the actual cultivators),
must be inferior in the principal elements of national power, and in
many of those of general well-being. This, however, has been taken for
granted much too readily. Undoubtedly the non-agricultural population
will bear a less ratio to the agricultural, under small than under large
cultivation. But that it will be less numerous absolutely, is by no
means a consequence. If the total population, agricultural and
non-agricultural, is greater, the non-agricultural portion may he more
numerous in itself, and may yet be a smaller proportion of the whole. If
the gross produce is larger, the net produce may be larger, and yet bear
a smaller ratio to the gross produce. Yet even Mr. Wakefield sometimes
appears to confound these distinct ideas. In France it is computed
[1848] that two-thirds of the whole population are agricultural. In
England, at most, one-third. Hence Mr. Wakefield infers, that “as in
France only three people are supported by the labour of two cultivators,
while in England the labour of two cultivators supports six people,
English agriculture is Edition: current; Page: [151] twice as productive
as French agriculture,” owing to the superior efficiency of large
farming through combination of labour. But in the first place, the facts
themselves are overstated. The labour of two persons in England does not
quite support six people, for there is not a little [1848] food imported
from foreign countries, and from Ireland. In France, too, the labour of
two cultivators does much more than supply the food of three persons. It
provides the three persons, and occasionally foreigners, with flax,
hemp, and to a certain extent with silk, oils, tobacco, and latterly
sugar, which in England are wholly obtained from abroad; nearly all the
timber used in France is of home growth, nearly all which is used in
England is imported; the principal fuel of France [1848] is procured and
brought to market by persons reckoned among agriculturists, in England
by persons not so reckoned. I do not take into calculation hides and
wool, these products being common to both countries, nor wine or brandy
produced for home consumption, since England has a corresponding
production of beer and spirits; but England has [1848] no material
export of either article, and a great importation of the last, while
France supplies wines and spirits to the whole world. I say nothing of
fruit, eggs, and such minor particles of agricultural produce, in which
the export trade of France is enormous. But not to lay undue stress on
these abatements, we will take the statement as it stands. Suppose that
two persons, in England, do bonâ fide produce the food of six, while in
France, for the same purpose, the labour of four is requisite. Does it
follow that England must have a larger surplus for the support of a
non-agricultural population? No; but merely that she can devote
two-thirds of her whole produce to the purpose, instead of one-third.
Suppose the produce to be twice as great, and the one-third will amount
to as much as the two-thirds. The fact might be, that owing to the
greater quantity of labour employed on the French system, the same land
would produce food for twelve persons which on the English system would
only produce it for six: and if this were so, which would be quite
consistent with the conditions of the hypothesis, then although the food
for twelve was produced by the labour of eight, while the six were fed
by the labour of only two, there would be the same number of hands
disposable for other employment in the one country as in the other. I am
not contending that the fact is so. I know that the gross produce per
acre in France as a whole (though not in its most improved districts)
averages much less than in England, and that, in proportion to the
extent and fertility Edition: current; Page: [152] of the two countries,
England has, in the sense we are now speaking of, much the largest
disposable population. But the disproportion certainly is not to be
measured by Mr. Wakefield's simple criterion. As well might it be said
that agricultural labour in the United States, where, by a late census
(1840), four families in every five appeared to be engaged in
agriculture, must be still more inefficient than in France.

The inferiority of French cultivation (which, taking the count as a
whole, must be allowed to be real, though much exaggerated) is probably
more owing to the lower general average of industrial skill and energy
in that country, than to any special cause; and even if partly the
effect of minute subdivision, it does not prove that small farming is
disadvantageous, but only (what is undoubtedly the fact) that farms in
France are very frequently too small, and, what is worse, broken up into
an almost incredible number of patches or parcelles, most inconveniently
dispersed and parted from one another.

As a question, not of gross, but of net produce, the comparative merits
of the grande and the petite culture, especially when the small farmer
is also the proprietor, cannot be looked upon as decided. It is a
question on which good judges at present differ. The current of English
opinion is [1848] in favour of large farms: on the Continent, the weight
of authority seems to be on the other side. Professor Rau, of
Heidelberg, the author of one of the most comprehensive and elaborate of
extant treatises on political economy, and who has that large
acquaintance with facts and authorities on his own subject, which
generally characterises his countrymen, lays it down as a settled truth,
that small or moderate-sized farms yield not only a larger gross but a
larger net produce: though, he adds, it is desirable there should be
some great proprietors, to lead the way in new improvements.∗ The most
apparently impartial and discriminating judgment that I have met with is
that of M. Passy, who (always speaking with reference to net produce)
gives his verdict in favour of large farms for grain and forage; but,
for the kinds of culture which require much labour and attention, places
the advantage wholly on the side of small cultivation; including in this
description, not only the vine and the olive, where a considerable
amount of care and labour must be bestowed on each individual plant, but
also roots, leguminous plants, and Edition: current; Page: [153] those
which furnish the materials of manufactures. The small size, and
consequent multiplication, of farms, according to all authorities, are
extremely favourable to the abundance of many minor products of
agriculture.∗

It is evident that every labourer who extracts from the land more than
his own food, and that of any family he may have, increases the means of
supporting a non-agricultural population. Even if his surplus is no more
than enough to buy clothes, the labourers who make the clothes are a
non-agricultural population, enabled to exist by food which he produces.
Every agricultural family, therefore, which produces its own
necessaries, adds to the net produce of agriculture; and so does every
person born on the land, who by employing himself on it, adds more to
its gross produce than the mere food which he eats. It is questionable
whether, even in the most subdivided districts of Europe which are
cultivated by the proprietors, the multiplication of hands on the soil
has approached, or tends to approach, within a great distance of this
limit. In France, though the subdivision is confessedly too great, there
is proof positive that it is far from having reached the point at which
it would begin to diminish the power of supporting a non-agricultural
population. This is demonstrated by the great increase of the towns;
which have of late [1848] increased in a much greater ratio than the
population generally,† showing (unless the condition of the town
labourers is becoming rapidly deteriorated, which there is no reason to
believe) that even by the unfair and inapplicable test of proportions,
the productiveness of agriculture must be on the increase. This, too,
concurrently with the amplest evidence that in the more improved
districts of France, and in some which, until lately, were among the
unimproved, there is a considerably increased consumption of country
produce by the country population itself.

1 Impressed with the conviction that, of all faults which can be
committed by a scientific writer on political and social subjects,
exaggeration, and assertion beyond the evidence, most require to be
guarded against, I limited myself in the early editions of this work
Edition: current; Page: [154] to the foregoing very moderate statements.
I little knew how much stronger my language might have been without
exceeding the truth, and how much the actual progress of French
agriculture surpassed anything which I had at that time sufficient
grounds to affirm. The investigations of that eminent authority on
agricultural statistics, M. Léonce de Lavergne, undertaken by desire of
the Academy of Moral and Political Sciences of the Institute of France,
have led to the conclusion that since the Revolution of 1789, the total
produce of French agriculture has doubled; profits and wages having both
increased in about the same, and rent in a still greater ratio. M. de
Lavergne, whose impartiality is one of his greatest merits, is,
moreover, so far in this instance from the suspicion of having a case to
make out, that he is labouring to show, not how much French agriculture
has accomplished, but how much still remains for it to do. “We have
required” (he says) “no less than seventy years to bring into
cultivation two million hectares” (five million English acres) “of waste
land, to suppress half our fallows, double our agricultural products,
increase our population by 30 per cent, our wages by 100 per cent, our
rent by 150 per cent. At this rate we shall require three quarters of a
century more to arrive at the point which England has already
attained.”∗

After this evidence, we have surely now heard the last of the
incompatibility of small properties and small farms with agricultural
improvement. The only question which remains open is one of degree; the
comparative rapidity of agricultural improvement under the two systems;
and it is the general opinion of those who are equally well acquainted
with both, that improvement is greatest under a due admixture between
them.

In the present chapter, I do not enter on the question between great and
small cultivation in any other respect than as a question of production,
and of the efficiency of labour. We shall return to it hereafter as
affecting the distribution of the produce, and the physical and social
well-being of the cultivators themselves; in which aspects it deserves,
and requires, a still more particular examination.1

Edition: current; Page: [155]


CHAPTER X: of the law of the increase of labour

§ 1. We have now successively considered each of the agents or
conditions of production, and of the means by which the efficacy of
these various agents is promoted. In order to come to an end of the
questions which relate exclusively to production, one more, of primary
importance, remains.

Production is not a fixed, but an increasing thing. When not kept back
by bad institutions, or a low state of the arts of life, the produce of
industry has usually tended to increase; stimulated not only by the
desire of the producers to augment their means of consumption, but by
the increasing number of the consumers. Nothing in political economy can
be of more importance than to ascertain the law of this increase of
production; the conditions to which it is subject: whether it has
practically any limits, and what these are. There is also no subject in
political economy which is popularly less understood, or on which the
errors committed are of a character to produce, and do produce, greater
mischief.

We have seen that the essential requisites of production are
three—labour, capital, and natural agents; the term capital including
all external and physical requisites which are products of labour, the
term natural agents all those which are not. But among natural agents we
need not take into account those which, existing in unlimited quantity,
being incapable of appropriation, and never altering in their qualities,
are always ready to lend an equal degree of assistance to production,
whatever may be its extent; as air, and the light of the sun. Being now
about to consider the impediments to production, not the facilities for
it, we need advert to no other natural agents than those which are
liable to be deficient either in quantity or in productive power. These
may be all represented by the term land. Land, in the narrowest
acceptation, as the source of agricultural produce, is the chief
Edition: current; Page: [156] of them; and if we extend the term to
mines and fisheries—to what is found in the earth itself, or in the
waters which partly cover it, as well as to what is grown or fed on its
surface, it embraces everything with which we need at present concern
ourselves.

We may say, then, without a greater stretch of language than under the
necessary explanation is permissible, that the requisites of production
are Labour, Capital, and Land. The increase of production, therefore,
depends on the properties of these elements. It is a result of the
increase either of the elements themselves, or of their productiveness.
The law of the increase of production must be a consequence of the laws
of these elements; the limits to the increase of production must be the
limits, whatever they are, set by those laws. We proceed to consider the
three elements successively, with reference to this effect; or in other
words, the law of the increase of production, viewed in respect of its
dependence, first on Labour, secondly on Capital, and lastly on Land.

§ 2. The increase of labour is the increase of mankind; of population.
On this subject the discussions excited by the Essay of Mr. Malthus have
made the truth, though by no means universally admitted, yet so fully
known, that a briefer examination of the question than would otherwise
have been necessary will probably on the present occasion suffice.

The power of multiplication inherent in all organic life may be regarded
as infinite. There is no one species of vegetable or animal, which, if
the earth were entirely abandoned to it, and to the things on which it
feeds, would not in a small number of years overspread every region of
the globe, of which the climate was compatible with its existence. The
degree of possible rapidity is different in different orders of beings;
but in all it is sufficient, for the earth to be very speedily filled
up. There are many species of vegetables of which a single plant will
produce in one year the germs of a thousand; if only two come to
maturity, in fourteen years the two will have multiplied to sixteen
thousand and more. It is but a moderate case of fecundity in animals to
be capable of quadrupling their numbers in a single year; if they only
do as much in half a century, ten thousand will have swelled within two
centuries to upwards of two millions and a half. The capacity of
increase is necessarily in a geometrical progression: the numerical
ratio alone is different.

Edition: current; Page: [157]
To this property of organized beings, the human species forms no
exception. Its power of increase is indefinite, and the actual
multiplication would be extraordinarily rapid, if the power were
exercised to the utmost. It never is exercised to the utmost, and yet,
in the most favourable circumstances known to exist, which are those of
a fertile region colonized from an industrious and civilized community,
population has continued, for several generations, independently of
fresh immication, to double itself in not much more than twenty years.∗
That the capacity of multiplication in the human species exceeds even
this, is evident if we consider how great is the ordinary number of
children to a family, where the climate is good and early marriages
usual; and how small a proportion of them die before the age of
maturity, in the present state of hygienic knowledge, where the locality
is healthy, and the family adequately provided with the means of living.
It is a very low estimate of the capacity of increase, if we only
assume, that in a good sanitary condition of the people, each generation
may be double the number of the generation which preceded it.

Twenty or thirty years ago, these propositions might still have required
considerable enforcement and illustration; but the evidence of them is
so ample and incontestable, that they have made their way against all
kinds of opposition, and may now be regarded as axiomatic: though the
extreme reluctance felt to admitting them, every now and then gives
birth to some ephemeral theory, speedily forgotten, of a different law
of increase in different circumstances, through a providential
adaptation of the fecundity of the human species to the exigencies of
society.† The obstacle to a just understanding Edition: current; Page:
[158] of the subject does not arise from these theories, but from too
confused a notion of the causes which, at most times and places, keep
the actual increase of mankind so far behind the capacity.

§ 3. Those causes, nevertheless, are in no way mysterious. What prevents
the population of hares and rabbits from overstocking the earth? Not
want of fecundity, but causes very different: many enemies, and
insufficient subsistence; not enough to eat, and liability to be eaten.
In the human race, which is not generally subject to the latter
inconvenience, the equivalents for it are war and disease. If the
multiplication of mankind proceeded only like that of the other animals,
from a blind instinct, it would be limited in the same manner with
theirs; the births would be as numerous as the physical constitution of
the species admitted of, and the population would be kept down by
deaths.∗ But the conduct of human creatures is more or less influenced
by foresight of consequences, and by impulses superior to mere animal
instincts: and they do not, therefore, propagate like swine, but
Edition: current; Page: [159] are capable, though in very unequal
degrees, of being withheld by prudence, or by the social affections,
from giving existence to beings born only to misery and premature death.
In proportion as mankind rise above the condition of the beasts,
population is restrained by the fear of want rather than by want itself.
Even where there is no question of starvation, many are similarly acted
upon by the apprehension of losing what have come to be regarded as the
decencies of their situation in life. Hitherto no other motives than
these two have been found strong enough, in the generality of mankind,
to counteract the tendency to increase. It has been the practice of a
great majority of the middle and the poorer classes, whenever free from
external control, to marry as early, and in most countries to have as
many children, with maintaining themselves in the condition of life
which they were born to, or were accustomed to consider as theirs. Among
the middle classes, in many individual instances, there is an additional
restraint exercised from the desire of doing more than maintaining their
circumstances—of improving them; but such a desire is rarely found, or
rarely has that effect, in the labouring classes. If they can bring up a
family as they were themselves brought up, even the prudent among them
are usually satisfied. Too often they do not think even of that, but
rely on fortune, or on the resources to be found in legal or voluntary
charity.

In a very backward state of society, like that of Europe in the Middle
Ages, and many parts of Asia at present [1848], population is kept down
by actual starvation. The starvation does not take place in ordinary
years, but in seasons of scarcity, which in those states of society are
much more frequent and more extreme than Europe is now accustomed to. In
these seasons actual want, or the maladies consequent on it, carry off
numbers of the population, which in a succession of favourable years
again expands, to be again cruelly decimated. In a more improved state,
few, even among the poorest of the people, are limited to actual
necessaries, and to a bare sufficiency of those: and the increase is
kept within bounds, not by excess of deaths, but by limitation of
births. The limitation is brought about in various ways. In some
countries, it is the result of prudent or conscientious self-restraint.
There is a condition to which the labouring people are habituated; they
perceive that by having too numerous families, they must sink below that
condition, or fail to transmit it to their children; and this they do
not choose to submit to. The countries in which, so far as is Edition:
current; Page: [160] known, a great degree of voluntary prudence has
been longest practised on this subject, are [1848] Norway and parts of
Switzerland. Concerning both, there happens to be unusually authentic
information; many facts were carefully brought together by Mr. Malthus,
and much additional evidence has been obtained since his time. In both
these countries the increase of population is very slow; and what checks
it is not multitude of deaths, but fewness of births. Both the births
and the deaths are remarkably few in proportion to the population; the
average duration of life is the longest in Europe; the population
contains fewer children, and a greater proportional number of persons in
the vigour of life, than is known to be the case in any other part of
the world. The paucity of births tends directly to prolong life, by
keeping the people in comfortable circumstances; and the same prudence
is doubtless exercised in avoiding causes of disease, as in keeping
clear of the principal cause of poverty. It is worthy of remark that the
two counties thus honourably distinguished, are countries of small
landed proprietors.

There are other cases in which the prudence and forethought, which
perhaps might not be exercised by the people themselves, are exercised
by the state for their benefit; marriage not being permitted until the
contracting parties can show that they have the prospect of a
comfortable support. Under these laws, of which I shall speak more fully
hereafter, the condition of the people is reported to be good, and the
illegitimate births not so numerous as might be expected. There are
places, again, in which the restraining cause seems to be not so much
individual prudence, as some general and perhaps even accidental habit
of the country. In the rural districts of England, during the last
century, the growth of population was very effectually repressed by the
difficulty of obtaining a cottage to live in. It was the custom for
unmarried labourers to lodge and board with their employers; it was the
custom for married labourers to have a cottage: and the rule of the
English poor laws by which a parish was charged with the support of its
unemployed poor, rendered landowners averse to promote marriage. About
the end of the century, the great demand for men in war and manufactures
made it be thought a patriotic thing to encourage population: and about
the same time the growing inclination of farmers to live like rich
people, favoured as it was by a long period of high prices, made them
desirous of keeping inferiors at a greater distance, and, pecuniary
motives arising from abuses of the poor laws being superadded, they
gradually Edition: current; Page: [161] drove their labourers into
cottages, which the landlords now no longer refused permission to build.
In some countries an old standing custom that a girl should not marry
until she had spun and woven for herself an ample trousseau (destined
for the supply of her whole subsequent life), is said to have acted as a
substantial check to population. In England, at present [1848], the
influence of prudence in keeping down multiplication is seen by the
diminished number of marriages in the manufacturing districts in years
when trade is bad.

But whatever be the causes by which population is anywhere limited to a
comparatively slow rate of increase, an acceleration of the rate very
speedily follows any diminution of the motives to restraint.1 It is but
rarely that improvements in the condition of the labouring classes do
anything more than give a temporary margin, speedily filled up by an
increase of their numbers. The use they commonly choose to make of any
advantageous change in their circumstances, is to take it out in the
form which, by augmenting the population, deprives the succeeding
generation of the benefit. Unless, either by their general improvement
in intellectual and moral culture, or at least by raising their habitual
standard of comfortable living, they can be taught to make a better use
of favourable circumstances, nothing permanent can be done for them; the
most promising schemes end only in having a more numerous, but not a
happier people. By their habitual standard, I mean that (when any such
there is) down to which they will multiply, but not lower. Every advance
they make in education, civilization, and social improvement, tends to
raise this standard; and there is no doubt that it is gradually, though
slowly, rising in the more advanced countries of Western Europe.
Subsistence and employment in England have never increased more rapidly
than in the last forty years [1862], but every census since 1821 showed
a smaller proportional increase of population than that of the period
preceding; and the produce of French agriculture and industry is
increasing in a progressive ratio, while the population exhibits in
every quinquennial census, a smaller proportion of births to the
population.

The subject, however, of population, in its connexion with the condition
of the labouring classes, will be considered in another place; in the
present we have to do with it solely as one of the Edition: current;
Page: [162] elements of Production: and in that character we could not
dispense with pointing out the unlimited extent of its natural powers of
increase, and the causes owing to which so small a portion of that
unlimited power is for the most part actually exercised. After this
brief indication, we shall proceed to the other elements.1

Edition: current; Page: [163]


CHAPTER XI: of the law of the increase of capital

§ 1. The requisites of production being labour, capital, and land, it
has been seen from the preceding chapter that the impediments to the
increase of production do not arise from the first of these elements. On
the side of labour there is no obstacle to an increase of production,
indefinite in extent and of unslackening rapidity. Population has the
power of increasing in an uniform and rapid geometrical ratio. If the
only essential condition of production were labour, the produce might,
and naturally would, increase in the same ratio; and there would be no
limit, until the numbers of mankind were brought to a stand from actual
want of space.

But production has other requisites, and of these, the one which we
shall next consider is Capital. There cannot be more people in any
country, or in the world, than can be supported from the produce of past
labour until that of present labour comes in. There will be no greater
number of productive labourers in any country, or in the world, than can
be supported from that portion of the produce of past labour, which is
spared from the enjoyments of its possessor for purposes of
reproduction, and is termed Capital. We have next, therefore, to inquire
into the conditions of the increase of capital: the causes by which the
rapidity of its increase is determined, and the necessary limitations of
that increase.

Since all capital is the product of saving, that is, of abstinence from
present consumption for the sake of a future good, the increase of
capital must depend upon two things—the amount of the fund from which
saving can be made, and the strength of the dispositions which prompt to
it.

The fund from which saving can be made, is the surplus of the produce of
labour, after supplying the necessaries of life to all concerned in the
production: including those employed in replacing the materials, and
keeping the fixed capital in repair. More than Edition: current; Page:
[164] this surplus cannot be saved under any circumstances. As much as
this, though it never is saved, always might be. This surplus is the
fund from which the enjoyments, as distinguished from the necessaries,
of the producers are provided; it is the fund from which all are
subsisted, who are not themselves engaged in production; and from which
all additions are made to capital. It is the real net produce of the
country. The phrase, net produce, is often taken in a more limited
sense, to denote only the profits of the capitalist and the rent of the
landlord, under the idea that nothing can be included in the net produce
of capital, but what is returned to the owner of the capital after
replacing his expenses. But this is too narrow an acceptation of the
term. The capital of the employer forms the revenue of the labourers,
and if this exceeds the necessaries of life, it gives them a surplus
which they may either expend in enjoyments, or save. For every purpose
for which there can be occasion to speak of the net produce of industry,
this surplus ought to be included in it. When this is included, and not
otherwise, the net produce of the country is the measure of its
effective power; of what it can spare for any purposes of public
utility, or private indulgence; the portion of its produce of which it
can dispose at pleasure; which can be drawn upon to attain any ends, or
gratify any wishes, either of the government or of individuals; which it
can either spend for its satisfaction, or save for future advantage.

The amount of this fund, this net produce, this excess of production
above the physical necessaries of the producers, is one of the elements
that determine the amount of saving. The greater the produce of labour
after supporting the labourers, the more there is which can be saved.
The same thing also partly contributes to determine how much will be
saved. A part of the motive to saving consists in the prospect of
deriving an income from savings; in the fact that capital, employed in
production, is capable of not only reproducing itself but yielding an
increase. The greater the profit that can be made from capital, the
stronger is the motive to its accumulation. That indeed which forms the
inducement to save, is not the whole of the fund which supplies the
means of saving, not the whole net produce of the land, capital, and
labour of the country, but only a part of it, the part which forms the
remuneration of the capitalist, and is called profit of stock. It will
however be readily enough understood, even previously to the
explanations which will be given hereafter, that when the general
productiveness of labour and capital is great, the returns to the
capitalist are likely Edition: current; Page: [165] to be large, and
that some proportion, though not an uniform one, will commonly obtain
between the two.

§ 2. But the disposition to save does not wholly depend on the external
inducement to it; on the amount of profit to be made from savings. With
the same pecuniary inducement, the inclination is very different, in
different persons, and in different communities. The effective desire of
accumulation is of unequal strength, not only according to the varieties
of individual character, but to the general state of society and
civilization. Like all other moral attributes, it is one in which the
human race exhibits great differences, conformably to the diversity of
its circumstances and the stage of its progress.

On topics which if they were to be fully investigated would exceed the
bounds that can be allotted to them in this treatise, it is satisfactory
to be able to refer to other works in which the necessary developments
have been presented more at length. On the subject of Population this
valuable service has been rendered by the celebrated Essay of Mr.
Malthus; and on the point which now occupies us I can refer with equal
confidence to another, though a less known work, New Principles of
Political Economy, by Dr. Rae.∗ In no other book known to me is so much
light thrown, both from principle and history, on the causes which
determine the accumulation of capital.

All accumulation involves the sacrifice of a present, for the sake of a
future good. But the expediency of such a sacrifice varies Edition:
current; Page: [166] very much in different states of circumstances; and
the willingness to make it, varies still more.

In weighing the future against the present, the uncertainty of all
things future is a leading element; and that uncertainty is of very
different degrees. “All circumstances” therefore, “increasing the
probability of the provision we make for futurity being enjoyed by
ourselves or others, tend” justly and reasonably “to give strength to
the effective desire of accumulation. Thus a healthy climate or
occupation, by increasing the probability of life, has a tendency to add
to this desire. When engaged in safe occupations, and living in healthy
countries, men are much more apt to be frugal, than in unhealthy or
hazardous occupations, and in climates pernicious to human life. Sailors
and soldiers are prodigals. In the West Indies, New Orleans, the East
Indies, the expenditure of the inhabitants is profuse. The same people,
coming to reside in the healthy parts of Europe, and not getting into
the vortex of extravagant fashion, live economically. War and pestilence
have always waste and luxury among the other evils that follow in their
train. For similar reasons, whatever gives security to the affairs of
the community is favourable to the strength of this principle. In this
respect the general prevalence of law and order, and the prospect of the
continuance of peace and tranquillity, have considerable influence.”∗
The more perfect the security, the greater will be the effective
strength of the desire of accumulation. Where property is less safe, or
the vicissitudes ruinous to fortunes are more frequent and severe, fewer
persons will save at all, and of those who do, many will require the
inducement of a higher rate of profit on capital, to make them prefer a
doubtful future to the temptation of present enjoyment.

These are considerations which affect the expediency, in the eye of
reason, of consulting future interests at the expense of present. But
the inclination to make the sacrifice does not solely depend upon its
expediency. The disposition to save is often far short of what reason
would dictate: and at other times is liable to be in excess of it.

Deficient strength of the desire of accumulation may arise from
improvidence, or from want of interest in others. Improvidence may be
connected with intellectual as well as moral causes. Individuals and
communities of a very low state of intelligence are always improvident.
A certain measure of intellectual development seems necessary to enable
absent things, and especially things future, Edition: current; Page:
[167] to act with any force on the imagination and will. The effect of
want of interest in others in diminishing accumulation will be admitted,
if we consider how much saving at present takes place, which has for its
object the interest of others rather than of ourselves; the education of
children, their advancement in life, the future interests of other
personal connexions, the power of promoting, by the bestowal of money or
time, objects of public or private usefulness. If mankind were generally
in the state of mind to which some approach was seen in the declining
period of the Roman Empire—caring nothing for their heirs, as well as
nothing for friends, the public, or any object which survived them—they
would seldom deny themselves any indulgence for the sake of saving,
beyond what was necessary for their own future years; which they would
place in life annuities, or in some other form which would make its
existence and their lives terminate together.

§ 3. From these various causes, intellectual and moral, there is, in
different portions of the human race, a greater diversity than is
usually adverted to, in the strength of the effective desire of
accumulation. A backward state of general civilization is often more the
effect of deficiency in this particular, than in many others which
attract more attention. In the circumstances, for example, of a hunting
tribe, “man may be said to be necessarily improvident, and regardless of
futurity, because, in this state, the future presents nothing which can
be with certainty either foreseen or governed.... Besides a want of the
motives exciting to provide for the needs of futurity through means of
the abilities of the present, there is a want of the habits of
perception and action, leading to a constant connexion in the mind of
those distant points, and of the series of events serving to unite them.
Even, therefore, if motives be awakened capable of producing the
exertion necessary to effect this connexion, there remains the task of
training the mind to think and act so as to establish it.”

For instance: “Upon the banks of the St. Lawrence there are several
little Indian villages. They are surrounded, in general, by a good deal
of land, from which the wood seems to have been long extirpated, and
have, besides, attached to them, extensive tracts of forest. The cleared
land is rarely, I may almost say never, cultivated, nor are any inroads
made in the forest for such a purpose. The soil is, nevertheless,
fertile, and were it not, manure lies in heaps by their houses. Were
every family to inclose half an acre of ground, Edition: current; Page:
[168] till it, and plant it in potatoes and maize, it would yield a
sufficiency to support them one half the year. They suffer, too, every
now and then, extreme want, insomuch that, joined to occasional
intemperance, it is rapidly reducing their numbers. This, to us, so
strange apathy proceeds not, in any great degree, from repugnance to
labour; on the contrary, they apply very diligently to it when its
reward is immediate. Thus, besides their peculiar occupations of hunting
and fishing, in which they are ever ready to engage, they are much
employed in the navigation of the St. Lawrence, and may be seen
labouring at the oar, or setting with the pole, in the large boats used
for the purpose, and always furnish the greater part of the additional
hands necessary to conduct rafts through some of the rapids. Nor is the
obstacle aversion to agricultural labour. This is no doubt a prejudice
of theirs; but mere prejudices always yield, principles of action cannot
be created. When the returns from agricultural labour are speedy and
great, they are also agriculturists. Thus, some of the little islands on
Lake St. Francis, near the Indian village of St. Regis, are favourable
to the growth of maize, a plant yielding a return of a hundredfold, and
forming, even when half ripe, a pleasant and substantial repast. Patches
of the best land on these islands are therefore every year cultivated by
them for this purpose. As their situation renders them inaccessible to
cattle, no fence is required; were this additional outlay necessary, I
suspect they would be neglected, like the commons adjoining their
village. These had apparently, at one time, been under crop. The cattle
of the neighbouring settlers would now, however, destroy any crop not
securely fenced, and this additional necessary outlay consequently bars
their culture. It removes them to an order of instruments of slower
return than that which corresponds to the strength of the effective
desire of accumulation in this little society.

“It is here deserving of notice, that what instruments of this kind they
do form, are completely formed. The small spots of corn they cultivate
are thoroughly weeded and hoed. A little neglect in this part would
indeed reduce the crop very much; of this experience has made them
perfectly aware, and they act accordingly. It is evidently not the
necessary labour that is the obstacle to more extended culture, but the
distant return from that labour. I am assured, indeed, that among some
of the more remote tribes, the labour thus expended much exceeds that
given by the whites. The same portions of ground being cropped without
remission, and manure not being used, they would scarcely yield any
return, were not the soil Edition: current; Page: [169] most carefully
broken and pulverized, both with the hoe and the hand. In such a
situation a white man would clear a fresh piece of ground. It would
perhaps scarce repay his labour the first year, and he would have to
look for his reward in succeeding years. On the Indian, succeeding years
are too distant to make sufficient impression; though, to obtain what
labour may bring about in the course of a few months, he toils even more
assiduously than the white man.”∗

This view of things is confirmed by the experience of the Jesuits, in
their interesting efforts to civilize the Indians of Paraguay. They
gained the confidence of these savages in a most extraordinary degree.
They acquired influence over them sufficient to make them change their
whole manner of life. They obtained their absolute submission and
obedience. They established peace. They taught them all the operations
of European agriculture, and many of the more difficult arts. There were
everywhere to be seen, according to Charlevoix, “workshops of gilders,
painters, sculptors, goldsmiths, watchmakers, carpenters, joiners,
dyers,” &c. These occupations were not practised for the personal gain
of the artificers: the produce was at the absolute disposal of the
missionaries, who ruled the people by a voluntary despotism. The
obstacles arising from aversion to labour were therefore very completely
overcome. The real difficulty was the improvidence of the people; their
inability to think for the future: and the necessity accordingly of the
most unremitting and minute superintendence on the part of their
instructors. “Thus at first, if these gave up to them the care of the
oxen with which they ploughed, their indolent thoughtlessness would
probably leave them at evening still yoked to the implement. Worse than
this, instances occurred where they cut them up for supper, thinking,
when reprehended, that they sufficiently excused themselves by saying
they were hungry.... These fathers, says Ulloa, have to visit the
houses, to examine what is really wanted: for without this care, the
Indians would never look after anything. They must be present, too, when
animals are slaughtered, not only that the meat may be equally divided,
but that nothing may be lost.” “But notwithstanding all this care and
superintendence,” says Charlevoix, “and all the precautions which are
taken to prevent any want of the necessaries of life, the missionaries
are sometimes much embarrassed. It often happens that they” (the
Indians) “do not reserve to themselves a sufficiency of grain, even for
seed. As for Edition: current; Page: [170] their other provisions, were
they not well looked after, they would soon be without wherewithal to
support life.”∗

As an example intermediate, in the strength of the effective desire of
accumulation, between the state of things thus depicted and that of
modern Europe, the case of the Chinese deserves attention. From various
circumstances in their personal habits and social condition, it might be
anticipated that they would possess a degree of prudence and
self-control greater than other Asiatics, but inferior to most European
nations; and the following evidence is adduced of the fact.

“Durability is one of the chief qualities, marking a high degree of the
effective desire of accumulation. The testimony of travellers ascribes
to the instruments formed by the Chinese, a very inferior durability to
similar instruments constructed by Europeans. The houses, we are told,
unless of the higher ranks, are in general of unburnt bricks, of clay,
or of hurdles plastered with earth; the roofs, of reeds fastened to
laths. We can scarcely conceive more unsubstantial or temporary fabrics.
Their partitions are of paper, requiring to be renewed every year. A
similar observation may be made concerning their implements of
husbandry, and other utensils. They are almost entirely of wood, the
metals entering but very sparingly into their construction; consequently
they soon wear out, and require frequent renewals. A greater degree of
strength in the effective desire of accumulation would cause them to be
constructed of materials requiring a greater present expenditure but
being far more durable. From the same cause, much land, that in other
countries would be cultivated, lies waste. All travellers take notice of
large tracts of lands, chiefly swamps, which continue in a state of
nature. To bring a swamp into tillage is generally a process, to
complete which, requires several years. It must be previously drained,
the surface long exposed to the sun, and many operations performed,
before it can be made capable of bearing a crop. Though yielding,
probably, a very considerable return for the labour bestowed on it, that
return is not made until a long time has elapsed. The cultivation of
such land implies a greater strength of the effective desire of
accumulation than exists in the empire.

“The produce of the harvest is, as we have remarked, always an
instrument of some order or another; it is a provision for future want,
and regulated by the same laws as those to which other means of
attaining a similar end conform. It is there chiefly rice, of which
Edition: current; Page: [171] there are two harvests, the one in June,
the other in October. The period then of eight months between October
and June, is that for which provision is made each year, and the
different estimate they make of to-day and this day eight months will
appear in the self-denial they practise now, in order to guard against
want then. The amount of this self-denial would seem to be small. The
father Parennin, indeed, (who seems to have been one of the most
intelligent of the Jesuits, and spent a long life among the Chinese of
all classes,) asserts, that it is their great deficiency in forethought
and frugality in this respect, which is the cause of the scarcities and
famines that frequently occur.”

That it is defect of providence, not defect of industry, that limits
production among the Chinese, is still more obvious than in the case of
the semi-agriculturized Indians. “Where the returns are quick, where the
instruments formed require but little time to bring the events for which
they were formed to an issue,” it is well known that “the great progress
which has been made in the knowledge of the arts suited to the nature of
the country and the wants of its inhabitants” makes industry energetic
and effective. “The warmth of the climate, the natural fertility of the
country, the knowledge which the inhabitants have acquired of the arts
of agriculture, and the discovery and gradual adaptation to every soil
of the most useful vegetable productions, enable them very speedily to
draw from almost any part of the surface, what is there esteemed an
equivalent to much more than the labour bestowed in tilling and cropping
it. They have commonly double, sometimes treble harvests. These, when
they consist of a grain so productive as rice, the usual crop, can
scarce fail to yield to their skill, from almost any portion of soil
that can be at once brought into culture, very ample returns.
Accordingly there is no spot that labour can immediately bring under
cultivation that is not made to yield to it. Hills, even mountains, are
ascended and formed into terraces; and water, in that country the great
productive agent, is led to every part by drains, or carried up to it by
the ingenious and simple hydraulic machines which have been in use from
time immemorial among this singular people. They effect this the more
easily, from the soil, even in these situations, being very deep and
covered with much vegetable mould. But what yet more this marks the
readiness with which labour is forced to form the most difficult
materials into instruments, where these instruments soon bring to an
issue the events for which they are formed, is the frequent occurrence
Edition: current; Page: [172] on many of their lakes and rivers, of
structures resembling the floating gardens of the Peruvians, rafts
covered with vegetable soil and cultivated. Labour in this way draws
from the materials on which it acts very speedy returns. Nothing can
exceed the luxuriance of vegetation when the quickening powers of a
genial sun are ministered to by a rich soil and abundant moisture. It is
otherwise, as we have seen, in cases where the return, though copious,
is distant. European travellers are surprised at meeting these little
floating farms by the side of swamps which only require draining to
render them tillable. It seems to them strange that labour should not
rather be bestowed on the solid earth, where its fruits might endure,
than on structures that must decay and perish in a few years. The people
they are among think not so much of future years as of the present time.
The effective desire of accumulation is of very different strength in
the one, from what it is in the other. The views of the European extend
to a distant futurity, and he is surprised at the Chinese, condemned
through improvidence, and want of sufficient prospective care, to
incessant toil, and as he thinks, insufferable wretchedness. The views
of the Chinese are confined to narrower bounds; he is content to live
from day to day, and has learnt to conceive even a life of toil a
blessing.”∗

When a country has carried production as far as in the existing state of
knowledge it can be carried with an amount of return corresponding to
the average strength of the effective desire of accumulation in that
country, it has reached what is called the stationary state; the state
in which no further addition will be made to capital, unless there takes
place either some improvement in the arts of production, or an increase
in the strength of the desire to accumulate. In the stationary state,
though capital does not on the whole increase, some persons grow richer
and others poorer. Those whose degree of providence is below the usual
standard, become impoverished, their capital perishes, and makes room
for the savings of those whose effective desire of accumulation exceeds
the average. These become the natural purchasers of the lands,
manufactories, and other instruments of production owned by their less
provident countrymen.

What the causes are which make the return to capital greater in one
country than in another, and which, in certain circumstances, make it
impossible for any additional capital to find investment unless at
diminished returns, will appear clearly hereafter. In China, if that
count has really attained, as it is supposed to have Edition: current;
Page: [173] done, the stationary state, accumulation has stopped when
the returns to capital are still [1848] as high as is indicated by a
rate of interest legally twelve per cent, and practically varying (it is
said) between eighteen and thirty-six. It is to be presumed therefore
that no greater amount of capital than the country already possesses,
can find employment at this high rate of profit, and that any lower rate
does not hold out to a Chinese sufficient temptation to induce him to
abstain from present enjoyment. What a contrast with Holland, where,
during the most flourishing period of its history, the government was
able habitually to borrow at two per cent, and private individuals, on
good security, at three. Since China is not a country like Burmah or the
native states of India, where an enormous interest is but an
indispensable compensation for the risk incurred from the bad faith or
poverty of the state, and of almost all private borrowers; the fact, if
fact it be, that the increase of capital has come to a stand while the
returns to it are still so large, denotes a much less degree of the
effective desire of accumulation, in other words a much lower estimate
of the future relatively to the present, than that of most European
nations.

§ 4. We have hitherto spoken of countries in which the average strength
of the desire to accumulate is short of that which, in circumstances of
any tolerable security, reason and sober calculation would approve. We
have now to speak of others in which it decidedly surpasses that
standard. In the more prosperous countries of Europe, there are to be
found abundance of prodigals; in some of them (and in none more than
England) the ordinary degree of economy and providence among those who
live by manual labour cannot be considered high: still, in a very
numerous portion of the community, the professional, manufacturing, and
trading classes, being those who, generally speaking, unite more of the
means with more of the motives for saving than any other class, the
spirit of accumulation is so strong, that the signs of rapidly
increasing wealth meet every eye: and the great amount of capital
seeking investment excites astonishment, whenever peculiar circumstances
turning much of it into some one channel, such as railway construction
or foreign speculative adventure, bring the largeness of the total
amount into evidence.

There are many circumstances, which, in England, give a peculiar force
to the accumulating propensity. The long exemption of the country from
the ravages of war, and the far earlier period than Edition: current;
Page: [174] elsewhere at which property was secure from military
violence or arbitrary spoliation, have produced a long-standing and
hereditary confidence in the safety of funds when trusted out of the
owner's hands, which in most other countries is of much more recent
origin, and less firmly established. The geographical causes which have
made industry rather than war the natural source of power and importance
to Great Britain, have turned an unusual proportion of the most
enterprising and energetic characters into the direction of manufactures
and commerce; into supplying their wants and gratifying their ambition
by producing and saving, rather than by appropriating what has been
produced and saved. Much also depended on the better political
institutions of this country, which by the scope they have allowed to
individual freedom of action, have encouraged personal activity and
self-reliance, while by the liberty they confer of association and
combination, they facilitate industrial enterprise on a large scale. The
same institutions in another of their aspects, give a most direct and
potent stimulus to the desire of acquiring wealth. The earlier decline
of feudalism having removed or much weakened invidious distinctions
between the originally trading classes and those who had been accustomed
to despise them; and a polity having grown up which made wealth the real
source of political influence; its acquisition was invested with a
factitious value, independent of its intrinsic utility. It became
synonymous with power; and since power with the common herd of mankind
gives power, wealth became the chief source of personal consideration,
and the measure and stamp of success in life. To get out of one rank in
society into the next above it, is the great aim of English middle-class
life, and the acquisition of wealth the means. And inasmuch as to be
rich without industry, has always hitherto constituted a step in the
social scale above those who are rich by means of industry, it becomes
the object of ambition to save not merely as much as will afford a large
income while in business, but enough to retire from business and live in
affluence on realized gains. These causes have, in England, been greatly
aided by that extreme incapacity of the people for personal enjoyment,
which is a characteristic of countries over which puritanism has passed.
But if accumulation is, on one hand, rendered easier by the absence of a
taste for pleasure, it is, on the other, made more difficult by the
presence of a very real taste for expense. So strong is the association
between personal consequence and the signs of wealth, that the silly
desire for the appearance of a large expenditure has the force of a
Edition: current; Page: [175] passion, among large classes of a nation
which derives less pleasure than perhaps any other in the world from
what it spends. Owing to this circumstance, the effective desire of
accumulation has never reached so high a pitch in England as it did in
Holland, where, there being no rich idle class to set the example of a
reckless expenditure, and the mercantile classes, who possessed the
substantial power on which social influence always waits, being left to
establish their own scale of living and standard of propriety, their
habits remained frugal and unostentatious.

In England and Holland, then, for a long time past, and now in most
other countries in Europe (which are rapidly following England in the
same race), the desire of accumulation does not require, to make it
effective, the copious returns which it requires in Asia, but is
sufficiently called into action by a rate of profit so low, that instead
of slackening, accumulation seems now to proceed more rapidly than ever;
and the second requisite of increased production, increase of capital,
shows no tendency to become deficient. So far as that element is
concerned, production is susceptible of an increase without any
assignable bounds.

The progress of accumulation would no doubt be considerably checked, if
the returns to capital were to be reduced still lower than at present.
But why should any possible increase of capital have that effect? This
question carries the mind forward to the remaining one of the three
requisites of production. The limitation to production, not consisting
in any necessary limit to the increase of the other two elements, labour
and capital, must turn upon the properties of the only element which is
inherently, and in itself, limited in quantity. It must depend on the
properties of land.

Edition: current; Page: [176]


CHAPTER XII: of the law of the increase of production from land

§ 1. Land differs from the other elements of production, labour and
capital, in not being susceptible of indefinite increase. Its extent is
limited, and the extent of the more productive kinds of it more limited
still. It is also evident that the quantity of produce capable of being
raised on any given piece of land is not indefinite. This limited
quantity of land, and limited productiveness of it, are the real limits
to the increase of production.

That they are the ultimate limits, must always have been clearly seen.
But since the final barrier has never in any instance been reached;
since there is no country in which all the land, capable of yielding
food, is so highly cultivated that a larger produce could not (even
without supposing any fresh advance in agricultural knowledge) be
obtained from it, and since a large portion of the earth's surface still
remains entirely uncultivated; it is commonly thought, and is very
natural at first to suppose, that for the present all limitation of
production or population from this source is at an indefinite distance,
and that ages must elapse before any practical necessity arises for
taking the limiting principle into serious consideration.

I apprehend this to be not only an error, but the most serious one, to
be found in the whole field of political economy. The question is more
important and fundamental than any other; it involves the whole subject
of the causes of poverty, in a rich and industrious community: and
unless this one matter be thoroughly understood, it is to no purpose
proceeding any further in our inquiry.

§ 2. The limitation to production from the properties of the soil, is
not like the obstacle opposed by a wall, which stands immovable in one
particular spot, and offers no hindrance to motion Edition: current;
Page: [177] short of stopping it entirely. We may rather compare it to a
highly elastic and extensible band, which is hardly ever so violently
stretched that it could not possibly be stretched any more, yet the
pressure of which is felt long before the final limit is reached, and
felt more severely the nearer that limit is approached.

After a certain, and not very advanced, stage in the progress of
agriculture,1 it is the law of production from the land, that in any
given state of agricultural skill and knowledge, by increasing the
labour, the produce is not increased in an equal degree; doubling the
labour does not double the produce; or, to express the same thing in
other words, every increase of produce is obtained by a more than
proportional increase in the application of labour to the land.

This general law of agricultural industry is the most important
proposition in political economy. Were the law different, nearly all the
phenomena of the production and distribution of wealth would be other
than they are. The most fundamental errors which still prevail on our
subject, result from not perceiving this law at work underneath the more
superficial agencies on which attention fixes itself; but mistaking
those agencies for the ultimate causes of effects of which they may
influence the form and mode, but of which it alone determines the
essence.

When, for the purpose of raising an increase of produce, recourse is had
to inferior land, it is evident that, so far, the produce does not
increase in the same proportion with the labour. The very meaning of
inferior land, is land which with equal labour returns a smaller amount
of produce. Land may be inferior either in fertility or in situation.
The one requires a greater proportional amount of labour for growing the
produce, the other for carrying it to market. If the land A yields a
thousand quarters of wheat, to a given outlay in wages, manure, &c., and
in order to raise another thousand recourse must be had to the land B,
which is either less fertile or more distant from the market, the two
thousand quarters will cost more than twice as much labour as the
original thousand, and the produce of agriculture will be increased in a
less ratio than the labour employed in procuring it.

Instead of cultivating the land B, it would be possible, by higher
cultivation, to make the land A produce more. It might Edition: current;
Page: [178] be ploughed or harrowed twice instead of once, or three
times instead of twice; it might be dug instead of being ploughed; after
ploughing, it might be gone over with a hoe instead of a harrow, and the
soil more completely pulverized; it might be oftener or more thoroughly
weeded; the implements used might be of higher finish, or more elaborate
construction; a greater quantity or more expensive kinds of manure might
be applied, or when applied, they might be more carefully mixed and
incorporated with the soil. These are some of the modes by which the
same land may be made to yield a greater produce; and when a greater
produce must be had, some of these are among the means usually employed
for obtaining it. But, that it is obtained at a more than proportional
increase of expense, is evident from the fact that inferior lands are
cultivated. Inferior lands, or lands at a greater distance from the
market, of course yield an inferior return, and an increasing demand
cannot be supplied from them unless at an augmentation of cost, and
therefore of price. If the additional demand could continue to be
supplied from the superior lands, by applying additional labour and
capital, at no greater proportional cost than that at which they yield
the quantity first demanded of them, the owners or farmers of those
lands could undersell all others, and engross the whole market. Lands of
a lower degree of fertility or in a more remote situation, might indeed
be cultivated by their proprietors, for the sake of subsistence or
independence; but it never could be the interest of any one to farm them
for profit. That a profit can be made from them, sufficient to attract
capital to such an investment, is a proof that cultivation on the more
eligible lands has reached a point, beyond which any greater application
of labour and capital would yield, at the best, no greater return than
can be obtained at the same expense from less fertile or less favourably
situated lands.

The careful cultivation of a well-farmed district of England or Scotland
is a symptom and an effect of the more unfavourable terms which the land
has begun to exact for any increase of its fruits. Such elaborate
cultivation costs much more in proportion, and requires a higher price
to render it profitable, than farming on a more superficial system; and
would not be adopted if access could be had to land of equal fertility,
previously unoccupied. Where there is the choice of raising the
increasing supply which society requires, from fresh land of as good
quality as that already cultivated, no attempt is made to extract from
land anything approaching to what it will yield on what are esteemed the
best Edition: current; Page: [179] European modes of cultivating. The
land is tasked up to the point at which the greatest return is obtained
in proportion to the labour employed, but no further: any additional
labour is carried elsewhere. “It is long,” says an intelligent traveller
in the United States,∗ “before an English eye becomes reconciled to the
lightness of the crops and the careless farming (as we should call it)
which is apparent. One forgets that where land is so plentiful and
labour so dear as it is here, a totally different principle must be
pursued to that which prevails in populous countries, and that the
consequence will of course be a want of tidiness, as it were, and
finish, about everything which requires labour.” Of the two causes
mentioned, the plentifulness of land seems to me the true explanation,
rather than the dearness of labour; for, however dear labour may be,
when food is wanted, labour will always be applied to producing it in
preference to anything else. But this labour is more effective for its
end by being applied to fresh soil, than if it were employed in bringing
the soil already occupied into higher cultivation. Only when no soils
remain to be broken up but such as either from distance or inferior
quality require a considerable rise of price to render their cultivation
profitable, can it become advantageous to apply the high farming of
Europe to any American lands; except, perhaps, in the immediate vicinity
of towns, where saving in cost of carriage may compensate for great
inferiority in the return from the soil itself. As American farming is
[1848] to English, so is the ordinary English to that of Flanders,
Tuscany, or the Terra di Lavoro; where by the application of a far
greater quantity of labour there is obtained a considerably larger gross
produce, but on such terms as would never be advantageous to a mere
speculator for profit, unless made so by much higher prices of
agricultural produce.

The principle which has now been stated must be received, no doubt, with
certain explanations and limitations. Even after the land is so highly
cultivated that the mere application of additional labour, or of an
additional amount of ordinary dressing, would yield no return
proportioned to the expense, it may still happen that the application of
a much greater additional labour and capital to improving the soil
itself, by draining or permanent manures, would be as liberally
remunerated by the produce, as any portion of the labour and capital
already employed. It would sometimes be much more amply remunerated.
This could not be, if Edition: current; Page: [180] capital always
sought and found the most advantageous employment; but if the most
advantageous employment has to wait longest for its remuneration, it is
only in a rather advanced stage of industrial development that the
preference will be given to it; and even in that advanced stage, the
laws or usages connected with property in land and the tenure of farms,
are often such as to prevent the disposable capital of the country from
flowing freely into the channel of agricultural improvement: and hence
the increased supply, required by increasing population, is sometimes
raised at an augmenting cost by higher cultivation, when the means of
producing it without increase of cost are known and accessible. There
can be no doubt, that if capital were forthcoming to execute, within the
next year, all known and recognised improvements in the land of the
United Kingdom which would pay at the existing prices, that is, which
would increase the produce in as great or a greater ratio than the
expense; the result would be such (especially if we include Ireland in
the supposition) that inferior land would not for a long time require to
be brought under tillage: probably a considerable part of the less
productive lands now cultivated, which are not particularly favoured by
situation, would go out of culture; or (as the improvements in question
are not so much applicable to good land, but operate rather by
converting bad land into good) the contraction of cultivation might
principally take place by a less high dressing and less elaborate
tilling of land generally; a falling back to something nearer the
character of American farming; such only of the poor lands being
altogether abandoned as were not found susceptible of improvement. And
thus the aggregate produce of the whole cultivated land would bear a
larger proportion than before to the labour expended on it; and the
general law of diminishing return from land would have undergone, to
that extent, a temporary supersession. No one, however, can suppose that
even in these circumstances, the whole produce required for the country
could be raised exclusively from the best lands, together with those
possessing advantages of situation to place them on a par with the best.
Much would undoubtedly continue to be produced under less advantageous
conditions, and with a smaller proportional return, than that obtained
from the best soils and situations. And in proportion as the further
increase of population required a still greater addition to the supply,
the general law would resume its course, and the further augmentation
would be obtained at a more than proportionate expense of labour and
capital.

Edition: current; Page: [181]
3. 1 That the produce of land increases, caeteris paribus, in a
diminishing ratio to the increase in the labour employed, is a truth
more often ignored or disregarded than actually denied. It has, however,
met with a direct impugner in the well-known American political
economist, Mr. H. C. Carey, who maintains that the real law of
agricultural industry is the very reverse; the produce increasing in a
greater ratio than the labour, or in other words affording to labour a
perpetually increasing return. To substantiate this assertion, he argues
that cultivation does not begin with the better soils, and extend from
them, as the demand increases, to the poorer, but begins with the
poorer, and does not, till long after, extend itself to the more
fertile. Settlers in a new country invariably commence on the high and
thin lands; the rich but swampy soils of the river bottoms cannot at
first be brought into cultivation, by reason of their unhealthiness, and
of the great and prolonged labour required for clearing and draining
them. As population and wealth increase, cultivation travels down the
hill sides, clearing them as it goes, and the most fertile soils, those
of the low grounds, are generally (he even says universally) the latest
cultivated. These propositions, with the inferences which Mr. Carey
draws from them, are set forth at much length in his latest and most
elaborate treatise, Principles of Social Science; and he considers them
as subverting the very foundation of what he calls the English political
economy, with all its practical consequences, especially the doctrine of
free trade.

As far as words go, Mr. Carey has a good case against several of the
highest authorities in political economy, who certainly did enunciate in
too universal a manner the law which they laid down, not remarking that
it is not true of the first cultivation in a newly settled country.
Where population is thin and capital scanty, land which requires a large
outlay to render it fit for tillage must remain untilled; though such
lands, when their time has come, often yield a greater produce than
those earlier cultivated, not only absolutely, but proportionally to the
labour employed, even if we include that which had been expended in
originally fitting them for culture. But it is not pretended that the
law of diminishing return was operative from the very beginning of
society: and though some Edition: current; Page: [182] political
economists may have believed it to come into operation earlier than it
does, it begins quite early enough to support the conclusions they
founded on it. Mr. Carey will hardly assert that in any old country—in
England or France, for example—the lands left waste are, or have for
centuries been, more naturally fertile than those under tillage. Judging
even by his own imperfect test, that of local situation—how imperfect I
need not stop to point out—is it true that in England or France at the
present day the uncultivated part of the soil consists of the plains and
valleys, and the cultivated, of the hills? Every one knows, on the
contrary, that it is the high lands and thin soils which are left to
nature, and when the progress of population demands an increase of
cultivation, the extension is from the plains to the hills. Once in a
century, perhaps, a Bedford Level may be drained, or a Lake of Harlem
pumped out: but these are slight and transient exceptions to the normal
progress of things; and in old countries which are at all advanced in
civilization, little of this sort remains to be done.∗

Mr. Carey himself unconsciously bears the strongest testimony to the
reality of the law he contends against: for one of the propositions most
strenuously maintained by him is, that the raw products of the soil, in
an advancing community, steadily tend to rise in price. Now, the most
elementary truths of political economy show that this could not happen,
unless the cost of production, measured in labour, of those products,
tended to rise. If the application of additional labour to the land was,
as a general rule, attended with an increase in the proportional return,
the price of produce, instead of rising, must necessarily fall as
society advances, unless the cost of production of gold and silver fell
still more: a case so rare, that there are only two periods in all
history when it is known to have taken place; the one, that which
followed the opening of the Mexican and Peruvian mines; the other, that
in which we now live. At all known periods, except these two, the cost
of production of the precious metals has been either stationary or
rising. If, therefore, it be true that the tendency of agricultural
produce is to rise in money price as wealth and population increase,
there needs no other evidence that the labour required for raising
Edition: current; Page: [183] it from the soil tends to augment when a
greater quantity is demanded.

I do not go so far as Mr. Carey: I do not assert that the cost of
production, and consequently the price, of agricultural produce, always
and necessarily rises as population increases. It tends to do so; but
the tendency may be, and sometimes is, even during long periods, held in
check. The effect does not depend on a single principle, but on two
antagonizing principles. There is another agency, in habitual antagonism
to the law of diminishing return from land; and to the consideration of
this we shall now proceed. It is no other than the progress of
civilization. I use this general and somewhat vague expression, because
the things to be included are so various, that hardly any term of a more
restricted signification would comprehend them all.

Of these, the most obvious is the progress of agricultural knowledge,
skill, and invention. Improved processes of agriculture are of two
kinds: some enable the land to yield a greater absolute produce, without
an equivalent increase of labour; others have not the power of
increasing the produce, but have that of diminishing the labour and
expense by which it is obtained. Among the first are to be reckoned the
disuse of fallows, by means of the rotation of crops; and the
introduction of new articles of cultivation capable of entering
advantageously into the rotation. The change made in British agriculture
towards the close of the last century, by the introduction of turnip
husbandry, is spoken of as amounting to a revolution. These improvements
operate not only by enabling the land to produce a crop every year,
instead of remaining idle one year in every two or three to renovate its
powers, but also by direct increase of its productiveness; since the
great addition made to the number of cattle by the increase of their
food, affords more abundant manure to fertilize the corn lands. Next in
order comes the introduction of new articles of food, containing a
greater amount of sustenance, like the potato, or more productive
species or varieties of the same plant, such as the Swedish turnip. In
the same class of improvements must be placed a better knowledge of the
properties of manures, and of the most effectual modes of applying them;
the introduction of new and more powerful fertilizing agents, such as
guano, and the conversion to the same purpose, of substances previously
wasted; inventions like subsoil-ploughing or tile draining; improvements
in the breed or feeding of labouring cattle; augmented stock of the
animals which consume and convert Edition: current; Page: [184] into
human food what would otherwise be wasted; and the like. The other sorts
of improvements, those which diminish labour, but without increasing the
capacity of the land to produce, are such as the improved construction
of tools; the introduction of new instruments which spare manual labour,
as the winnowing and threshing machines; a more skilful and economical
application of muscular exertion, such as the introduction, so slowly
accomplished in England, of Scotch ploughing, with two horses abreast
and one man, instead of three or four horses in a team and two men, &c.
These improvements do not add to the productiveness of the land, but
they are equally calculated with the former to counteract the tendency
in the cost of production of agricultural produce to rise with the
progress of population and demand.

Analogous in effect to this second class of agricultural improvements,
are improved means of communication. Good roads are equivalent to good
tools. It is of no consequence whether the economy of labour takes place
in extracting the produce from the soil, or in conveying it to the place
where it is to be consumed. Not to say in addition, that the labour of
cultivation itself is diminished by whatever lessens the cost of
bringing manure from a distance, or facilitates the many operations of
transport from place to place which occur within the bounds of the farm.
Railways and canals are virtually a diminution of the cost of production
of all things sent to market by them; and literally so of all those, the
appliances and aids for producing which, they serve to transmit. By
their means land can be cultivated, which could not otherwise have
remunerated the cultivators without a rise of price. Improvements in
navigation have, with respect to food or materials brought from beyond
sea, a corresponding effect.

From similar considerations, it appears that many purely mechanical
improvements, which have, apparently at least, no peculiar connexion
with agriculture, nevertheless enable a given amount of food to be
obtained with a smaller expenditure of labour. A great improvement in
the process of smelting iron, would tend to cheapen agricultural
implements, diminish the cost of railroads, of waggons and carts, ships,
and perhaps buildings, and many other things to which iron is not at
present applied, because it is too costly; and would thence diminish the
cost of production of food. The same effect would follow from an
improvement in those processes of what may be termed manufacture to
which the material of food is subjected after it is separated from the
ground. The Edition: current; Page: [185] first application of wind or
water power to grind corn tended to cheapen bread as much as a very
important discovery in agriculture would have done; and any great
improvement in the construction of corn-mills, would have, in
proportion, a similar influence. The effects of cheapening locomotion
have been already considered. There are also engineering inventions
which facilitate all great operations on the earth's surface. An
improvement in the art of taking levels is of importance to draining,
not to mention canal and railway making. The fens of Holland, and of
some parts of England, are drained by pumps worked by the wind or by
steam. Where canals of irrigation, or where tanks or embankments are
necessary, mechanical skill is a great resource for cheapening
production.

Those manufacturing improvements which cannot be made instrumental to
facilitate, in any of its stages, the actual production of food, and
therefore do not help to counteract or retard the diminution of the
proportional return to labour from the soil, have, however, another
effect, which is practically equivalent. What they do not prevent, they
yet, in some degree, compensate for.

The materials of manufacture being all drawn from the land, and many of
them from agriculture, which supplies in particular the entire material
of clothing; the general law of production from the land, the law of
diminishing return, must in the last resort be applicable to
manufacturing as well as to agricultural history. As population
increases, and the power of the land to yield increased produce is
strained harder and harder, any additional supply of material, as well
as of food, must be obtained by a more than proportionally increasing
expenditure of labour. But the cost of the material forming generally a
very small portion of the entire cost of the manufacture, the
agricultural labour concerned in the production of manufactured goods is
but a small fraction of the whole labour worked up in the commodity. All
the rest of the labour tends constantly and strongly towards diminution,
as the amount of production increases. Manufactures are vastly more
susceptible than agriculture of mechanical improvements, and
contrivances for saving labour; and it has already been seen how greatly
the skilful and economical distribution, depend on the extent of the
market, and on the possibility of production in large masses. In
manufactures, accordingly, the causes tending to increase the
productiveness of industry, preponderate greatly over the one cause
which tends to diminish it: and Edition: current; Page: [186] the
increase of production, called forth by the progress of society, takes
place, not at an increasing, but at a continually diminishing
proportional cost. This fact has manifested itself in the progressive
fall of the prices and values of almost every kind of manufactured goods
during two centuries past; a fall accelerated by the mechanical
inventions of the last seventy or eighty years, and susceptible of being
prolonged and extended beyond any limit which it would be safe to
specify.

Now it is quite conceivable that the efficiency of agricultural labour
might be undergoing, with the increase of produce, a gradual diminution;
that the price of food, in consequence, might be progressively rising,
and an ever growing proportion of the population might be needed to
raise food for the whole; while yet the productive power of labour in
all other branches of industry might be so rapidly augmenting, that the
required amount of labour could be spared from manufactures, and
nevertheless a greater produce be obtained, and the aggregate wants of
the community be on the whole better supplied, than before. The benefit
might even extend to the poorest class. The increased cheapness of
clothing and lodging might make up to them for the augmented cost of
their food.

There is, thus, no possible improvement in the arts of production which
does not in one or another mode exercise an antagonist influence to the
law of diminishing return to agricultural labour. Nor is it only
industrial improvements which have this effect. Improvements in
government, and almost every kind of moral and social advancement,
operate in the same manner. Suppose a country in the condition of France
before the Revolution: taxation imposed almost exclusively on the
industrial classes, and on such a principle as to be an actual penalty
on production; and no redress obtainable for any injury to property or
person, when inflicted by people of rank, or court influence. Was not
the hurricane which swept away this system of things, even if we look no
further than to its effect in augmenting the productiveness of labour,
equivalent to many industrial inventions? The removal of a fiscal
burthen on agriculture, such as tithe, has the same effect as if the
labour necessary for obtaining the existing produce were suddenly
reduced one-tenth. The abolition of corn laws, or of any other
restrictions which prevent commodities from being produced where the
cost of their production is lowest, amounts to a vast improvement in
production. When fertile land, previously reserved as hunting ground, or
for any other purpose of amusement, Edition: current; Page: [187] is set
free for culture, the aggregate productiveness of agricultural industry
is increased. It is well known what has been the effect in England of
badly administered poor laws, and the still worse effect in Ireland of a
bad system of tenancy, in rendering agricultural labour slack and
ineffective. No improvements operate more directly upon the
productiveness of labour, than those in the tenure of farms, and in the
laws relating to landed property. The breaking up of entails, the
cheapening of the transfer of property, and whatever else promotes the
natural tendency of land in a system of freedom, to pass out of hands
which can make little of it into those which can make more; the
substitution of long leases for tenancy at will, and of any tolerable
system of tenancy whatever for the wretched cottier system; above all,
the acquisition of a permanent interest in the soil by the cultivators
of it; all these things are as real, and some of them as great,
improvements in production, as the invention of the spinning jenny or
the steam-engine.

We may say the same of improvements in education. The intelligence of
the workman is a most important element in the productiveness of labour.
So low, in some of the most civilized countries, is the present [1848]
standard of intelligence, that there is hardly any source from which a
more indefinite amount of improvement may be looked for in productive
power, than by endowing with brains those who now have only hands. The
carefulness, economy, and general trustworthiness of labourers are as
important as their intelligence. Friendly relations, and a community of
interest and feeling between labourers and employers, are eminently so:
I should rather say, would be: for I know not where any such sentiment
of friendly alliance now exists. Nor is it only in the labouring class
that improvement of mind and character operates with beneficial effect
even on industry. In the rich and idle classes, increased mental energy,
more solid instruction, and stronger feelings of conscience, public
spirit, or philanthropy, would qualify them to originate and promote the
most valuable improvements, both in the economical resources of their
country, and in its institutions and customs. To look no further than
the most obvious phenomena; the backwardness of French agriculture in
the precise points in which benefit might be expected from the influence
of an educated class, is partly accounted for by the exclusive devotion
of the richer landed proprietors to town interests and town pleasures.
There is scarcely any possible amelioration of human affairs which would
not, among its other benefits, have Edition: current; Page: [188] a
favourable operation, direct or indirect, upon the productiveness of
industry. The intensity of devotion to industrial occupations would
indeed in many cases be moderated by a more liberal and genial mental
culture, but the labour actually bestowed on those occupations would
almost always be rendered more effective.

Before pointing out the principal inferences to be drawn from the nature
of the two antagonist forces by which the productiveness of agricultural
industry is determined, we must observe that what we have said of
agriculture, is true with little variation, of the other occupations
which it represents; of all the arts which extract materials from the
globe. Mining industry, for example, usually yields an increase of
produce at a more than proportional increase of expense. It does worse,
for even its customary annual produce requires to be extracted by a
greater and greater expenditure of labour and capital. As a mine does
not reproduce the coal or ore taken from it, not only are all mines at
last exhausted, but even when they as yet show no signs of exhaustion,
they must be worked at a continually increasing cost; shafts must be
sunk deeper, galleries driven farther, greater power applied to keep
them clear of water; the produce must be lifted from a greater depth, or
conveyed a greater distance. The law of diminishing return applies
therefore to mining, in a still more unqualified sense than to
agriculture: but the antagonizing agency, that of improvements in
production, also applies in a still greater degree. Mining operations
are more susceptible of mechanical improvements than agricultural: the
first great application of the steam-engine was to mining; and there are
unlimited possibilities of improvement in the chemical processes by
which the metals are extracted. There is another contingency, of no
unfrequent occurrence, which avails to counterbalance the progress of
all existing mines towards exhaustion: this is, the discovery of new
ones, equal or superior in richness.

To resume; all natural agents which are limited in quantity, are not
only limited in their ultimate productive power, but, long before that
power is stretched to the utmost, they yield to any additional demands
on progressively harder terms. This law may however be suspended, or
temporarily controlled, by whatever adds to the general power of mankind
over nature; and especially by any extension of their knowledge, and
their consequent command, of the properties and powers of natural
agents.1

Edition: current; Page: [189]


CHAPTER XIII: consequences of the foregoing laws

§ 1. From the preceding exposition it appears that the limit to the
increase of production is two-fold; from deficiency of capital, or of
land. Production comes to a pause, either because the effective desire
of accumulation is not sufficient to give rise to any further increase
of capital, or because, however disposed the possessors of surplus
income may be to save a portion of it, the limited land at the disposal
of the community does not permit additional capital to be employed with
such a return, as would be an equivalent to them for their abstinence.

In countries where the principle of accumulation is as weak as it is in
the various nations of Asia; where people will neither save, nor work to
obtain the means of saving, unless under the inducement of enormously
high profits, nor even then if it is necessary to wait a considerable
time for them; where either productions remain scanty, or drudgery
great, because there is neither capital forthcoming nor forethought
sufficient for the adoption of the contrivances by which natural agents
are made to do the work of human labour; the desideratum for such a
country, economically considered, is an increase of industry, and of the
effective desire of accumulation. The means are, first, a better
government: more complete security of property; moderate taxes, and
freedom from arbitrary exaction under the name of taxes; a more
permanent and more advantageous tenure of land, securing to the
cultivator as far as possible the undivided benefits of the industry,
skill, and economy he may exert. Secondly, improvement of the public
intelligence: the decay of usages or superstitions which interfere with
the effective employment of industry; and the growth of mental activity,
making the people alive to new objects of desire. Thirdly, the
introduction of foreign arts, which raise the returns derivable from
additional capital, to a rate corresponding to the low strength of the
desire of accumulation: Edition: current; Page: [190] and the
importation of foreign capital, which renders the increase of production
no longer exclusively dependent on the thrift or providence of the
inhabitants themselves, while it places before them a stimulating
example, and by instilling new ideas and breaking the chains of habit,
if not by improving the actual condition of the population, tends to
create in them new wants, increased ambition, and greater thought for
the future. These considerations apply more or less to all the Asiatic
populations, and to the less civilized and industrious parts of Europe,
as Russia, Turkey, Spain, and Ireland.

§ 2. But there are other countries, and England is at the head of them,
in which neither the spirit of industry nor the effective desire of
accumulation need any encouragement; where the people will toil hard for
a small remuneration, and save much for a small profit; where, though
the general thriftiness of the labouring class is much below what is
desirable, the spirit of accumulation in the more prosperous part of the
community requires abatement rather than increase. In these countries
there would never be any deficiency of capital, if its increase were
never checked or brought to a stand by too great a diminution of its
returns. It is the tendency of the returns to a progressive diminution,
which causes the increase of production to be often attended with a
deterioration in the condition of the producers; and this tendency,
which would in time put an end to increase of production altogether, is
a result of the necessary and inherent conditions of production from the
land.

In all countries which have passed beyond a rather1 early stage in the
progress of agriculture, every increase in the demand for food,
occasioned by increased population, will always, unless there is a
simultaneous improvement in production, diminish the share which on a
fair division would fall to each individual. An increased production, in
default of unoccupied tracts of fertile land, or of fresh improvements
tending to cheapen commodities, can never be obtained but by increasing
the labour in more than the same proportion. The population must either
work harder, or eat less, or obtain their usual food by sacrificing a
part of their other customary comforts. Whenever this necessity is
postponed, notwithstanding an increase of population,2 it is because the
improvements which facilitate production continue progressive; because
the contrivances Edition: current; Page: [191] of mankind for making
their labour more effective, keep up an equal struggle with nature, and
extort fresh resources from her reluctant powers as fast as human
necessities occupy and engross the old.

From this, results the important corollary, that the necessity of
restraining population is not, as many persons believe, peculiar to a
condition of great inequality of property. A greater number of people
cannot, in any given state of civilization, be collectively so well
provided for as a smaller. The niggardliness of nature, not the
injustice of society, is the cause of the penalty attached to
over-population. An unjust distribution of wealth does not even
aggravate the evil, but, at most, causes it to be somewhat earlier felt.
It is in vain to say, that all mouths which the increase of mankind
calls into existence, bring with them hands. The new mouths require as
much food as the old ones, and the hands do not produce as much. If all
instruments of production were held in joint property by the whole
people, and the produce divided with perfect equality among them, and
if, in a society thus constituted, industry were as energetic and the
produce as ample as at present, there would be enough to make all the
existing population extremely comfortable; but when that population had
doubled itself, as, with the existing habits of the people, under such
an encouragement, it undoubtedly would in little more than twenty years,
what would then be their condition? Unless the arts of production were
in the same time improved in an almost unexampled degree,1 the inferior
soils which must be resorted to, and the more laborious and scantily
remunerative cultivation which must be employed on the superior soils,
to procure food for so much larger a population, would, by an
insuperable necessity, render every individual in the community poorer
than before. If the population continued to increase at the same rate, a
time would soon arrive when no one would have more than mere
necessaries, and, soon after, a time when no one would have a
sufficiency of those, and the further increase of population would be
arrested by death.

Whether, at the present or any other time, the produce of industry
proportionally to the labour employed, is increasing or diminishing, and
the average condition of the people improving or deteriorating, depends
upon whether population is advancing faster than improvement, or
improvement than population. After a degree of density has been
attained, sufficient to allow the principal Edition: current; Page:
[192] benefits of combination of labour, all further increase tends in
itself to mischief, so far as regards the average condition of the
people; but the progress of improvement has a counteracting operation,
and allows of increased numbers without any deterioration, and even
consistently with a higher average of comfort. Improvement must here be
understood in a wide sense, including not only new industrial
inventions, or an extended use of those already known, but improvements
in institutions, education, opinions, and human affairs generally,
provided they tend, as almost all improvements do, to give new motives
or new facilities to production. If the productive powers of the country
increase as rapidly as advancing numbers call for an augmentation of
produce, it is not necessary to obtain that augmentation by the
cultivation of soils more sterile than the worst already under culture,
or by applying additional labour to the old soils at a diminished
advantage; or at all events this loss of power is compensated by the
increased efficiency with which, in the progress of improvement, labour
is employed in manufactures. In one way or the other, the increased
population is provided for, and all are as well off as before. But if
the growth of human power over nature is suspended or slackened, and
population does not slacken its increase; if, with only the existing
command over natural agencies, those agencies are called upon for an
increased produce; this greater produce will not be afforded to the
increased population, without either demanding on the average a greater
effort from each, or on the average reducing each to a smaller ration
out of the aggregate produce.

As a matter of fact, at some periods the progress of population has been
the more rapid of the two, at others that of improvement. In England
during a long interval preceding the French Revolution, population
increased slowly; but the progress of improvement, at least in
agriculture, would seem to have been still slower, since though nothing
occurred to lower the value of the precious metals, the price of corn
rose considerably, and England, from an exporting, became an importing
country. This evidence, however, is short of conclusive, inasmuch as the
extraordinary number of abundant seasons during the first half of the
century, not continuing during the last, was a cause of increased price
in the later period, extrinsic to the ordinary progress of society.
Whether during the same period improvements in manufactures, or
diminished cost of imported commodities, made amends for the diminished
productiveness of labour on the land, is uncertain. But ever since the
great mechanical Edition: current; Page: [193] inventions of Watt,
Arkwright, and their contemporaries, the return to labour has probably
increased as fast as the population; and would have outstripped it, if
that very augmentation of return had not called forth an additional
portion of the inherent power of multiplication in the human species.
During the twenty or thirty years last elapsed [1857], so rapid has been
the extension of improved processes of agriculture, that even the land
yields a greater produce in proportion to the labour employed; the
average price of corn had become decidedly lower, even before the repeal
of the corn laws had so materially lightened, for the time being, the
pressure of population upon production. But though improvement may
during a certain space of time keep up with, or even surpass, the actual
increase of population, it assuredly never comes up to the rate of
increase of which population is capable; and nothing could have
prevented a general deterioration in the condition of the human race,
were it not that population has in fact been restrained. Had it been
restrained still more, and the same improvements taken place, there
would have been a larger dividend than there now is, for the nation or
the species at large. The new ground wrung from nature by the
improvements would not have been all used up in the support of mere
numbers. Though the gross produce would not have been so great, there
would have been a greater produce per head of the population.

§ 3. When the growth of numbers outstrips the progress of improvement,
and a country is driven to obtain the means of subsistence on terms more
and more unfavourable, by the inability of its land to meet additional
demands except on more onerous conditions; there are two expedients by
which it may hope to mitigate that disagreeable necessity, even though
no change should take place in the habits of the people with respect to
their rate of increase. One of these expedients is the importation of
food from abroad. The other is emigration.

The admission of cheaper food from a foreign country, is equivalent to
an agricultural invention by which food could be raised at a similarly
diminished cost at home. It equally increases the productive power of
labour. The return was before, so much food for so much labour employed
in the growth of food: the return is now, a greater quantity of food,
for the same labour employed in producing cottons or hardware or some
other commodity, to be given in exchange for food. The one improvement,
like the other, throws Edition: current; Page: [194] back the decline of
the productive power of labour by a certain distance: but in the one
case as in the other, it immediately resumes its course; the tide which
has receded, instantly begins to re-advance. It might seem, indeed, that
when a country draws its supply of food from so wide a surface as the
whole habitable globe, so little impression can be produced on that
great expanse by any increase of mouths in one small corner of it, that
the inhabitants of the country may double and treble their numbers,
without feeling the effect in any increased tension of the springs of
production, or any enhancement of the price of food throughout the
world. But in this calculation several things are overlooked.

In the first place, the foreign regions from which corn can be imported
do not comprise the whole globe, but those parts of it principally which
are in the immediate neighbourhood of coasts or navigable rivers. The
coast is the part of most countries which is earliest and most thickly
peopled, and has seldom any food to spare. The chief source of supply,
therefore, is the strip of country along the banks of some navigable
river, as the Nile, the Vistula, or the Mississippi; and of such there
is not, in the productive regions of the earth, so great a multitude as
to suffice during an indefinite time for a rapidly growing demand,
without an increasing strain on the productive powers of the soil. To
obtain auxiliary supplies of corn from the interior in any abundance,
is, in the existing state of the communications [1871], in most cases
impracticable. By improved roads, and by canals and railways, the
obstacle will eventually be so reduced as not to be insuperable: but
this is a slow progress; in all the food-exporting countries except
America, a very slow progress; and one which cannot keep pace with
population, unless the increase of the last is very effectually
restrained.

In the next place, even if the supply were drawn from the whole instead
of a small part of the surface of the exporting counties, the quantity
of food would still be limited, which could be obtained from them
without an increase of the proportional cost. The countries which export
food may be divided into two classes; those in which the effective
desire of accumulation is strong, and those in which it is weak. In
Australia and the United States of America, the effective desire of
accumulation is strong; capital increases fast, and the production of
food might be very rapidly extended. But in such countries population
also increases with extraordinary rapidity. Their agriculture has to
provide for their own expanding numbers, as well as for those of the
importing countries. They Edition: current; Page: [195] must, therefore,
from the nature of the case, be rapidly driven, if not to less fertile,
at least what is equivalent, to remoter and less accessible lands, and
to modes of cultivation like those of old countries, less productive in
proportion to the labour and expense.

But the countries which have at the same time cheap food and great
industrial prosperity are few, being only those in which the arts of
civilized life have been transferred full-grown to a rich and
uncultivated soil. Among old countries, those which are able to export
food, are able only because their industry is in a very backward state;
because capital, and hence population, have never increased sufficiently
to make food rise to a higher price. Such countries are [1848] Russia,
Poland, and the plains of the Danube. In those regions the effective
desire of accumulation is weak, the arts of production most imperfect,
capital scanty, and its increase, especially from domestic sources,
slow. When an increased demand arose for food to be exported to other
countries, it would only be very gradually that food could be produced
to meet it. The capital needed could not be obtained by transfer from
other employments, for such do not exist. The cottons or hardware which
would be received from England in exchange for corn, the Russians and
Poles do not now produce in the country: they go without them. Something
might in time be expected from the increased exertions to which
producers would be stimulated by the market opened for their produce;
but to such increase of exertion, the habits of countries whose
agricultural population consists of serfs, or of peasants who have but
just emerged from a servile condition, are the reverse of favourable,
and even in this age of movement these habits do not rapidly change. If
a greater outlay of capital is relied on as the source from which the
produce is to be increased, the means must either be obtained by the
slow process of saving, under the impulse given by new commodities and
more extended intercourse (and in that case the population would most
likely increase as fast), or must be brought in from foreign countries.
If England is to obtain a rapidly increasing supply of corn from Russia
or Poland, English capital must go there to produce it. This, however,
is attended with so many difficulties, as are equivalent to great
positive disadvantages. It is opposed by differences of language,
differences of manners, and a thousand obstacles arising from the
institutions and social relations of the country; and after all it would
inevitably so stimulate population on the spot, that nearly all the
increase of food produced by its means would probably be Edition:
current; Page: [196] consumed without leaving the country: so that, if
it were not the almost only mode of introducing foreign arts and ideas,
and giving an effectual spur to the backward civilization of those
countries, little reliance could be placed on it for increasing the
exports, and supplying other countries with a progressive and indefinite
increase of food. But to improve the civilization of a country is a slow
process, and gives time for so great an increase of population both in
the country itself, and in those supplied from it, that its effect in
keeping down the price of food against the increase of demand, is not
likely to be more decisive on the scale of all Europe, than on the
smaller one of a particular nation.

The law, therefore, of diminishing return to industry, whenever
population makes a more rapid progress than improvement, is not solely
applicable to countries which are fed from their own soil, but in
substance applies quite as much to those which are willing to draw their
food from any accessible quarter that can afford it cheapest. A sudden
and great cheapening of food, indeed, in whatever manner produced,
would, like any other sudden improvement in the arts of life, throw the
natural tendency of affairs a stage or two further back, though without
altering its course.1 There is one contingency connected with freedom of
importation, which may yet produce temporary effects greater than were
ever contemplated either by the bitterest enemies or the most ardent
adherents of free-trade in food. Maize, or Indian corn, is a product
capable of being supplied in quantity sufficient to feed the whole
country, at a cost, allowing for difference of nutritive quality,
cheaper even than the potato. If maize should ever substitute itself for
wheat as the staple food of the poor, the productive power of labour in
obtaining food would be so Edition: current; Page: [197] enormously
increased, and the expense of maintaining a family so diminished, that
it would require perhaps some generations for population, even if it
started forward at an American pace, to overtake this great accession to
the facilities of its support.

§ 4. Besides the importation of corn, there is another resource which
can be invoked by a nation whose increasing numbers press hard, not
against their capital, but against the productive capacity of their
land: I mean Emigration, especially in the form of Colonization. Of this
remedy the efficacy as far as it goes is real, since it consists in
seeking elsewhere those unoccupied tracts of fertile land, which if they
existed at home would enable the demand of an increasing population to
be met without any falling off in the productiveness of labour.
Accordingly, when the region to be colonized is near at hand, and the
habits and tastes of the people sufficiently migratory, this remedy is
completely effectual. The migration from the older parts of the American
Confederation to the new territories, which is to all intents and
purposes colonization, is what enables population to go on unchecked
throughout the Union without having yet diminished the return to
industry, or increased the difficulty of earning a subsistence. If
Australia or the interior of Canada were as near to Great Britain as
Wisconsin and Iowa to New York; if the superfluous people could remove
to it without crossing the sea, and were of as adventurous and restless
a character, and as little addicted to staying at home, as their
kinsfolk of New England, those unpeopled continents would render the
same service to the United Kingdom which the old states of America
derive from the new. But, these things being as they are—though a
judiciously conducted emigration is a most important resource for
suddenly lightening the pressure of population by a single effort—and
though in such an extraordinary case as that of Ireland under the
threefold operation of the potato failure, the poor law, and the general
turning-out of tenantry throughout the country, spontaneous emigration
may at a particular crisis remove greater multitudes than it was ever
proposed to remove at once by any national scheme;1 it still remains to
be shown by experience2 whether a permanent stream of emigration can be
kept up, sufficient to take off, as in America, all that portion of the
annual increase (when proceeding at its greatest Edition: current; Page:
[198] rapidity) which, being in excess of the progress made during the
same short period in the arts of life, tends to render living more
difficult for every averagely-situated individual in the community. And
unless this can be done, emigration cannot, even in an economical point
of view, dispense with the necessity of checks to population. Further
than this we have not to speak of it in this place. The general subject
of colonization as a practical question, its importance to old
countries, and the principles on which it should be conducted, will be
discussed at some length in a subsequent portion of this treatise.

Edition: current; Page: [199]


Book II.: DISTRIBUTION.


CHAPTER I.: of property

§ 1. The principles which have been set forth in the first part of this
treatise, are, in certain respects, strongly distinguished from those on
the consideration of which we are now about to enter. The laws and
conditions of the Production of wealth partake of the character of
physical truths. There is nothing optional or arbitrary in them.
Whatever mankind produce, must be produced in the modes, and under the
conditions, imposed by the constitution of external things, and by the
inherent properties of their own bodily and mental structure. Whether
they like it or not, their productions will be limited by the amount of
their previous accumulation, and, that being given, it will be
proportional to their energy, their skill, the perfection of their
machinery, and their judicious use of the advantages of combined labour.
Whether they like it or not, a double quantity of labour will not raise,
on the same land, a double quantity of food, unless some improvement
takes place in the processes of cultivation. Whether they like it or
not, the unproductive expenditure of individuals will pro tanto tend to
impoverish the community, and only their productive expenditure will
enrich it. The opinions, or the wishes, which may exist on these
different matters, do not control the things themselves. We cannot,
indeed, foresee to what extent the modes of production may be altered,
or the productiveness of labour increased, by future extensions of our
knowledge of the laws of nature, suggesting new processes of industry of
which we have at present no conception. But howsoever we Edition:
current; Page: [200] may succeed in making for ourselves more space
within the limits set by the constitution of things, we know that there
must be limits. We cannot alter the ultimate properties either of matter
or mind, but can only employ those properties more or less successfully,
to bring about the events in which we are interested.1.

It is not so with the Distribution of wealth. That is a matter of human
institution solely. The things once there, mankind, individually or
collectively, can do with them as they like. They can place them at the
disposal of whomsoever they please, and on whatever terms. Further, in
the social state, in every state except total solitude, any disposal
whatever of them can only take place by the consent of society,2. or
rather of those who dispose of its active force. Even what a person has
produced by his individual toil, unaided by any one, he cannot keep,
unless by the permission of society. Not only can society take it from
him, but individuals could and would take it from him, if society only
remained passive; if it did not either interfere en masse, or employ and
pay people for the purpose of preventing him from being disturbed in the
possession. The distribution of wealth, therefore, depends on the laws
and customs of society. The rules by which it is determined, are what
the opinions and feelings of the ruling portion of the community make
them, and are very different in different ages and countries; and might
be still more different, if mankind so chose.

The opinions and feelings of mankind, doubtless, are not a matter of
chance. They are consequences of the fundamental laws of human nature,
combined with the existing state of knowledge and experience, and the
existing condition of social institutions and intellectual and moral
culture. But the laws of the generation of human opinions are not within
our present subject. They are part of the general theory of human
progress, a far larger and more difficult subject of inquiry than
political economy. We have here to consider, not the causes, but the
consequences, of the rules according to which wealth may be distributed.
Those, at least, are as little arbitrary, and have as much the character
of physical laws, as the laws of production. Human beings can control
their own Edition: current; Page: [201] acts, but not the consequences
of their acts either to themselves or to others. Society can subject the
distribution of wealth to whatever rules it thinks best: but what
practical results will flow from the operation of those rules, must be
discovered, like any other physical or mental truths, by observation and
reasoning.

We proceed, then, to the consideration of the different modes of
distributing the produce of land and labour, which have been adopted in
practice, or may be conceived in theory. Among these, our attention is
first claimed by that primary and fundamental institution, on which,
unless in some exceptional and very limited cases, the economical
arrangements of society have always rested, though in its secondary
features it has varied, and is liable to vary. I mean, of course, the
institution of individual property.

§ 2. Private property, as an institution, did not owe its origin to any
of those considerations of utility, which plead for the maintenance of
it when established. Enough is known of rude ages, both from history and
from analogous states of society in our own time, to show that tribunals
(which always precede laws) were originally established, not to
determine rights, but to repress violence and terminate quarrels. With
this object chiefly in view, they naturally enough gave legal effect to
first occupancy, by treating as the aggressor the person who first
commenced violence, by turning, or attempting to turn, another out of
possession. The preservation of the peace, which was the original object
of civil government, was thus attained: while by confirming, to those
who already possessed it, even what was not the fruit of personal
exertion, a guarantee was incidentally given to them and others that
they would be protected in what was so.

In considering the institution of property as a question in social
philosophy, we must leave out of consideration its actual origin in any
of the existing nations of Europe. We may suppose a community unhampered
by any previous possession; a body of colonists, occupying for the first
time an uninhabited country; bringing nothing with them but what
belonged to them in common, and having a clear field for the adoption of
the institutions and polity which they judged most expedient; required,
therefore, to choose whether they would conduct the work of production
on the principle of individual property, or on some system of common
ownership and collective agency.

If private property were adopted, we must presume that it would Edition:
current; Page: [202] be accompanied by none of the initial inequalities
and injustices which obstruct the beneficial operation of the principle
in old societies. Every full grown man or woman, we must suppose, would
be secured in the unfettered use and disposal of his or her bodily and
mental faculties; and the instruments of production, the land and tools,
would be divided fairly among them, so that all might start, in respect
to outward appliances, on equal terms. It is possible also to conceive
that in this original apportionment, compensation might be made for the
injuries of nature, and the balance redressed by assigning to the less
robust members of the community advantages in the distribution,
sufficient to put them on a par with the rest. But the division, once
made, would not again be interfered with; individuals would be left to
their own exertions and to the ordinary chances, for making an
advantageous use of what was assigned to them. If individual property,
on the contrary, were excluded, the plan which must be adopted would be
to hold the land and all instruments of production as the joint property
of the community, and to carry on the operations of industry on the
common account. The direction of the labour of the community would
devolve upon a magistrate or magistrates, whom we may suppose elected by
the suffrages of the community, and whom we must assume to be
voluntarily obeyed by them. The division of the produce would in like
manner be a public act. The principle might either be that of complete
equality, or of apportionment to the necessities or deserts of
individuals, in whatever manner might be conformable to the ideas of
justice or policy prevailing in the community.

Examples of such associations, on a small scale, are the monastic
orders, the Moravians, the followers of Rapp, and others: and from the
hopes1. which they hold out of relief from the miseries and iniquities
of a state of much inequality of wealth, schemes for a larger
application of the same idea have reappeared and become popular at all
periods of active speculation on the first principles of society. In an
age like the present [1848], when a general reconsideration of all first
principles is felt to be inevitable, and when more than at any former
period of history the suffering portions of the community have a voice
in the discussion, it was impossible but that ideas of this nature
should spread far and wide.2. The late Edition: current; Page: [203]
revolutions in Europe have thrown up a great amount of speculation of
this character, and an unusual share of attention has consequently been
drawn to the various forms which these ideas have assumed: nor is this
attention likely to diminish, but on the contrary, to increase more and
more.

The assailants of the principle of individual property may be divided
into two classes: those whose scheme implies absolute equality in the
distribution of the physical means of life and enjoyment, and those who
admit inequality, but grounded on some principle, or supposed principle,
of justice or general expediency, and not, like so many of the existing
social inequalities, dependent on accident alone. At the head of the
first class, as the earliest of those belonging to the present
generation, must be placed Mr. Owen and his followers. M. Louis Blanc
and M. Cabet have more recently become conspicuous as apostles of
similar doctrines (though the former advocates equality of distribution
only as a transition to a still higher standard of justice, that all
should work according to their capacity, and receive according to their
wants). The characteristic name for this economical system is Communism,
a word of continental origin, only of late introduced into this country.
The word Socialism, which originated among the English Communists, and
was assumed by them as a name to designate their own doctrine, is now
[1849], on the Continent, employed in a larger sense; not necessarily
implying Communism, or the entire abolition of private property, but
applied to any system which requires that the land and the instruments
of production should be the property, not Edition: current; Page: [204]
of individuals, but of communities or associations, or of the
government. Among such systems, the two of highest intellectual
pretension are those which, from the names of their real or reputed
authors, have been called St. Simonism and Fourierism; the former
defunct as a system, but which during the few years of its public
promulgation, sowed the seeds of nearly all the Socialist tendencies
which have since spread so widely in France: the second, still [1865]
flourishing in the number, talent, and zeal of its adherents.

§ 3.1. Whatever may be the merits or defects of these various schemes,
they cannot be truly said to be impracticable. No reasonable person can
doubt that a village community, composed of a few thousand inhabitants
cultivating in joint ownership the same extent of land which at present
feeds that number of people, and producing by combined labour and the
most improved processes the manufactured articles which they required,
could raise an amount of productions sufficient to maintain them in
comfort; and would find the means of obtaining, and if need be,
exacting, the quantity of labour necessary for this purpose, from every
member of the association who was capable of work.

The objection ordinarily made to a system of community of property and
equal distribution of the produce, that each person would be incessantly
occupied in evading his fair share of the work, points, undoubtedly, to
a real difficulty. But those who urge this objection, forget to how
great an extent the same difficulty exists under the system on which
nine-tenths of the business of society is now conducted. The objection
supposes, that honest and efficient labour is only to be had from those
who are themselves individually to reap the benefit of their own
exertions. But how small a part of all the labour performed in England,
from the lowest-paid to the highest, is done by persons working for
their own benefit. From the Irish reaper or hodman to the chief justice
or the minister of state, nearly all the work of society is remunerated
by day wages or fixed salaries. A factory operative has less personal
interest in his work than a member of a Communist association, since he
is not, like him, Edition: current; Page: [205] working for a
partnership of which he is himself a member. It will no doubt be said,
that though the labourers themselves have not, in most cases, a personal
interest in their work, they are watched and superintended, and their
labour directed, and the mental part of the labour performed, by persons
who have. Even this, however, is far from being universally the fact. In
all public, and many of the largest and most successful private
undertakings, not only the labours of detail but the control and
superintendence are entrusted to salaried officers. And though the
“aster” eye, “when the master is vigilant and intelligent, is of
proverbial value, it must be remembered that in a Socialist farm or
manufactory, each labourer would be under the eye not of one master, but
of the whole community. In the extreme case of obstinate perseverance in
not performing the due share of work, the community would have the same
resources which society now has for compelling conformity to the
necessary conditions of the association. Dismissal, the only remedy at
present, is no remedy when any other labourer who may be engaged does no
better than his predecessor: the power of dismissal only enables an
employer to obtain from his workmen the customary amount of labour, but
that customary labour may be of any degree of inefficiency. Even the
labourer who loses his employment by idleness or negligence, has nothing
worse to suffer, in the most unfavourable case, than the discipline of a
workhouse, and if the desire to avoid this be a sufficient motive in the
one system, it would be sufficient in the other. I am not undervaluing
the strength of the incitement given to labour when the whole or a large
share of the benefit of extra exertion belongs to the labourer. But
under the present system of industry this incitement, in the great
majority of cases, does not exist. If Communistic labour might be less
vigorous than that of a peasant proprietor, or a workman labouring on
his own account, it would probably be more energetic than that of a
labourer for hire, who has no personal interest in the matter at all.
The neglect by the uneducated classes of labourers for hire, of the
duties which they engage to perform, is in the present state of society
most flagrant. Now it is an admitted condition of the Communist scheme
that all shall be educated: and this being supposed, the duties of the
members of the association would doubtless be as diligently performed as
those of the generality of salaried officers in the middle or higher
classes; who are not supposed to be necessarily unfaithful to their
trust, because so long as they are not dismissed, their pay Edition:
current; Page: [206] is the same in however lax a manner their duty is
fulfilled. Undoubtedly, as a general rule, remuneration by fixed
salaries does not in any class of functionaries produce the maximum of
zeal: and this is as much as can be reasonably alleged against
Communistic labour.

That even this inferiority would necessarily exist, is by no means so
certain as is assumed by those who are little used to carry their minds
beyond the state of things with which they are familiar. Mankind are
capable of a far greater amount of public spirit than the present age is
accustomed to suppose possible. History bears witness to the success
with which large bodies of human beings may be trained to feel the
public interest their own. And no soil could be more favourable to the
growth of such a feeling, than a Communist association, since all the
ambition, and the bodily and mental activity, which are now exerted in
the pursuit of separate and self-regarding interests, would require
another sphere of employment, and would naturally find it in the pursuit
of the general benefit of the community. The same cause, so often
assigned in explanation of the devotion of the Catholic priest or monk
to the interest of his order—that he has no interest apart from
it—would, under Communism, attach the citizen to the community. And
independently of the public motive, every member of the association
would be amenable to the most universal, and one of the strongest, of
personal motives, that of public opinion. The force of this motive in
deterring from any act or omission positively reproved by the community,
no one is likely to deny; but the power also of emulation, in exciting
to the most strenuous exertions for the sake of the approbation and
admiration of others, is borne witness to by experience in every
situation in which human beings publicly compete with one another, even
if it be in things frivolous, or from which the public derive no
benefit. A contest, who can do most for the common good, is not the kind
of competition which Socialists repudiate. To what extent, therefore,
the energy of labour would be diminished by Communism, or whether in the
long run it would be diminished at all, must be considered for the
present an undecided question.

Another of the objections to Communism is similar to that so often urged
against poor laws: that if every member of the community were assured of
subsistence for himself and any number of children, on the sole
condition of willingness to work, prudential restraint on the
multiplication of mankind would be Edition: current; Page: [207] at an
end, and population would start forward at a rate which would reduce the
community, through successive stages of increasing discomfort, to actual
starvation. There would certainly be much ground for this apprehension
if Communism provided no motives to restraint, equivalent to those which
it would take away. But Communism is precisely the state of things in
which opinion might be expected to declare itself with greatest
intensity against this kind of selfish intemperance. Any augmentation of
numbers which diminished the comfort or increased the toil of the mass,
would then cause (which now it does not) immediate and unmistakeable
inconvenience to every individual in the association; inconvenience
which could not then be imputed to the avarice of employers, or the
unjust privileges of the rich. In such altered circumstances opinion
could not fail to reprobate, and if reprobation did not suffice, to
repress by penalties of some description, this or any other culpable
self-indulgence at the expense of the community. The Communistic scheme,
instead of being peculiarly open to the objection drawn from danger of
over-population, has the recommendation of tending in an especial degree
to the prevention of that evil.

A more real difficulty is that of fairly apportioning the labour of the
community among its members. There are many kinds of work, and by what
standard are they to be measured one against another? Who is to judge
how much cotton spinning, or distributing goods from the stores, or
bricklaying, or chimney sweeping, is equivalent to so much ploughing?
The difficulty of making the adjustment between different qualities of
labour is so strongly felt by Communist writers, that they have usually
thought it necessary to provide that all should work by turns at every
description of useful labour: an arrangement which, by putting an end to
the division of employments, would sacrifice so much of the advantage of
co-operative production as greatly to diminish the productiveness of
labour. Besides, even in the same kind of work, nominal equality of
labour would be so great a real inequality, that the feeling of justice
would revolt against its being enforced. All persons are not equally fit
for all labour; and the same quantity of labour is an unequal burthen on
the weak and the strong, the hardy and the delicate, the quick and the
slow, the dull and the intelligent.

But these difficulties, though real, are not necessarily insuperable.
The apportionment of work to the strength and capacities of individuals,
the mitigation of a general rule to provide for cases in Edition:
current; Page: [208] which it would operate harshly, are not problems to
which human intelligence, guided by a sense of justice, would be
inadequate. And the worst and most unjust arrangement which could be
made of these points, under a system aiming at equality, would be so far
short of the inequality and injustice with which labour (not to speak of
remuneration) is now apportioned, as to be scarcely worth counting in
comparison. We must remember too, that Communism, as a system of
society, exists only in idea; that its difficulties, at present, are
much better understood than its resources; and that the intellect of
mankind is only beginning to contrive the means of organizing it in
detail, so as to overcome the one and derive the greatest advantage from
the other.1.

If, therefore, the choice were to be made between Communism with all its
chances, and the present [1852] state of society with all its sufferings
and injustices; if the institution of private property necessarily
carried with it as a consequence, that the produce of labour should be
apportioned as we now see it, almost in an inverse ratio to the
labour—the largest portions to those who have never worked at all, the
next largest to those whose work is almost nominal, and so in a
descending scale, the remuneration dwindling as the work grows harder
and more disagreeable, until the most fatiguing and exhausting bodily
labour cannot count with certainty on being able to earn even the
necessaries of life; if this or Communism were the alternative, all the
difficulties, great or small, of Communism would be but as dust in the
balance. But to make the comparison applicable, we must compare
Communism at its best, with the régime of individual property, not as it
is, but as it might be made. The principle of private property has never
yet had a fair trial in any country; and less so, perhaps, in this
country than in some others. The social arrangements of modern Europe
commenced from a distribution of property which was the result, not of
just partition, or acquisition by industry, but of conquest and
violence: and notwithstanding what industry has been doing for many
centuries to modify the work of force, the system still retains many and
large traces of its origin. The laws of property have never yet
conformed to the principles on which the justification of private
property rests. They have made property of things which never ought to
be property, and absolute property where only a qualified Edition:
current; Page: [209] property ought to exist. They have not held the
balance fairly between human beings, but have heaped impediments upon
some, to give advantage to others; they have purposely fostered
inequalities, and prevented all from starting fair in the race. That all
should indeed start on perfectly equal terms, is inconsistent with any
law of private property: but if as much pains as has been taken to
aggravate the inequality of chances arising from the natural working of
the principle, had been taken to temper that inequality by every means
not subversive of the principle itself; if the tendency of legislation
had been to favour the diffusion, instead of the concentration of
wealth—to encourage the subdivision of the large masses, instead of
striving to keep them together; the principle of individual property
would have been found to have no necessary connexion with the physical
and social evils which almost all Socialist writers assume to be
inseparable from it.

Private property, in every defence made of it, is supposed to mean the
guarantee to individuals of the fruits of their own labour and
abstinence. The guarantee to them of the fruits of the labour and
abstinence of others, transmitted to them without any merit or exertion
of their own, is not of the essence of the institution, but a mere
incidental consequence, which, when it reaches a certain height, does
not promote, but conflicts with, the ends which render private property
legitimate. To judge of the final destination of the institution of
property, we must suppose everything rectified, which causes the
institution to work in a manner opposed to that equitable principle, of
proportion between remuneration and exertion, on which in every
vindication of it that will bear the light, it is assumed to be
grounded. We must also suppose two conditions realized, without which
neither Communism nor any other laws or institutions could make the
condition of the mass of mankind other than degraded and miserable. One
of these conditions is universal education; the other, a due limitation
of the numbers of the community. With these there could be no poverty,
even under the present social institutions: and these being supposed,
the question of Socialism is not, as generally stated by Socialists, a
question of flying to the sole refuge against the evils which now bear
down humanity; but a mere question of comparative advantages, which
futurity must determine. We are too ignorant either of what individual
agency in its best form, or Socialism in its best form, can accomplish,
to be qualified to decide which of the two will be the ultimate form of
human society.

Edition: current; Page: [210]
If a conjecture may be hazarded, the decision will probably depend
mainly on one consideration, viz. which of the two systems is consistent
with the greatest amount of human liberty and spontaneity. After the
means of subsistence are assured, the next in strength of the personal
wants of human beings is liberty; and (unlike the physical wants, which
as civilization advances become more moderate and more amenable to
control) it increases instead of diminishing in intensity, as the
intelligence and the moral faculties are more developed. The perfection
both of social arrangements and of practical morality would be, to
secure to all persons complete independence and freedom of action,
subject to no restriction but that of not doing injury to others: and
the education which taught or the social institutions which required
them to exchange the control of their own actions for any amount of
comfort or affluence, or to renounce liberty for the sake of equality,
would deprive them of one of the most elevated characteristics of human
nature. It remains to be discovered how far the preservation of this
characteristic would be found compatible with the Communistic
organization of society. No doubt, this, like all the other objections
to the Socialist schemes, is vastly exaggerated. The members of the
association need not be required to live together more than they do now,
nor need they be controlled in the disposal of their individual share of
the produce, and of the probably large amount of leisure which, if they
limited their production to things really worth producing, they would
possess. Individuals need not be chained to an occupation, or to a
particular locality. The restraints of Communism would be freedom in
comparison with the present condition of the majority of the human race.
The generality of labourers in this and most other countries, have as
little choice of occupation or freedom of locomotion, are practically as
dependent on fixed rules and on the will of others, as they could be on
any system short of actual slavery; to say nothing of the entire
domestic subjection of one half the species, to which it is the signal
honour of Owenism and most other forms of Socialism that they assign
equal rights, in all respects, with those of the hitherto dominant sex.
But it is not by comparison with the present bad state of society that
the claims of Communism can be estimated; nor is it sufficient that it
should promise greater personal and mental freedom than is now enjoyed
by those who have not enough of either to deserve the name. The question
is, whether there would be any asylum left for individuality of
character; whether public opinion would Edition: current; Page: [211]
not be a tyrannical yoke; whether the absolute dependence of each on
all, and surveillance of each by all, would not grind all down into a
tame uniformity of thoughts, feelings, and actions. This is already one
of the glaring evils of the existing state of society, notwithstanding a
much greater diversity of education and pursuits, and a much less
absolute dependence of the individual on the mass, than would exist in
the Communistic régime. No society in which eccentricity is a matter of
reproach, can be in a wholesome state. It is yet to be ascertained
whether the Communistic scheme would be consistent with that multiform
development of human nature, those manifold unlikenesses, that diversity
of tastes and talents, and variety of intellectual points of view, which
not only form a great part of the interest of human life, but by
bringing intellects into stimulating collision, and by presenting to
each innumerable notions that he would not have conceived of himself,
are the mainspring of mental and moral progression.

§ 4. I have thus far confined my observations to the Communistic
doctrine, which forms the extreme limit of Socialism; according to which
not only the instruments of the land and capital, are the joint property
of the community, but the produce is divided and the labour apportioned,
as far as possible, equally. The objections, whether well or ill
grounded, to which Socialism is liable, apply to this form of it in
their greatest force. The other varieties of Socialism mainly differ
from Communism in not relying solely on what M. Louis Blanc calls the
point of honour of industry, but retaining more or less of the
incentives to labour derived from private pecuniary interest. Thus it is
already a modification of the strict theory of Communism, when the
principle is professed of proportioning remuneration to labour. The
attempts which have been made in France to carry Socialism into
practical effect, by associations of workmen manufacturing on their own
account,1. mostly began by sharing the remuneration equally, without
regard to the quantity of work done by the individual: but in almost
every case this plan was after a short time abandoned, and recourse was
had to working by the piece. The original principle appeals to a higher
standard of justice, and is adapted to a much higher moral condition of
human nature. The proportioning of remuneration to work done is really
just only in so far as the Edition: current; Page: [212] more or less of
the work is a matter of choice: when it depends on natural difference of
strength or capacity, this principle of remuneration is in itself an
injustice: it is giving to those who have; assigning most to those who
are already most favoured by nature. Considered, however, as a
compromise with the selfish type of character formed by the present
standard of morality, and fostered by the existing social institutions,
it is highly expedient; and until education shall have been entirely
regenerated, is far more likely to prove immediately successful, than an
attempt at a higher ideal.

The two elaborate forms of non-communistic Socialism known as St.
Simonism and Fourierism, are totally free from the objections usually
urged against Communism; and though they are open to others of their
own, yet by the great intellectual power which in many respects
distinguishes them, and by their large and philosophic treatment of some
of the fundamental problems of society and morality, they may justly be
counted among the most remarkable productions of the past and present
age.

The St. Simonian scheme does not contemplate an equal, but an unequal
division of the produce; it does not propose that all should be occupied
alike, but differently, according to their vocation or capacity; the
function of each being assigned, like grades in a regiment, by the
choice of the directing authority, and the remuneration being by salary,
proportioned to the importance, in the eyes of that authority, of the
function itself, and the merits of the person who fulfils it. For the
constitution of the ruling body, different plans might be adopted,
consistently with the essentials of the system. It might be appointed by
popular suffrage. In the idea of the original authors, the rulers were
supposed to be persons of genius and virtue, who obtained the voluntary
adhesion of the rest by the force of mental superiority.1. That the
scheme might in some peculiar states of society work with advantage, is
not improbable. There is indeed a successful experiment, of a somewhat
similar kind, on record, to which I have once alluded; that of the
Jesuits in Paraguay. A race of savages, belonging to a portion of
mankind more averse to consecutive exertion for a distant object than
any other authentically known to us, was brought under the mental
dominion of civilized and instructed men who were united among Edition:
current; Page: [213] themselves by a system of community of goods. To
the absolute authority of these men they reverentially submitted
themselves, and were induced by them to learn the arts of civilized
life, and to practise labours for the community, which no inducement
that could have been offered would have prevailed on them to practise
for themselves. This social system was of short duration, being
prematurely destroyed by diplomatic arrangements and foreign force. That
it could be brought into action at all was probably owing to the immense
distance in point of knowledge and intellect which separated the few
rulers from the whole body of the ruled, without any intermediate
orders, either social or intellectual. In any other circumstances it
would probably have been a complete failure. It supposes an absolute
despotism in the heads of the association; which would probably not be
much improved if the depositaries of the despotism (contrary to the
views of the authors of the system) were varied from time to time
according to the result of a popular canvass. But to suppose that one or
a few human beings, howsoever selected, could, by whatever machinery of
subordinate agency, be qualified to adapt each person' work to his
capacity, and proportion each person' remuneration to his merits—to be,
in fact, the dispensers of distributive justice to every member of a
community; or that any use which they could make of this power would
give general satisfaction, or would be submitted to without the aid of
force—is a supposition almost too chimerical to be reasoned against. A
fixed rule, like that of equality, might be acquiesced in, and so might
chance, or an external necessity; but that a handful of human beings
should weigh everybody in the balance, and give more to one and less to
another at their sole pleasure and judgment would not be borne, unless
from persons believed to be more than men, and backed by supernatural
terrors.

1. The most skilfully combined, and with the greatest foresight of
objections, of all the forms of Socialism, is that commonly known as
Fourierism. This system does not contemplate the abolition of private
property, nor even of inheritance; on the contrary, it avowedly takes
into consideration, as an element in the distribution of the produce,
capital as well as labour. It proposes that the operations of industry
should be carried on by associations of about two thousand members,
combining their labour on a district of about a square league in extent,
under the guidance of chiefs selected by Edition: current; Page: [214]
themselves. In the distribution, a certain minimum is first assigned for
the subsistence of every member of the community, whether capable or not
of labour. The remainder of the produce is shared in certain
proportions, to be determined beforehand, among the three elements,
Labour, Capital, and Talent. The capital of the community may be owned
in unequal shares by different members, who would in that case receive,
as in any other joint-stock company, proportional dividends. The claim
of each person on the share of the produce apportioned to talent, is
estimated by the grade or rank which the individual occupies in the
several groups of labourers to which he or she belongs; these grades
being in all cases conferred by the choice of his or her companions. The
remuneration, when received, would not of necessity be expended or
enjoyed in common; there would be separate ménages for all who preferred
them, and no other community of living is contemplated, than that all
the members of the association should reside in the same pile of
buildings; for saving of labour and expense, not only in building, but
in every branch of domestic economy; and in order that, the whole of the
buying and selling operations of the community being performed by a
single agent, the enormous portion of the produce of industry now
carried off by the profits of mere distributors might be reduced to the
smallest amount possible.

This system, unlike Communism, does not, in theory at least, withdraw
any of the motives to exertion which exist in the present state of
society. On the contrary, if the arrangement worked according to the
intentions of its contrivers, it would even strengthen those motives;
since each person would have much more certainty of reaping individually
the fruits of increased skill or energy, bodily or mental, than under
the present social arrangements can be felt by any but those who are in
the most advantageous positions, or to whom the chapter of accidents is
more than ordinarily favourable. The Fourierists, however, have still
another resource. They believe that they have solved the great and
fundamental problem of rendering labour attractive. That this is not
impracticable, they contend by very strong arguments; in particular by
one which they have in common with the Owenites, viz., that scarcely any
labour, however severe, undergone by human beings for the sake of
subsistence, exceeds in intensity that which other human beings, whose
subsistence is already provided for, are found ready and even eager to
undergo for pleasure. This certainly is a most significant fact, and one
from which the student in social philosophy Edition: current; Page:
[215] may draw important instruction. But the argument founded on it may
easily be stretched too far. If occupations full of discomfort and
fatigue are freely pursued by many persons as amusements, who does not
see that they are amusements exactly because they are pursued freely,
and may be discontinued at pleasure? The liberty of quitting a position
often makes the whole difference between its being painful and
pleasurable. Many a person remains in the same town, street, or house
from January to December, without a wish or a thought tending towards
removal, who, if confined to that same place by the mandate of
authority, would find the imprisonment absolutely intolerable.

According to the Fourierists, scarcely any kind of useful labour is
naturally and necessarily disagreeable, unless it is either regarded as
dishonourable, or is immoderate in degree, or destitute of the stimulus
of sympathy and emulation. Excessive toil needs not, they contend, be
undergone by any one, in a society in which there would be no idle
class, and no labour wasted, as so enormous an amount of labour is now
wasted, in useless things; and where full advantage would be taken of
the power of association, both in increasing the efficiency of
production, and in economizing consumption. The other requisites for
rendering labour attractive would, they think, be found in the execution
of all labour by social groups, to any number of which the same
individual might simultaneously belong, at his or her own choice: their
grade in each being determined by the degree of service which they were
found capable of rendering, as appreciated by the suffrages of their
comrades. It is inferred from the diversity of tastes and talents, that
every member of the community would be attached to several groups,
employing themselves in various kinds of occupation, some bodily, others
mental, and would be capable of occupying a high place in some one or
more; so that a real equality, or something more nearly approaching to
it than might at first be supposed, would practically result: not, from
the compression, but, on the contrary, from the largest possible
development, of the various natural superiorities residing in each
individual.

Even from so brief an outline, it must be evident that this system does
no violence to any of the general laws by which human action, even in
the present imperfect state of moral and intellectual cultivation, is
influenced;1. and that it would be extremely rash to Edition: current;
Page: [216] pronounce it incapable of success, or unfitted to realize a
great part of the hopes founded on it by its partisans. With regard to
this, as to all other varieties of Socialism, the thing to be desired,
and to which they have a just claim, is opportunity of trial. They are
all capable of being tried on a moderate scale, and at no risk, either
personal or pecuniary, to any except those who try them. It is for
experience to determine how far or how soon any one or more of the
possible systems of community of property will be fitted to substitute
itself for the “organization of industry” based on private ownership of
Edition: current; Page: [217] land and capital. In the meantime we may,
without attempting to limit the ultimate capabilities of human nature,
affirm, that the political economist, for a considerable time to come,
will be chiefly concerned with the conditions of existence and progress
belonging to a society founded on private property and individual
competition; and that the object to be principally aimed at, in the
present stage of human improvement, is not the subversion of the system
of individual property, but the improvement of it, and the full
participation of every member of the community in its benefits.1.

Edition: current; Page: [218]


CHAPTER II.: the same subject continued

§ 1. It is next to be considered, what is included in the idea of
private property, and by what considerations the application of the
principle should be bounded.

The institution of property, when limited to its essential elements,
consists in the recognition, in each person, of a right to the exclusive
disposal of what he or she have produced by their own exertions, or
received either by gift or by fair agreement, without force or fraud,
from those who produced it. The foundation of the whole is the right of
producers to what they themselves have produced. It may be objected,
therefore, to the institution as it now exists, that it recognises
rights of property in individuals over things which they have not
produced. For example (it may be said) the operatives in a manufactory
create, by their labour and skill, the whole produce; yet, instead of
its belonging to them, the law gives them only their stipulated hire,
and transfers the produce to some one who has merely supplied the funds,
without perhaps contributing anything to the work itself, even in the
form of superintendence. The answer to this is, that the labour of
manufacture is only one of the conditions which must combine for the
production of the commodity. The labour cannot be carried on without
materials and machinery, nor without a stock of necessaries provided in
advance, to maintain the labourers during the production. All these
things are the fruits of previous labour. If the labourers were
possessed of them, they would not need to divide the produce with any
one; but while they have them not, an equivalent must be given to those
who have, both for the antecedent labour, and for the abstinence by
which the produce of that labour, instead of being expended on
indulgences, has been reserved for this use. The capital may not have
been, and in most cases was not, created by the Edition: current; Page:
[219] labour and abstinence of the present possessor; but it was created
by the labour and abstinence of some former person, who may indeed have
been wrongfully dispossessed of it,1 but who, in the present age of the
world, much more probably transferred his claims to the present
capitalist by gift or voluntary contract: and the abstinence at least
must have been continued by each successive owner, down to the present.
2. If it be said, as it may with truth, that those who have inherited
the savings of others have an advantage which they may have in no way
deserved, over the industrious whose predecessors have not left them
anything; I not only admit, but strenuously contend, that this unearned
advantage should be curtailed, as much as is consistent with justice to
those who thought fit to dispose of their savings by giving them to
their descendants. But while it is true that the labourers are at a
disadvantage compared with those whose predecessors have saved, it is
also true that the labourers are far better off than if those
predecessors had not saved. They share in the advantage, though not to
an equal extent with the inheritors. The terms of co-operation between
present labour and the fruits of past labour and saving, are a subject
for adjustment between the two parties. Each is necessary to the other.
The capitalists can do nothing without labourers, nor the labourers
without capital.3. If the labourers compete for employment, the
capitalists on their part compete for labour, to the full extent of the
circulating capital of the country. 4. Competition is often spoken of as
if it were necessarily a cause of misery and Edition: current; Page:
[220] degradation to the labouring class; as if high wages were not
precisely as much a product of competition as low wages. The
remuneration of labour is as much the result of the law of competition
in the United States, as it is in Ireland, and much more completely so
than in England.

The right of property includes then, the freedom of acquiring by
contract. The right of each to what he has produced, implies a right to
what has been produced by others, if obtained by their free consent;
since the producers must either have given it from good will, or
exchanged it for what they esteemed an equivalent, and to prevent them
from doing so would be to infringe their right of property in the
product of their own industry.

§ 2. Before proceeding to consider the things which the principle of
individual property does not include, we must specify one more thing
which it does include: and this is that a title, after a certain period,
should be given by prescription. According to the fundamental idea of
property, indeed, nothing ought to be treated as such, which has been
acquired by force or fraud, or appropriated in ignorance of a prior
title vested in some other person; but it is necessary to the security
of rightful possessors, that they should not be molested by charges of
wrongful acquisition, when by the lapse of time witnesses must have
perished or been lost sight of, and the real character of the
transaction can no longer be cleared up. Possession which has not been
legally questioned within a moderate number of years, ought to be, as by
the laws of all nations it is, a complete title. Even when the
acquisition was wrongful, the dispossession, after a generation has
elapsed, of the probably bonâ fide possessors, by the revival of a claim
which had been long dormant, would generally be a greater injustice, and
almost always a greater private and public mischief, than leaving the
original wrong without atonement. It may seem hard that a claim,
originally just, should be defeated by mere lapse of time; but there is
a time after which (even looking at the individual case, and without
regard to the general effect on the security of possessors), the balance
of hardship turns the other way. With the injustices of men, as with the
convulsions and disasters of nature, the longer they remain unrepaired,
the greater become the obstacles to repairing them, arising from the
aftergrowths which would have to be torn up or broken through. In no
human transactions, not even in the simplest and clearest, does it
follow that a thing is fit to be done now, because it was fit Edition:
current; Page: [221] to be done sixty years ago. It is scarcely needful
to remark, that these reasons for not disturbing acts of injustice of
old date, cannot apply to unjust systems or institutions; since a bad
law or usage is not one bad act, in the remote past, but a perpetual
repetition of bad acts, as long as the law or usage lasts.

Such, then, being the essentials of private property, it is now to be
considered, to what extent the forms in which the institution has
existed in different states of society, or still exists, are necessary
consequences of its principle, or are recommended by the reasons on
which it is grounded.

§ 3. Nothing is implied in property but the right of each to his (or
her) own faculties, to what he can produce by them, and to whatever he
can get for them in a fair market; together with his right to give this
to any other person if he chooses, and the right of that other to
receive and enjoy it.

It follows, therefore, that although the right of bequest, or gift after
death, forms part of the idea of private property, the right of
inheritance, as distinguished from bequest, does not. That the property
of persons who have made no disposition of it during their lifetime,
should pass first to their children, and failing them, to the nearest
relations, may be a proper arrangement or not, but is no consequence of
the principle of private property. Although there belong to the decision
of such questions many considerations besides those of political
economy, it is not foreign to the plan of this work to suggest, for the
judgment of thinkers, the view of them which most recommends itself to
the writer' mind.

No presumption in favour of existing ideas on this subject is to be
derived from their antiquity. In early ages, the property of a deceased
person passed to his children and nearest relatives by so natural and
obvious an arrangement, that no other was likely to be even thought of
in competition with it. In the first place, they were usually present on
the spot: they were in possession, and if they had no other title, had
that, so important in an early state of society, of first occupancy.
Secondly, they were already, in a manner, joint owners of his property
during his life. If the property was in land, it had generally been
conferred by the State on a family rather than on an individual: if it
consisted of cattle or moveable goods, it had probably been acquired,
and was certainly protected and defended, by the united efforts of all
members of the family who were of an age to work or fight. Exclusive
individual property in the modern Edition: current; Page: [222] sense,
scarcely entered into the ideas of the time; and when the first
magistrate of the association died, he really left nothing vacant but
his own share in the division, which devolved on the member of the
family who succeeded to his authority. To have disposed of the property
otherwise, would have been to break up a little commonwealth, united by
ideas, interest, and habits, and to cast them adrift on the world. These
considerations, though rather felt than reasoned about, had so great an
influence on the minds of mankind, as to create the idea of an inherent
right in the children to the possessions of their ancestor; a right
which it was not competent to himself to defeat. Bequest, in a primitive
state of society, was seldom recognised; a clear proof, were there no
other, that property was conceived in a manner totally different from
the conception of it in the present time.∗.

But the feudal family, the last historical form of patriarchal life, has
long perished, and the unit of society is not now the family or clan,
composed of all the reputed descendants of a common ancestor, but the
individual; or at most a pair of individuals, with their unemancipated
children. Property is now inherent in individuals, not in families: the
children when grown up do not follow the occupations or fortunes of the
parent: if they participate in the parent' pecuniary means it is at his
or her pleasure, and not by a voice in the ownership and government of
the whole, but generally by the exclusive enjoyment of a part; and in
this country at least (except as far as entails or settlements are an
obstacle) it is in the power of parents to disinherit even their
children, and leave their fortune to strangers. More distant relatives
are in general almost as completely detached from the family and its
interests as if they were in no way connected with it. The only claim
they are supposed to have on their richer relations, is to a preference,
caeteris paribus, in good offices, and some aid in case of actual
necessity.

So great a change in the constitution of society must make a
considerable difference in the grounds on which the disposal of property
by inheritance should rest. The reasons usually assigned by modern
writers for giving the property of a person who dies intestate to the
children, or nearest relatives, are, first, the supposition that in so
disposing of it, the law is more likely than in any other mode to do
what the proprietor would have done, if he had done anything; and
secondly, the hardship, to those who lived with their Edition: current;
Page: [223] parents and partook in their opulence, of being cast down
from the enjoyments of wealth into poverty and privation.

There is some force in both these arguments. The law ought, no doubt, to
do for the children or dependents of an intestate, whatever it was the
duty of the parent or protector to have done,1. so far as this can be
known by any one besides himself. Since, however, the law cannot decide
on individual claims, but must proceed by general rules, it is next to
be considered what these rules should be.

We may first remark, that in regard to collateral relatives, it is not,
unless on grounds personal to the particular individual, the duty of any
one to make a pecuniary provision for them. No one now expects it,
unless there happen to be no direct heirs; nor would it be expected even
then, if the expectation were not created by the provisions of the law
in case of intestacy. I see, therefore, no reason why collateral
inheritance should exist at all. Mr. Bentham long ago proposed, and
other high authorities have agreed in the opinion, that if there are no
heirs either in the descending or in the ascending line, the property,
in case of intestacy, should escheat to the State. With respect to the
more remote degrees of collateral relationship, the point is not very
likely to be disputed. Few will maintain that there is any good reason
why the accumulations of some childless miser should on his death (as
every now and then happens) go to enrich a distant relative who never
saw him, who perhaps never knew himself to be related to him until there
was something to be gained by it, and who had no moral claim upon him of
any kind, more than the most entire stranger. But the reason of the case
applies alike to all collaterals, even in the nearest degree.
Collaterals have no real claims, but such as may be equally strong in
the case of non-relatives; and in the one case as in the other, where
valid claims exist, the proper mode of paying regard to them is by
bequest.2.

Edition: current; Page: [224]
The claims of children are of a different nature: they are real, and
indefeasible. But even of these, I venture to think that the measure
usually taken is an erroneous one: what is due to children is in some
respects underrated, in others, as it appears to me, exaggerated. One of
the most binding of all obligations, that of not bringing children into
the world unless they can be maintained in comfort during childhood, and
brought up with a likelihood of supporting themselves when of full age,
is both disregarded in practice and made light of in theory in a manner
disgraceful to human intelligence. On the other hand, when the parent
possesses property, the claims of the children upon it seem to me to be
the subject of an opposite error. Whatever fortune a parent may have
inherited, or still more, may have acquired, I cannot admit that he owes
to his children, merely because they are his children, to leave them
rich, without the necessity of any exertion. I could not admit it, even
if to be so left were always, and certainly, for the good of the
children themselves. But this is in the highest degree uncertain. It
depends on individual character. Without supposing extreme cases, it may
be affirmed that in a majority of instances the good not only of society
but of the individuals would be better consulted by bequeathing to them
a moderate, than a large provision. This, which is a commonplace of
moralists ancient and modern, is felt to be true by many intelligent
parents, and would be acted upon much more frequently, if they did not
allow themselves to consider less what really is, than what will be
thought by others to be, advantageous to the children.

The duties of parents to their children are those which are indissolubly
to the fact of causing the existence of a human being. The parent owes
to society to endeavour to make the child a good and valuable member of
it, and owes to the children to provide, so far as depends on him, such
education, and such appliances and means, as will enable them to start
with a fair chance of achieving by their own exertions a successful
life. To this every child has a claim; and I cannot admit, that as a
child he has a claim to more. There is a case in which these obligations
present themselves in their true light, without any extrinsic
circumstances to disguise or confuse them: it is that of an illegitimate
child. To such a child it is generally felt that there is due from the
parent, the amount of provision for his welfare which will enable him to
make his life on the whole a desirable one. I hold that to no child,
merely as such, anything more is due, than what is admitted to be due to
an illegitimate child: Edition: current; Page: [225] and that no child
for whom thus much has been done, has, unless on the score of previously
raised expectations, any grievance, if the remainder of the parent'
fortune is devoted to public uses, or to the benefit of individuals on
whom in the parent' opinion it is better bestowed.

In order to give the children that fair chance of a desirable existence,
to which they are entitled, it is generally necessary that they should
not be brought up from childhood in habits of luxury which they will not
have the means of indulging in after-life. This, again, is a duty often
flagrantly violated by possessors of terminable incomes, who have little
property to leave. When the children of rich parents have lived, as it
is natural they should do, in habits corresponding to the scale of
expenditure in which the parents indulge, it is generally the duty of
the parents to make a greater provision for them than would suffice for
children otherwise brought up. I say generally, because even here there
is another side to the question. It is a proposition quite capable of
being maintained, that to a strong nature which has to make its way
against narrow circumstances, to have known early some of the feelings
and experiences of wealth, is an advantage both in the formation of
character and in the happiness of life. But allowing that children have
a just ground of complaint, who have been brought up to require luxuries
which they are not afterwards likely to obtain, and that their claim,
therefore, is good to a provision bearing some relation to the mode of
their bringing up; this, too, is a claim which is particularly liable to
be stretched further than its reasons warrant. The case is exactly that
of the younger children of the nobility and landed gentry, the bulk of
whose fortune passes to the eldest son. The other sons, who are usually
numerous, are brought up in the same habits of luxury as the future
heir, and they receive as a younger brother' portion, generally what the
reason of the case dictates, namely, enough to support, in the habits of
life to which they are accustomed, themselves, but not a wife or
children. It really is no grievance to any man, that for the means of
marrying and of supporting a family, he has to depend on his own
exertions.

A provision, then, such as is admitted to be reasonable in the case of
illegitimate children, for younger children, wherever in short the
justice of the case, and the real interests of the individuals and of
society, are the only things considered, is, I conceive, all that
parents owe to their children, and all, therefore, which the State owes
to the children of those who die intestate. The surplus, if any, I hold
that Edition: current; Page: [226] it may rightfully appropriate to the
general purposes of the community. I would not, however, be supposed to
recommend that parents should never do more for their children than
what, merely as children, they have a moral right to. In some cases it
is imperative, in many laudable, and in all allowable, to do much more.
For this, however, the means are afforded by the liberty of bequest. It
is due, not to the children but to the parents, that they should have
the power of showing marks of affection, of requiting services and
sacrifices, and of bestowing their wealth according to their own
preferences, or their own judgment of fitness.

§ 4. Whether the power of bequest should itself be subject to
limitation, is an ulterior question of great importance. Unlike
inheritance ab intestato, bequest is one of the attributes of property:
the ownership of a thing cannot be looked upon as complete without the
power of bestowing it, at death or during life, at the owner' pleasure:
and all the reasons, which recommend that private property should exist,
recommend pro tanto this extension of it. But property is only a means
to an end, not itself the end. Like all other proprietary rights, and
even in a greater degree than most, the power of bequest may be so
exercised as to conflict with the permanent interests of the human race.
It does so, when, not content with bequeathing an estate to A, the
testator prescribes that on A' death it shall pass to his eldest son,
and to that son' son, and so on for ever. No doubt, persons have
occasionally exerted themselves more strenuously to acquire a fortune
from the hope of founding a family in perpetuity; but the mischiefs to
society of such perpetuities outweigh the value of this incentive to
exertion, and the incentives in the case of those who have the
opportunity of making large fortunes are strong enough without it. A
similar abuse of the power of bequest is committed when a person who
does the meritorious act of leaving property for public uses, attempts
to prescribe the details of its application in perpetuity; when in
founding a place of education (for instance) he dictates, for ever, what
doctrines shall be taught. It being impossible that any one should know
what doctrines will be fit to be taught after he has been dead for
centuries, the law ought not to give effect to such dispositions of
property, unless subject to the perpetual revision (after a certain
interval has elapsed) of a fitting authority.

There are obvious limitations. But even the simplest exercise of the
right of bequest, that of determining the person to whom Edition:
current; Page: [227] property shall pass immediately on the death of the
testator, has always been reckoned among the privileges which might be
limited or varied, according to views of expediency. The limitations,
hitherto, have been almost solely in favour of children. In England the
right is in principle unlimited, almost the only impediment being that
arising from a settlement by a former proprietor, in which case the
holder for the time being cannot indeed bequeath his possessions, but
only because there is nothing to bequeath, he having merely a life
interest. By the Roman law, on which the civil legislation of the
Continent of Europe is principally founded, bequest originally was not
permitted at all, and even after it was introduced, a legitima portio
was compulsorily reserved for each child; and such is still the law in
some of the Continental nations. By the French law since the Revolution,
the parent can only dispose by will, of a portion equal to the share of
one child, each of the children taking an equal portion. This entail, as
it may be called, of the bulk of every one' property upon the children
collectively, seems to me as little defensible in principle as an entail
in favour of one child, though it does not shock so directly the idea of
justice. I cannot admit that1. parents should be compelled to leave to
their children even that provision which, as children, I have contended
that they have a moral claim to. Children may forfeit that claim by
general unworthiness, or particular ill-conduct to the parents: they may
have other resources or prospects: what has been previously done for
them, in the way of education and advancement in life, may fully satisfy
their moral claim; or others may have claims superior to theirs.2.

The extreme restriction of the power of bequest in French law, was
adopted as a democratic expedient, to break down the custom of
primogeniture, and counteract the tendency of inherited property to
collect in large masses. I agree in thinking these objects eminently
desirable; but the means used are not, I think, the most judicious. Were
I framing a code of laws according to what seems to me best in itself,
without regard to existing opinions and sentiments, I should prefer to
restrict, not what any one might bequeath, but what any one should be
permitted to acquire, by bequest or inheritance. Edition: current; Page:
[228] Each person should have power to dispose by will of his or her
whole property; but not to lavish it in enriching some one individual,
beyond a certain maximum, which should be fixed sufficiently high to
afford the means of comfortable independence. The inequalities of
property which arise from unequal industry, frugality, perseverance,
talents, and to a certain extent even opportunities, are inseparable
from the principle of private property, and if we accept the principle,
we must bear with these consequences of it: but I see nothing
objectionable in fixing a limit to what any one may acquire by the mere
favour of others, without any exercise of his faculties, and in
requiring that if he desires any further accession of fortune, he shall
work for it.∗. I do not conceive that the degree of limitation which
this would impose on the right of bequest, would be felt as a
burthensome restraint by any testator who estimated a large fortune at
its true value, that of the pleasures and advantages that can be
purchased with it: on even the most extravagant estimate of which, it
must be apparent to every one, that the difference to the happiness of
the possessor between a moderate independence and five times as much, is
insignificant when weighed against the enjoyment that might be given,
and the permanent benefits diffused, by some other disposal of the
four-fifths. So long indeed as the opinion practically prevails, that
the best thing which can be done for objects of affection is to heap on
them to satiety those intrinsically worthless things on which large
fortunes are mostly expended, there might be little use in enacting such
a law, even if it were possible to get it passed, since if there were
the inclination, there would generally be the power of evading it. The
law would be unavailing unless the popular sentiment went energetically
along with it; which (judging from the tenacious adherence of public
opinion in France to the law of compulsory division) it would in some
states of society and government be very likely to do, however much the
contrary may be the fact in England and at the present time. If the
restriction could be Edition: current; Page: [229] made practically
effectual, the benefit would be great. Wealth which could no longer be
employed in over-1. enriching a few, would either be devoted to objects
of public usefulness, or if bestowed on individuals, would be
distributed among a larger number. While those enormous fortunes which
no one needs for any personal purpose but ostentation or improper power,
would become much less numerous, there would be a great multiplication
of persons in easy circumstances, with the advantages of leisure, and
all the real enjoyments which wealth can give, except those of vanity; a
class by whom the services which a nation having leisured classes is
entitled to expect from them, either by their direct exertions or by the
tone they give to the feelings and tastes of the public, would be
rendered in a much more beneficial manner than at present. A large
portion also of the accumulations of successful industry would probably
be devoted to public uses, either by direct bequests to the State, or by
the endowment of institutions; as is already done very largely in the
United States, where the ideas and practice in the matter of inheritance
seem to be unusually rational and beneficial.∗.

§ 5. The next point to be considered is, whether the reasons on which
the institution of property rests are applicable to all things in which
a right of exclusive ownership is at present recognised; and if not, on
what other grounds the recognition is defensible.

The essential principle of property being to assure to all persons what
they have produced by their labour and accumulated by their Edition:
current; Page: [230] abstinence, this principle cannot apply to what is
not the produce of labour, the raw material of the earth. If the land
derived its productive power wholly from nature, and not at all from
industry, or if there were any means of discriminating what is derived
from each source, it not only would not be necessary, but it would be
the height of injustice, to let the gift of nature be engrossed by
individuals. The use of the land in agriculture must indeed, for the
time being, be of necessity exclusive; the same person who has ploughed
and sown must be permitted to reap: but the land might be occupied for
one season only, as among the ancient Germans; or might be periodically
redivided as population increased: or the State might be the universal
landlord, and the cultivators tenants under it, either on lease or at
will.

But though land is not the produce of industry, most of its valuable
qualities are so. Labour is not only requisite for using, but almost
equally so for fashioning, the instrument. Considerable labour is often
required at the commencement, to clear the land for cultivation. In many
cases, even when cleared, its productiveness is wholly the effect of
labour and art. The Bedford Level produced little or nothing until
artificially drained. The bogs of Ireland, until the same thing is done
to them, can produce little besides fuel. One of the barrenest soils in
the world, composed of the material of the Goodwin Sands, the Pays de
Waes in Flanders, has been so fertilized by industry, as to have become
one of the most productive in Europe. Cultivation also requires
buildings and fences, which are wholly the produce of labour. The fruits
of this industry cannot be reaped in a short period. The labour and
outlay are immediate, the benefit is spread over many years, perhaps
over all future time. A holder will not incur this labour and outlay
when strangers and not himself will be benefited by it. If he undertakes
such improvements, he must have a sufficient period before him in which
to profit by them: and he is in no way so sure of having always a
sufficient period as when his tenure is perpetual.∗.

Edition: current; Page: [231]
§ 6. These are the reasons which form the justification in an economical
point of view, of property in land. It is seen, that they are only
valid, in so far as the proprietor of land is its improver. Whenever, in
any country, the proprietor, generally speaking, ceases to be the
improver, political economy has nothing to say in defence of landed
property, as there established. In no sound theory of private property
was it ever contemplated that the proprietor of land should be merely a
sinecurist quartered on it.

In Great Britain, the landed proprietor is not unfrequently an improver.
But it cannot be said that he is generally so. And in the majority of
cases he grants the liberty of cultivation [1848] on such terms, as to
prevent improvements from being made by any one else. In the southern
parts of the island, as there are usually no leases, permanent
improvements can scarcely be made except by the landlord' capital;
accordingly the South, compared with the North of England, and with the
Lowlands of Scotland, is still extremely backward in agricultural
improvement. The truth is, that any very general improvement of land by
the landlords is hardly compatible with a law or custom of
primogeniture. When the land goes wholly to the heir, it generally goes
to him severed from the pecuniary resources which would enable him to
improve it, the personal property being absorbed by the provision for
younger children, and the land itself often heavily burthened for the
same purpose. There is therefore but a small proportion of landlords who
have the means of making expensive improvements, unless they do it with
borrowed money, and by adding to the mortgages with which in most cases
the land was already burthened when they Edition: current; Page: [232]
received it. But the position of the owner of a deeply mortgaged estate
is so precarious; economy is so unwelcome to one whose apparent fortune
greatly exceeds his real means, and the vicissitudes of rent and price
which only trench upon the margin of his income, are so formidable to
one who can call little more than the margin his own, that it is no
wonder if few landlords find themselves in a condition to make immediate
sacrifices for the sake of future profit. Were they ever so much
inclined, those alone can prudently do it, who have seriously studied
the principles of scientific agriculture: and great landlords have
seldom seriously studied anything. They might at least hold out
inducements to the farmers to do what they will not or cannot do
themselves; but even in granting leases, it is in England a general
complaint [1848] that they tie up their tenants by covenants grounded on
the practices of an obsolete and exploded agriculture; while most of
them, by withholding leases altogether, and giving the farmer no
guarantee of possession beyond a single harvest, keep the land on a
footing little more favourable to improvement than in the time of our
barbarous ancestors,

-   

    —— immetata quibus jugera liberas
-   

    Fruges et Cererem ferunt,
-   

    Nec cultura placet longior annuâ.

Landed property in England is thus very far from completely fulfilling
the conditions which render its existence economically justifiable. But
if insufficiently realized even in England, in Ireland those conditions
are [1848] not complied with at all. With individual exceptions (some of
them very honourable ones), the owners of Irish estates do nothing for
the land but drain it of its produce. What has been epigrammatically
said in the discussions on “peculiar burthens” is literally true when
applied to them; that the greatest “burthen on land” is the landlords.
Returning nothing to the soil, they consume its whole produce, minus the
potatoes strictly necessary to keep the inhabitants from dying of
famine; and when they have any purpose of improvement, the preparatory
step usually consists in not leaving even this pittance, but turning out
the people to beggary if not to starvation.∗. When landed property
Edition: current; Page: [233] has placed itself upon this footing it
ceases to be defensible, and the time has come for making some new
arrangement of the matter.

When the “sacredness of property” is talked of, it should always be
remembered, that any such sacredness does not belong in the same degree
to landed property. No man made the land. It is the original inheritance
of the whole species. Its appropriation is wholly a question of general
expediency. When private property in land is not expedient, it is
unjust.1. It is no hardship to any one to be excluded from what others
have produced: they were not bound to produce it for his use, and he
loses nothing by not sharing in what otherwise would not have existed at
all. But it is some hardship to be born into the world and to find all
nature' gifts previously engrossed, and no place left for the new-comer.
To reconcile people to this, after they have once admitted into their
minds the idea that any moral rights belong to them as human beings, it
will always be necessary to convince them that the exclusive
appropriation is good for mankind on the whole, themselves included. But
this is what no sane human being could be persuaded of, if the relation
between the landowner and the cultivator were the same everywhere as it
has been in Ireland.

Landed property is felt, even by those most tenacious of its rights, to
be a different thing from other property; and where the bulk of the
community have been disinherited of their share of it, and it has become
the exclusive attribute of a small minority, men have generally tried to
reconcile it, at least in theory, to their sense of justice, by
endeavouring to attach duties to it, and erecting it into a sort of
magistracy, either moral or legal. But if the state is at liberty to
treat the possessors of land as public functionaries, it is only going
one step further to say, that it is at liberty to discard them. The
claim of the landowners to the land is altogether subordinate to the
general policy of the state. The principle of property gives them no
right to the land, but only a right to compensation for whatever portion
of their interest in the land it may be the policy of the state to
deprive them of. To that, their claim is indefeasible. It is due to
landowners, and to owners of any property whatever, recognised as such
by the state, that they should not be dispossessed of it without
receiving its pecuniary value, or an annual income equal to what they
derived from it. This is due on the general Edition: current; Page:
[234] principles on which property rests. If the land was bought with
produce of the labour and abstinence of themselves or their ancestors,
compensation is due to them on that ground; even if otherwise, it is
still due on ground of prescription. Nor can it ever be necessary for
accomplishing an object by which the community altogether will gain,
that a particular portion of the community should be immolated. When the
property is of a kind to which peculiar affections attach themselves,
the compensation ought to exceed a bare pecuniary equivalent. But,
subject to this proviso, the state is at liberty to deal with landed
property as the general interests of the community may require, even to
the extent, if it so happen, of doing with the whole, what is done with
a part whenever a bill is passed for a railroad or a new street.1. The
community has too much at stake in the proper cultivation of the land,
and in the conditions annexed to the occupancy of it, to leave these
things to the discretion of a class of persons called landlords, when
they have shown themselves unfit for the trust. The legislature, which
if it pleased might convert the whole body of landlords into fundholders
or pensioners, might, à fortiori, commute the average receipts of Irish
landowners into a fixed rent charge, and raise the tenants into
proprietors; supposing always2. that the full market value of the land
was tendered to the landlords, in case they preferred that to accepting
the conditions proposed.

There will be another place for discussing the various modes of landed
property and tenure, and the advantages and inconveniences of each; in
this chapter our concern is with the right itself, the grounds which
justify it, and (as a corollary from these) the conditions by which it
should be limited. To me it seems almost an axiom that property in land
should be interpreted strictly, and that the balance in all cases of
doubt should incline against the proprietor. The reverse is the case
with property in moveables, and in all things the product of labour:
over these, the owner' power both of use and of exclusion should be
absolute, except where positive evil Edition: current; Page: [235] to
others would result from it: but in the case of land, no exclusive right
should be permitted in any individual, which cannot be shown to be
productive of positive good. To be allowed any exclusive right at all,
over a portion of the common inheritance, while there are others who
have no portion, is already a privilege. No quantity of moveable goods
which a person can acquire by his labour, prevents others from acquiring
the like by the same means; but from the very nature of the case,
whoever owns land, keeps others out of the enjoyment of it. The
privilege, or monopoly, is only defensible as a necessary evil; it
becomes an injustice when carried to any point to which the compensating
good does not follow it.

For instance, the exclusive right to the land for purposes of
cultivation does not imply an exclusive right to it for purposes of
access; and no such right ought to be recognised, except to the extent
necessary to protect the produce against damage, and the owner' privacy
against invasion. The pretension of two Dukes [1848] to shut up a part
of the Highlands, and exclude the rest of mankind from many square miles
of mountain scenery to prevent disturbance to wild animals, is an abuse;
it exceeds the legitimate bounds of the right of landed property. When
land is not intended to be cultivated, no good reason can in general be
given for its being private property at all; and if any one is permitted
to call it his, he ought to know that he holds it by sufferance of the
community, and on an implied condition that his ownership, since it
cannot possibly do them any good, at least shall not deprive them of
any, which they could have derived from the land if it had been
unappropriated. Even in the case of cultivated land, a man whom, though
only one among millions, the law permits to hold thousands of acres as
his single share, is not entitled to think that all this is given to him
to use and abuse, and deal with as if it concerned nobody but himself.
The rents or profits which he can obtain from it are at his sole
disposal; but with regard to the land, in everything which he does with
it, and in everything which he abstains from doing, he is morally bound,
and should whenever the case admits be legally compelled, to make his
interest and pleasure consistent with the public good. The species at
large still retains, of its original claim to the soil of the planet
which it inhabits, as much as is compatible with the purposes for which
it has parted with the remainder.

§ 7. Besides property in the produce of labour, and property in land,
there are other things which are or have been subjects of Edition:
current; Page: [236] property, in which no proprietary rights ought to
exist at all. But as the civilized world has in general made up its mind
on most of these, there is no necessity for dwelling on them in this
place. At the head of them, is property in human beings. It is almost
superfluous to observe, that this institution can have no place in any
society even pretending to be founded on justice, or on fellowship
between human creatures. But, iniquitous as it is, yet when the state
has expressly legalized it, and human beings, for generations, have been
bought, sold, and inherited under sanction of law, it is another wrong,
in abolishing the property, not to make full compensation. This wrong
was avoided by the great measure of justice in 1833, one of the most
virtuous acts, as well as the most practically beneficent, ever done
collectively by a nation. Other examples of property which ought not to
have been created, are properties in public trusts; such as judicial
offices under the old French régime, and the heritable jurisdictions
which, in countries not wholly emerged from feudality, pass with the
land. Our own country affords, as cases in point, that of a commission
in the army [1848], and of an advowson, or right of nomination to an
ecclesiastical benefice. A property is also sometimes created in a right
of taxing the public; in a monopoly, for instance, or other exclusive
privilege. These abuses prevail most in semibarbarous countries, but are
not without example in the most civilized. In France there are [1848]
several important trades and professions, including notaries, attorneys,
brokers, appraisers, printers, and (until lately)1. bakers and butchers,
of which the numbers are limited by law. The brevet or privilege of one
of the permitted number consequently brings a high price in the market.
When such is the case, compensation probably could not with justice be
refused, on the abolition of the privilege. There are other cases in
which this would be more doubtful. The question would turn upon what, in
the peculiar circumstances, was sufficient to constitute prescription;
and whether the legal recognition which the abuse had obtained, was
sufficient to constitute it an institution, or amounted only to an
occasional licence. It would be absurd to claim compensation for losses
caused by changes in a tariff, a thing confessedly variable from year to
year; or for monopolies like those granted to individuals by the Tudors,
favours of a despotic authority, which the power that gave was competent
at any time to recall.

Edition: current; Page: [237]
So much on the institution of property, a subject of which, for the
purposes of political economy, it was indispensable to treat, but on
which we could not usefully confine ourselves to economical
considerations. We have now to inquire on what principles and with what
results the distribution of the produce of land and labour is effected,
under the relations which this institution creates among the different
members of the community.

Edition: current; Page: [238]


Chapter III.: Of the classes among whom the produce is distributed

§ 1. Private property being assumed as a fact, we have next to enumerate
the different classes of persons to whom it gives rise; whose
concurrence, or at least whose permission, is necessary to production,
and who are therefore able to stipulate for a share of the produce. We
have to inquire, according to what laws the produce distributes itself
among these classes, by the spontaneous action of the interests of those
concerned: after which, a further question will be, what effects are or
might be produced by laws, institutions, and measures of government, in
superseding or modifying that spontaneous distribution.

The three requisites of production, as has been so often repeated, are
labour, capital, and land: understanding by capital, the means and
appliances which are the accumulated results of previous labour, and by
land, the materials and instruments supplied by nature, whether
contained in the interior of the earth, or constituting its surface.
Since each of these elements of production may be separately
appropriated, the industrial community may be considered as divided into
landowners, capitalists, and productive labourers. Each of these
classes, as such, obtains a share of the produce: no other person or
class obtains anything, except by concession from them. The remainder of
the community is, in fact, supported at their expense, giving, if any
equivalent, one consisting of unproductive services. These three
classes, therefore, are considered in political economy as making up the
whole community.

§ 2. But although these three sometimes exist as separate classes,
dividing the produce among them, they do not necessarily or always so
exist. The fact is so much otherwise, that there are only one or two
communities in which the complete separation of these classes is the
general rule. England and Scotland, with parts Edition: current; Page:
[239] of Belgium and Holland, are almost the only countries in the
world, where the land, capital, and labour employed in agriculture, are
generally the property of separate owners. The ordinary case is, that
the same person owns either two of these requisites, or all three.

The case in which the same person owns all three, embraces the two
extremes of existing society, in respect to the independence and dignity
of the labouring class. First, when the labourer himself is the
proprietor. This is the commonest case in the Northern States of the
American Union; one of the commonest in France, Switzerland, the three
Scandinavian kingdoms, and parts of Germany;∗. and a common case in
parts of Italy and in Belgium. In all these countries there are, no
doubt, large landed properties, and a still greater number which,
without being large, require the occasional or constant aid of hired
labourers. Much, however, of the land is owned in portions too small to
require any other labour than that of the peasant and his family, or
fully to occupy even that. The capital employed is not always that of
the peasant proprietor, many of these small properties being mortgaged
to obtain the means of cultivating; but the capital is invested at the
peasant' risk, and though he pays interest for it, it gives to no one
any right of interference, except, perhaps, eventually to take
possession of the land, if the interest ceases to be paid.

The other case in which the land, labour, and capital, belong to the
same person, is the case of slave countries, in which the Edition:
current; Page: [240] labourers themselves are owned by the landowner.
Our West India colonies before emancipation, and the sugar colonies of
the nations by whom a similar act of justice is still unperformed, are
examples of large establishments for agricultural and manufacturing
labour (the production of sugar and rum is a combination of both) in
which the land, the factories (if they may be so called), the machinery,
and the degraded labourers, are all the property of a capitalist. In
this case, as well as in its extreme opposite, the case of the peasant
proprietor, there is no division of the produce.

§ 3. When the three requisites are not all owned by the same person, it
often happens that two of them are so. Sometimes the same person owns
the capital and the land, but not the labour. The landlord makes his
engagement directly with the labourer, and supplies the whole or part of
the stock necessary for cultivation. This system is the usual one in
those parts of Continental Europe, in which the labourers are neither
serfs on the one hand, nor proprietors on the other. It was very common
in France before the Revolution, and is still practised in some parts of
that country, when the land is not the property of the cultivator. It
prevails generally in the level districts of Italy, except those
principally pastoral, such as the Maremma of Tuscany and the Campagna of
Rome. On this system the division of the produce is between two classes,
the landowner and the labourer.

In other cases again the labourer does not own the land, but owns the
little stock employed on it, the landlord not being in the habit of
supplying any. This system generally prevails in Ireland. It is nearly
universal in India, and in most countries of the East; whether the
government retains, as it generally does, the ownership of the soil, or
allows portions to become, either absolutely or in a qualified sense,
the property of individuals. In India, however, things are so far better
than in Ireland, that the owner of land is in the habit of making
advances to the cultivators, if they cannot cultivate without them. For
these advances the native landed proprietor usually demands high
interest; but the principal landowner, the government, makes them
gratuitously, recovering the advance after the harvest, together with
the rent. The produce is here divided as before, between the same two
classes, the landowner and the labourer.

These are the principal variations in the classification of those among
whom the produce of agricultural labour is distributed. In Edition:
current; Page: [241] the case of manufacturing industry there never are
more than two classes, the labourers and the capitalists. The original
artisans in all countries were either slaves, or the women of the
family. In the manufacturing establishments of the ancients, whether on
a large or on a small scale, the labourers were usually the property of
the capitalist. In general, if any manual labour was thought compatible
with the dignity of a freeman, it was only agricultural labour. The
converse system, in which the capital was owned by the labourer, was
coeval with free labour, and under it the first great advances of
manufacturing industry were achieved. The artisan owned the loom or the
few tools he used, and worked on his own account; or at least ended by
doing so, though he usually worked for another, first as apprentice and
next as journeyman, for a certain number of years before he could be
admitted a master. But the status of a permanent journeyman, all his
life a hired labourer and nothing more, had no place in the crafts and
guilds of the Middle Ages. In country villages, where a carpenter or a
blacksmith cannot live and support hired labourers on the returns of his
business, he is even now his own workman; and shopkeepers in similar
circumstances are their own shopmen, or shopwomen. But wherever the
extent of the market admits of it, the distinction is now fully
established between the class of capitalists, or employers of labour,
and the class of labourers; the capitalists, in general, contributing no
other labour than that of direction and superintendence.

Edition: current; Page: [242]


CHAPTER IV.: of competition and custom

§ 1. Under the rule of individual property, the division of the produce
is the result of two determining agencies: Competition, and Custom. It
is important to ascertain the amount of influence which belongs to each
of these causes, and in what manner the operation of one is modified by
the other.

Political economists generally, and English political economists above
others, have been accustomed to lay almost exclusive stress upon the
first of these agencies; to exaggerate the effect of competition, and to
take into little account the other and conflicting principle. They are
apt to express themselves as if they thought that competition actually
does, in all cases, whatever it can be shown to be the tendency of
competition to do. This is partly intelligible, if we consider that only
through the principle of competition has political economy any
pretension to the character of a science.So far as rents, profits,
wages, prices, are determined by competition, laws may be assigned for
them. Assume competition to be their exclusive regulator, and principles
of broad generality and scientific precision may be laid down, according
to which they will be regulated. The political economist justly deems
this his proper business: and as an abstract or hypothetical science,
political economy cannot be required to do, and indeed cannot do,
anything more. But it would be a great misconception of the actual
course of human affairs, to suppose that competition exercises in fact
this unlimited sway. I am not speaking of monopolies, either natural or
artificial, or of any interferences of authority with the liberty of
production or exchange. Such disturbing causes have always been allowed
for by political economists. I speak of cases in which there is nothing
to restrain competition; no hindrance to it either in the nature of the
case or in artificial obstacles; yet in which the result is not
determined by competition, Edition: current; Page: [243] but by custom
or usage; competition either not taking place at all, or producing its
effect in quite a different manner from that which is ordinarily assumed
to be natural to it.

§ 2. Competition, in fact, has only become in any considerable degree
the governing principle of contracts, at a comparatively modern period.
The farther we look back into history, the more we see all transactions
and engagements under the influence of fixed customs. The reason is
evident. Custom is the most powerful protector of the weak the strong;
their sole protector where there are no laws or government adequate to
the purpose. Custom is a barrier which, even in the most oppressed
condition of mankind, tyranny is forced in some degree to respect. To
the industrious population, in a turbulent military community, freedom
of competition is a vain phrase; they are never in a condition to make
terms for themselves by it: there is always a master who throws his
sword into the scale, and the terms are such as he imposes. But though
the law of the strongest decides, it is not the interest nor in general
the practice of the strongest to strain that law to the utmost, and
every relaxation of it has a tendency to become a custom, and every
custom to become a right. Rights thus originating, and not competition
in any shape, determine, in a rude state of society, the share of the
produce enjoyed by those who produce it. The relations, more especially,
between the landowner and the cultivator, and the payments made by the
latter to the former, are, in all states of society but the most modern,
determined by the usage of the country. Never until late times have the
conditions of the occupancy of land been (as a genral rule) an affiar of
copetition. The occupier for the time has very commonly been considered
to have a right to retain his holdings, while he fulfils the customary
requirements; and thus become, in a certain sense, a co-proprietor of
the soil. Even where the holder has not acquired this fixity of tenure,
the terms of occupation have often been fixed and invariable.

In India, for example, and other Asiatic communities similarly
constituted, the ryots, or peasant-farmers, are not regarded as tenants
at will, nor even as tenants by virtue of a lease. In most villages
there are indeed some ryots on this precarious footing, consisting of
those, or the descendants of those, who have settled in the place at a
known and comparatively recent period; but all who are looked upon as
descendants or representatives of the original Edition: current; Page:
[244] inhabitants, and even many mere tenants of ancient date, are
thought entitled to retain their land, as long as they pay the customary
rents. What these customary rents are, or ought to be, has indeed, in
most cases, become a matter of obscurity; usurpation, tyranny, and
foreign conquest having to a great degree obliterated the evidences of
them. But when an old and purely Hindoo principality falls under the
dominion of the British Government, or the management of its officers,
and when the details of the revenue system come to be inquired into, it
is usually found that though the demands of the great landholder, the
State, have been swelled by fiscal rapacity until all limit is
practically lost sight of, it has yet been thought necessary to have a
distinct name and a separate pretext for each increase of exaction; so
that the demand has sometimes come to consist of thirty or forty
different items, in addition to the nominal rent. This circuitous mode
of increasing the payments assuredly would not have been resorted to, if
there had been an acknowledged right in the landlord to increase the
rent. Its adoption is a proof that there was once an effective
limitation, a real customary rent; and that the understood right of the
ryot to the land, so long as he paid rent according to custom, was at
some time or other more than nominal.∗. The British Government of India
always simplifies the tenure by consolidating the various assessments
into one, thus making the rent nominally as well as really an arbitrary
thing, or at least a matter of specific agreement: but it scrupulously
respects the right of the ryot to the land, though until the reforms of
the present generation (reforms even now only partially carried into
effect) it seldom left him much more than a bare subsistence.∗.

In modern Europe the cultivators have gradually emerged from a state of
personal slavery. The barbarian conquerors of the Western Empire found
that the easiest mode of managing their conquests would be to leave the
occupation of the land in the hands in which they found it, and to save
themselves a labour so uncongenial as the superintendence of troops of
slaves, by allowing the slaves to retain in a certain degree the control
of their own actions, under an obligation to furnish the lord with
provisions and labour. Edition: current; Page: [245] A common expedient
was to assign to the serf, for his exclusive use, as much land as was
thought sufficient for his support, and to make him work on the other
lands of his lord whenever required. By degrees these indefinite
obligations were transformed into a definite one, of supplying a fixed
quantity of provisions or a fixed quantity of labour: and as the lords,
in time, became inclined to employ their income in the purchase of
luxuries rather than in the maintenance of retainers, the payments in
kind were commuted for payments in money. Each concession, at first
voluntary and revocable at pleasure, gradually acquired the force of
custom, and was at last recognised and enforced by the tribunals. In
this manner the serfs progressively rose into a free tenantry, who held
their land in perpetuity on fixed conditions. The conditions were
sometimes very onerous, and the people very miserable. But their
obligations were determined by the usage or law of the country, and not
by competition.

Where the cultivators had never been, strictly speaking, in personal
bondage, or after they had ceased to be so, the exigencies of a poor and
little advanced society gave rise to another arrangement, which in some
parts of Europe, even highly improved parts, has been found sufficiently
advantageous to be continued to the present day. I speak of the métayer
system. Under this, the land is divided, in small farms, among single
families, the landlord generally supplying the stock which the
agricultural system of the country is considered to require, and
receiving, in lieu of rent and profit, a fixed proportion of the
produce. This proportion, which is generally paid in kind, is usually,
(as is implied in the words métayer, mezzaiuolo, and medietarius,)
one-half. There are places, however, such as the rich volcanic soil of
the province of Naples, where the landlord takes two-thirds, and yet the
cultivator by means of an excellent agriculture contrives to live. But
whether the proportion is two-thirds or one-half, it is a fixed
proportion; not variable from farm to farm, or from tenant to tenant.
The custom of the country is the universal rule; nobody thinks of
raising or lowering rents, or of letting land on other than the
customary conditions. Competition, as a regulator of rent, has no
existence.

§ 3. Prices, whenever there was no monopoly, came earlier under the
influence of competition, and are much more universally subject to it,
than rents: but that influence is by no means, even in the present
activity of mercantile competition, so absolute as is Edition: current;
Page: [246] sometimes assumed. There is no proposition which meets us in
the field of political economy oftener than this—that there cannot be
two prices in the same market. Such undoubtedly is the natural effect of
unimpeded competition; yet every one knows that there are, almost
always,1. two prices in the same market. Not only are there in every
large town, and in almost every trade, cheap shops and dear shops, but
the same shop often sells the same article at different prices to
different customers: and, as a general rule, each retailer adapts his
scale of prices to the class of customers whom he expects. The wholesale
trade, in the great articles of commerce, is really under the dominion
of competition. There, the buyers as well as sellers are traders or
manufacturers, and their purchases are not influenced by indolence or
vulgar finery, nor depend on the smaller motives of personal
convenience, but are business transactions. In the wholesale markets
therefore it is true as a general proposition, that there are not two
prices at one time for the same thing: there is at each time and place a
market price, which can be quoted in a price-current. But retail price,
the price paid by the actual consumer, seems to feel very slowly and
imperfectly the effect of competition; and when competition does exist,
it often, instead of lowering prices, merely divides the gains of the
high price among a greater number of dealers. Hence it is that, of the
price paid by the consumer, so large a proportion is absorbed by the
gains of retailers; and any one who inquires into the amount which
reaches the hands of those who made the things he buys, will often be
astonished at its smallness. When indeed the market, being that of a
great city, holds out a sufficient inducement to large capitalists to
engage in retail operations, it is generally found a better speculation
to attract a large business by underselling others, than merely to
divide the field of employment with them. This influence of competition
is making itself felt more and more through the principal branches of
retail trade in the large towns; and the rapidity and cheapness of
transport, by making consumers less dependent on the dealers in their
immediate neighbourhood, are tending to assimilate more and more the
whole country to a large town: but hitherto [1848] it is only in the
great centres of business that retail transactions have been chiefly, or
even much, determined, by competition. Elsewhere it rather acts, when it
acts at all, as an occasional disturbing influence; the habitual
regulator is custom, modified from time to time by notions existing
Edition: current; Page: [247] in the minds of purchasers and sellers, of
some kind of equity or justice.

In many trades the terms on which business is done are a matter of
positive arrangement among the trade, who use the means they always
possess of making the situation of any member of the body, who departs
from its fixed customs, inconvenient or disagreeable. It is well known
that the bookselling trade was, until lately, one of these, and that
notwithstanding the active spirit of rivalry in the trade, competition
did not produce its natural effect in breaking down the trade rules.1.
All professional remuneration is regulated by custom. The fees of
physicians, surgeons, and barristers, the charges of attorneys, are
nearly invariable. Not certainly for want of abundant competition in
those professions, but because the competition operates by diminishing
each competitor' chance of fees, not by lowering the fees themselves.

Since custom stands its ground against competition to so considerable an
extent, even where, from the multitude of competitors and the general
energy in the pursuit of gain, the spirit of competition is strongest,
we may be sure that this is much more the case where people are content
with smaller gains, and estimate their pecuniary interest at a lower
rate when balanced against their ease or their pleasure. I believe it
will often be found, in Continental Europe, that prices and charges, of
some or of all sorts, are much higher in some places than in others not
far distant, without its being possible to assign any other cause than
that it has always been so: the customers are used to it, and acquiesce
in it. An enterprising competitor, with sufficient capital, might force
down the charges, and make his fortune during the process; but there are
no enterprising competitors; those who have capital prefer to leave it
where it is, or to make less profit by it in a more quiet way.

These observations must be received as a general correction to be
applied whenever relevant, whether expressly mentioned or not, to the
conclusions contained in the subsequent portions of this treatise. Our
reasonings must, in general, proceed as if the known and natural effects
of competition were actually produced by it, in all cases in which it is
not restrained by some positive obstacle. Where competition, though free
to exist, does not exist, or where it exists, but has its natural
consequences overruled by any other agency, the conclusions will fail
more or less of being applicable. Edition: current; Page: [248] To
escape error, we ought, in applying the conclusions of political economy
to the actual affairs of life, to consider not only what will happen
supposing the maximum of competition, but how far the result will be
affected if competition falls short of the maximum.

The states of economical relation which stand first in order to be
discussed and appreciated, are those in which competition has no part,
the arbiter of transactions being either brute force or established
usage. These will be the subject of the next four chapters.

Edition: current; Page: [249]


CHAPTER V.: of slavery

§ 1. Among the forms which society assumes under the influence of the
institution of property, there are, as I have already remarked, two,
otherwise of a widely dissimilar character, but resembling in this, that
the ownership of the land, the labour, and the capital, is in the same
hands. One of these cases is that of slavery, the other is that of
peasant proprietors. In the one, the landowner owns the labour, in the
other the labourer owns the land. We begin with the first.

In this system all the produce belongs to the landlord. The food and
other necessaries of his labourers are part of his expenses. The
labourers possess nothing but what he thinks fit to give them, and until
he thinks fit to take it back: and they work as hard as he chooses, or
is able, to compel them. Their wretchedness is only limited by his
humanity, or his pecuniary interest. With the first consideration, we
have on the present occasion nothing to do. What the second in so
detestable a constitution of society may dictate, depends on the
facilities for importing fresh slaves. If full-grown, able-bodied slaves
can be procured in sufficient numbers, and imported at a moderate
expense, self-interest will recommend working the slaves to death, and
replacing them by importation, in preference to the slow and expensive
process of breeding them. Nor are the slave-owners generally backward in
learning this lesson. It is notorious that such was the practice in our
slave colonies, while the slave trade was legal; and it is said to be so
still in Cuba.1.

When, as among the ancients, the slave-market could only be supplied by
captives either taken in war, or kidnapped from thinly scattered tribes
on the remote confines of the known world, it was Edition: current;
Page: [250] generally more profitable to keep up the number by breeding,
which necessitates a far better treatment of them; and for this reason,
joined with several others, the condition of slaves, notwithstanding
occasional enormities, was probably much less bad in the ancient world,
than in the colonies of modern nations. The Helots are usually cited as
the type of the most hideous form of personal slavery, but with how
little truth appears from the fact that they were regularly armed
(though not with the panoply of the hoplite) and formed an integral part
of the military strength of the State. They were doubtless an inferior
and degraded caste, but their slavery seems to have been one of the
least onerous varieties of serfdom. Slavery appears in far more
frightful colours among the Romans, during the period in which the Roman
aristocracy was gorging itself with the plunder of a newly-conquered
world. The Romans were a cruel people, and the worthless nobles sported
with the lives of their myriads of slaves with the same reckless
prodigality with which they squandered any other part of their
ill-acquired possessions. Yet, slavery is divested of one of its worst
features when it is compatible with hope; enfranchisement was easy and
common: enfranchised slaves obtained at once the full rights of
citizens, and instances were frequent of their acquiring not only
riches, but latterly even honours. By the progress of milder legislation
under the Emperors, much of the protection of law was thrown round the
slave, he became capable of possessing property, and the evil altogether
assumed a considerably gentler aspect. Until, however, slavery assumes
the mitigated form of villenage, in which not only the slaves have
property and legal rights, but their obligations are more or less
limited by usage, and they partly labour for their own benefit; their
condition is seldom such as to produce a rapid growth either of
population or of production.1.

§ 2. So long as slave countries are underpeopled in proportion to their
cultivable land, the labour of the slaves, under any tolerable Edition:
current; Page: [251] management, produces much more than is sufficient
for their support; especially as the great amount of superintendence
which their labour requires, preventing the dispersion of the
population, insures some of the advantages of combined labour. Hence, in
a good soil and climate, and with reasonable care of his own interests,
the owner of many slaves has the means of being rich. The influence,
however, of such a state of society on production, is perfectly well
understood. It is a truism to assert, that labour extorted by fear of
punishment is inefficient and unproductive. It is true that in some
circumstances, human beings can be driven by the lash to attempt, and
even to accomplish, things which they would not have undertaken for any
payment which it could have been worth while to an employer to offer
them. And it is likely that productive operations which require much
combination of labour, the production of sugar for example, would not
have taken place so soon in the American colonies if slavery had not
existed to keep masses of labour together. There are also savage tribes
so averse from regular industry, that industrial life is scarcely able
to introduce itself among them until they are either conquered and made
slaves of, or become conquerors and make others so. But after allowing
the full value of these considerations, it remains certain that slavery
is incompatible with any high state of the arts of life, and any great
efficiency of labour. For all products which require much skill, slave
countries are usually1. dependent on foreigners. Hopeless slavery
effectually brutifies the intellect; and intelligence in the slaves,
though often encouraged in the ancient world and in the East, is in a
more advanced state of society a source of so much danger and an object
of so much dread to the masters, that in some of the States of America
it was a highly penal offence to teach a slave to read.2. All processes
carried on by slave labour are conducted in the rudest strength and most
unimproved manner. And even the animal strength of the slave is, on an
average, not half exerted. The unproductiveness and wastefulness of the
industrial system in the Slave States is instructively displayed in the
valuable writings of Mr. Olmsted.3. The mildest form of slavery is
certainly the condition of the serf, who is attached to the soil,
supports himself from his allotment, and works a certain number of days
in the week for his lord. Yet there is but one opinion on the extreme
Edition: current; Page: [252] inefficiency of serf labour. The following
passage is from Professor Jones,∗. whose Essay on the Distribution of
Wealth (or rather on Rent), is a copious repertory of valuable facts on
the landed tenures of different countries.

“The Russians, or rather those German writers who have observed the
manners and habits of Russia, state some strong facts on this point. Two
Middlesex mowers, they say, will mow in a day as much grass as six
Russian serfs, and in spite of the dearness of provisions in England and
their cheapness in Russia, the mowing a quantity of hay which would cost
an English farmer half a copeck, will cost a Russian proprietor three or
four copecks.†. The Prussian counsellor of state, Jacob, is considered
to have proved, that in Russia, where everything is cheap, the labour of
a serf is doubly as expensive as that of a labourer in England. M.
Schmalz gives a startling account of the unproductiveness of serf labour
in Prussia, from his own knowledge and observation.‡. In Austria, it is
distinctly stated, that the labour of a serf is equal to only one-third
of that of a free hired labourer. This calculation, made in an able work
on agriculture (with some extracts from which I have been favoured), is
applied to the practical purpose of deciding on the number of labourers
necessarity to cultivate an estate of a given magnitude. So palpable,
indeed, are the ill effects of labour rents on the industry of the
agricultural population, that in Austria itself, where proposals of
changes of any kind do not readily make their way, schemes and plans for
the commutation of labour rents are as popular as in the more stirring
German provinces of the North.”§.

What is wanting in the quality of the labour itself, is not made up by
any excellence in the direction and superintendence. As the same
writer||. remarks, the landed proprietors “are necessarily, in their
character of cultivators of their own domains, the only guides and
directors of the industry of the agricultural population,” since there
can be no intermediate class of capitalist farmers where Edition:
current; Page: [253] the labourers are the property of the lord. Great
landowners are everywhere an idle class, or if they labour at all,
addict themselves only to the more exciting kinds of exertion; that
lion' share which superiors always reserve for themselves. “It would,”
as Mr. Jones observes, “be hopeless and irrational to expect, that a
race of noble proprietors, fenced round with privileges and dignity, and
attracted to military and political pursuits by the advantages and
habits of their station, should ever become attentive cultivators as a
body.” Even in England, if the cultivation of every estate depended upon
its proprietor, any one can judge what would be the result. There would
be a few cases of great science and energy, and numerous individual
instances of moderate success, but the general state of agriculture
would be contemptible.

§ 3. Whether the proprietors themselves would lose by the emancipation
of their slaves, is a different question from the comparative
effectiveness of free and slave labour to the community. There has been
much discussion of this question as an abstract thesis; as if it could
possibly admit of any universal solution. Whether slavery or free labour
is most profitable to the employer, depends on the wages of the free
labourer. These, again, depend on the numbers of the labouring
population, compared with the capital and the land. Hired labour is
generally so much more efficient than slave labour, that the employer
can pay a considerably greater value in wages, than the maintenance of
his slaves cost him before, and yet be a gainer by the change: but he
cannot do this without limit. The decline of serfdom in Europe, and its
destruction in the Western nations, were doubtless hastened by the
change which the growth of population must have made in the pecuniary
interests of the master. As population pressed harder upon the land,
with any improvements in agriculture, the maintenance of the serfs
necessarily became more costly, and their labour less valuable. With the
rate of wages such as it is in Ireland, or in England (where, in
proportion to its efficiency, labour is quite as cheap as in Ireland),
no one can for a moment imagine that slavery could be profitable. If the
Irish peasantry were slaves, their masters would be as willing, as their
landlords now [1848] are, to pay large sums merely to get rid of them.
In the rich and underpeopled soil of the West India islands, there is
just as little doubt that the balance of profits between free and slave
labour was greatly on the side of slavery, and that the compensation
Edition: current; Page: [254] granted to the slave-owners for its
abolition was not more, perhaps even less,1. than an equivalent for
their loss.

More needs not be said here on a cause so completely judged and decided
as that of slavery. 2. Its demerits are no longer a question requiring
argument; though the temper of mind manifested by the larger part of the
influential classes in Great Britain respecting the struggle in America,
shows how grievously the feelings of the present generation [1865] of
Englishmen, on this subject, had fallen behind the positive acts of the
generation which preceded them. That the sons of the deliverers of the
West Indian Negroes should expect with complacency, and encourage by
their sympathies, the establishment of a great and powerful military
commonwealth, pledged by its principles and driven by its strongest
interests to be the armed propagator of slavery through every region of
the earth into which its power could penetrate, discloses a mental state
in the leading portion of our higher and middle classes which it is
melancholy to see, and will be a lasting blot in English history.
Fortunately they stopped short of actually aiding, otherwise than by
words, the nefarious enterprise to which they were not ashamed of
wishing success; and at the expense of the best blood of the Free
States, but to their immeasurable elevation in mental and moral worth,
Edition: current; Page: [255] the curse of slavery has been cast out
from the great American republic, to find its last temporary refuge in
Brazil and Cuba. No European country, except Spain alone, any longer
participates in the enormity. Even serfage has now ceased to have a
legal existence in Europe. Denmark has the honour of being the first
Continental nation which imitated England in liberating its colonial
slaves; and the abolition of slavery was one of the earliest acts of the
heroic and calumniated Provisional Government of France. The Dutch
Government was not long behind, and its colonies and dependencies are
now, I believe without exception, free from actual slavery, though
forced labour for the public authorities is still [1865] a recognised
institution in Java, soon, we may hope, to be exchanged for complete
personal freedom.

Edition: current; Page: [256]


CHAPTER VI.: of peasant proprietors

§ 1. In the régime of peasant properties, as in that of slavery, the
whole produce belongs to a single owner, and the distinction of rent,
profits, and wages, does not exist. In all other respects, the two
states of society are the extreme opposites of each other. The one is
the state of greatest oppression and degradation to the labouring class.
The other is that in which they are the most uncontrolled arbiters of
their own lot.

The advantage, however, of small properties in land, is one of the most
disputed questions in the range of political economy. On the Continent,
though there are some dissentients from the prevailing opinion, the
benefit of having a numerous proprietary population exists in the minds
of most people in the form of an axiom. But English authorities are
either unaware of the judgment of Continental agriculturists, or are
content to put it aside, on the plea of their having no experience of
large properties in favourable circumstances: the advantage of large
properties being only felt where there are also large farms; and as
this, in arable districts, implies a greater accumulation of capital
than usually exists on the Continent, the great Continental estates,
except in the case of grazing farms, are mostly let out for cultivation
in small portions. There is some truth in this; but the argument admits
of being retorted; for if the Continent knows little, by experience, of
cultivation on a large scale and by large capital, the generality of
English writers are no better acquainted practically with peasant
proprietors, and have almost always the most erroneous ideas of their
social condition and mode of life. Yet the old traditions even of
England are on the same side with the general opinion of the Continent.
The “yeomanry” who were vaunted as the glory of England while they
existed, and have been so much mourned over since they disappeared, were
either small proprietors or small farmers, and if they were mostly
Edition: current; Page: [257] the last, the character they bore for
sturdy independence is the more noticeable. There is a part of England,
unfortunately a very small part, where peasant proprietors are still
[1848] common; for such are the “statesmen” of Cumberland and
Westmoreland, though they pay, I believe, generally if not universally,
certain customary dues, which, being fixed, no more affect their
character of proprietor, than the land-tax does. There is but one voice,
among those acquainted with the country, on the admirable effects of
this tenure of land in those counties. No other agricultural population
in England could have furnished the originals of Wordsworth'
peasantry.∗.

The general system, however, of English cultivation, affording no
experience to render the nature and operation of peasant properties
familiar, and Englishmen being in general profoundly ignorant of the
agricultural economy of other countries, the very idea of peasant
proprietors is strange to the English mind, and does not easily find
access to it. Even the forms of language stand in the way: the familiar
designation for owners of land being “landlords,” a term to which
“tenants” is always understood as a correlative. When at the time of the
famine, the suggestion of peasant properties as a means of Irish
improvement found its way into parliamentary and newspaper discussions,
there were writers of Edition: current; Page: [258] pretension to whom
the word “proprietor” was so far from conveying any distinct idea, that
they mistook the small holdings of Irish cottier tenants for peasant
properties. The subject being so little understood, I think it
important, before entering into the theory of it, to do something
towards showing how the case stands as to matter of fact; by exhibiting,
at greater length than would otherwise be admissible, some of the
testimony which exists respecting the state of cultivation, and the
comfort and happiness of the cultivators, in those countries and parts
of countries, in which the greater part of the land other than the
labourer who tills the soil.

§ 2. I lay no stress on the condition of North America, where, as is
well known, the land, except in the former Slave States,1. is almost
universally owned by the same person who holds the plough. A country
combining the natural fertility of America with the knowledge and arts
of modern Europe, is so peculiarly circumstanced, that scarcely
anything, except insecurity of property or a tyrannical government,
could materially impair the prosperity of the industrious classes. I
might, with Sismondi, insist more strongly on the case of ancient Italy,
especially Latium, that Campagna which then swarmed with inhabitants in
the very regions which under a contrary régime have become uninhabitable
from malaria. But I prefer taking the evidence of the same writer on
things known to him by personal observation.

“It is especially Switzerland,” says M. de Sismondi, “which should be
traversed and studied to judge of the happiness of peasant proprietors.
It is from Switzerland we learn that agriculture practised by the very
persons who enjoy its fruits, suffices to procure great comfort for a
very numerous population; a great independence of character, arising
from independence of position; a great commerce of consumption, the
result of the easy circumstances of all the inhabitants, even in a
country whose climate is rude, whose soil is but moderately fertile, and
where late frosts and inconstancy of seasons often blight the hopes of
the cultivator. It is impossible to see without admiration those timber
houses of the poorest peasant, so vast, so well closed in, so covered
with carvings. In the interior, spacious corridors separate the
different chambers of the numerous family; each chamber has but one bed,
which is abundantly furnished Edition: current; Page: [259] with
curtains, bedclothes, and the whitest linen; carefully kept furniture
surrounds it; the wardrobes are filled with linen; the dairy is vast,
well aired, and of exquisite cleanness; under the same roof is a great
provision of corn, salt meat, cheese and wood; in the cow-houses are the
finest and most carefully tended cattle in Europe; the garden is planted
with flowers, both men and women are cleanly and warmly clad, the women
preserve with pride their ancient costume; all carry in their faces the
impress of health and strength. Let other nations boast of their
opulence, Switzerland may always point with pride to her peasants.”∗.

The same eminent writer thus expresses his opinion on peasant
proprietorship in general.

“Wherever we find peasant proprietors, we also find the comfort,
security, confidence in the future, and independence, which assure at
once happiness and virtue. The peasant who with his children does all
the work of his little inheritance, who pays no rent to any one above
him, nor wages to any one below, who regulates his production by his
consumption, who eats his own corn, drinks his own wine, is clothed in
his own hemp and wool, cares little for the prices of the market; for he
has little to sell and little to buy, and is never ruined by revulsions
of trade. Instead of fearing for the future, he sees it in the colours
of hope; for he employs every moment not required by the labours of the
year, on something profitable to his children and to future generations.
A few minutes' work suffices him to plant the seed which in a hundred
years will be a large tree, to dig the channel which will conduct to him
a spring of fresh water, to improve by cares often repeated, but stolen
from odd times, all the species of animals and vegetables which surround
him. His little patrimony is a true savings bank, always ready to
receive all his little gains and utilize all his moments of leisure. The
ever-acting power of nature returns them a hundred-fold. The peasant has
a lively sense of the happiness attached to the condition of a
proprietor. Accordingly he is always eager to buy land at any price. He
pays more for it than its value, more perhaps than it will bring him in;
but is he not right in estimating highly the advantage of having always
an advantageous investment for his labour, without underbidding in the
wages-market—of being always able to find bread, without the necessity
of buying it at a scarcity price?

“The peasant proprietor is of all cultivators the one who gets most from
the soil, for he is the one who thinks most of the future, and Edition:
current; Page: [260] who has been most instructed by experience. He is
also the onewho employs the human powers to most advantage, because
dividing his occupations among all the members of his family, he
reserves some for every day of the year, so that nobody is ever out of
work. Of all cultivators he is the happiest, and at the same time the
land nowhere occupies, and feeds amply without becoming exhausted, so
many inhabitants as where they are proprietors. Finally, of all
cultivators the peasant proprietor is the one who gives most
encouragement to commerce and manufactures, because he is the
richest.”∗.

This picture of unwearied assiduity, and what may be called affectionate
interest in the land, is borne out in regard to the more intelligent
Cantons of Switzerland by English observers. “In walking anywhere in the
neighbourhood of Zurich,” says Mr. Inglis, “in looking to the right or
to the left, one is struck with the extraordinary industry of the
inhabitants; and if we learn that a proprietor here has a return of ten
per cent, we are inclined to say, ‘he deserves it.’ I speak at present
of country labour, though I believe that in every kind of trade also,
the people of Zurich are remarkable for their assiduity; but in the
industry they show in the cultivation of their land I may safely say
they are unrivalled. When I used to open my casement between four and
five in the morning to look out upon the lake and the distant Alps, I
saw the labourer in the fields; and when I returned from an evening
walk, long after sunset, as late, perhaps, as half-past eight, there was
the labourer mowing his grass, or tying up his vines... It is impossible
to look at a field, a garden, a hedging, scarcely even a tree, a flower,
or a vegetable, without perceiving proofs of the extreme care and
industry that are bestowed upon the cultivation of the soil. If, for
example, a path Edition: current; Page: [261] leads through or by the
side of a field of grain, the corn is not, as in England, permitted to
hang over the path, exposed to be pulled or trodden down by every passer
by; it is everywhere bounded by a fence, stakes are placed at intervals
of about a yard, and, about two, or three feet from the ground, boughs
of trees are passed longitudinally along. If you look into a field
towards evening, where there are large beds of cauliflower or cabbage,
you will find that every single plant has been watered. In the gardens,
which around Zurich are extremely large, the most punctilious care is
evinced in every production that grows. The vegetables are planted with
seemingly mathematical accuracy; not a single weed is to be seen, not a
single stone. Plants are not earthed up as with us, but are planted in a
small hollow, into each of which a little manure is put, and each plant
is watered daily. Where seeds are sown, the earth directly above is
broken into the finest powder; every shrub, every flower is tied to a
stake, and where there is wall-fruit a trellice is erected against the
wall, to which the boughs are fastened, and there is not a single thing
that has not its appropriate resting place.”∗.

Of one of the remote valleys of the High Alps the same writer thus
expresses himself.†.

“In the whole of the Engadine the land belongs to the peasantry, who,
like the inhabitants of every other place where this state of things
exists, vary greatly in the extent of their possessions.... Generally
speaking, an Engadine peasant lives entirely upon the produce of his
land, with the exception of the few articles of foreign growth required
in his family, such as coffee, sugar, and wine. Flax is grown, prepared,
spun, and woven, without ever leaving his house. He has also his own
wool, which is converted into a blue coat, without passing through the
hands of either the dyer or the tailor. The country is incapable of
greater cultivation than it has received. All has been done for it that
industry and an extreme love of gain can devise. There is not a foot of
waste land in the Engadine, the lowest part of which is not much lower
than the top of Snowdon. Wherever grass will grow, there it is; wherever
a rock will bear a blade, verdure is seen upon it; wherever an ear of
rye will ripen, there it is to be found. Barley and oats have also their
appropriate spots; and wherever it is possible to ripen a little patch
of wheat, the cultivation of it is attempted. In no country in Europe
will be found Edition: current; Page: [262] so few poor as in the
Engadine. In the village of Suss, which contains about six hundred
inhabitants, there is not a single individual who has not wherewithal to
live comfortably, not a single individual who is indebted to others for
one morsel that he eats.”

Notwithstanding the general prosperity of the Swiss peasantry, this
total absence of pauperism and (it may almost be said) of poverty,
cannot be predicated of the whole country; the largest and richest
canton, that of Berne, being an example of the contrary; for although,
in the parts of it which are occupied by peasant proprietors, their
industry is as remarkable and their ease and comfort as conspicuous as
elsewhere, the canton is burthened with a numerous pauper population,
through the operation of the worst regulated system of poor-law
administration in Europe, except that of England before the new Poor
Law.∗. Nor is Switzerland in some other respects a favourable example of
all that peasant properties might effect. There exists a series of
statistical accounts of the Swiss Cantons, drawn up mostly with great
care and intelligence, containing detailed information, of tolerably
recent date, respecting the condition of the land and of the people.
From these, the subdivision appears to be often so minute, that it can
hardly be supposed not to be excessive: and the indebtedness of the
proprietors in the flourishing canton of Zurich “borders,” as the writer
expresses it, “on the incredible;”†. so that “only the intensest
industry, frugality, temperance, and complete freedom of commerce enable
them to stand their ground.” Yet the general conclusion deducible from
these books is that since the beginning of the century, and concurrently
with the subdivision of many great estates which belonged to nobles or
to the cantonal governments, there has been Edition: current; Page:
[263] a striking and rapid improvement in almost every department of
agriculture, as well as in the houses, the habits, and the food of the
people. The writer of the account of Thürgau goes so far as to say, that
since the subdivision of the feudal estates into peasant properties, it
is not uncommon for a third or a fourth part of an estate to produce as
much grain, and support as many head of cattle, as the whole estate did
before.∗.

§ 3. One of the countries in which peasant proprietors are of oldest
date, and most numerous in proportion to the population, is Norway. Of
the social and economical condition of that country an interesting
account has been given by Mr. Laing. His testimony in favour of small
landed properties both there and elsewhere, is given with great
decision. I shall quote a few passages.

“If small proprietors are not good farmers, it is not from the same
cause here which we are told makes them so in Scotland—indolence and
want of exertion. The extent to which irrigation is carried on in these
glens and valleys shows a spirit of exertion and co-operation” (I
request particular attention to this point), “to which the latter can
show nothing similar. Hay being the principal winter support of live
stock, and both it and corn, as well as potatoes, liable, from the
shallow soil and powerful reflexion of sunshine from the rocks, to be
burnt and withered up, the greatest exertions are made to bring water
from the head of each glen, along such a level as will give the command
of it to each farmer at the head of his fields. This is done by leading
it in wooden troughs (the half of a tree roughly scooped) from the
highest perennial stream among the hills, through woods, across ravines,
along the rocky, often perpendicular, sides of the glens, and from this
main trough giving a lateral one to each farmer in passing the head of
his farm. He distributes this supply by moveable troughs among the
fields; and at this season waters each rig successively with scoops like
those used by bleachers in watering cloth, laying his trough between
every two rigs. One would not believe, without seeing it, how very large
an extent of land is traversed expeditiously by these artificial
showers. The extent of the main troughs is very great. In one glen I
walked ten miles, and found it toughed on both sides: on one, the chain
is continued down the main valley for forty miles.†. Those may be
Edition: current; Page: [264] bad farmers who do such things; but they
are not indolent, nor ignorant of the principle of working in concert,
and keeping up establishments for common benefit. They are undoubtedly,
in these respects, far in advance of any community of cottars in our
Highland glens. They feel as proprietors, who receive the advantage of
their own exertions. The excellent state of the roads and bridges is
another proof that the country is inhabited by people who have a common
interest to keep them under repair. There are no tolls.”∗.

On the effects of peasant proprietorship on the Continent generally, the
same writer expresses himself as follows.†.

“If we listen to the large farmer, the scientific agriculturist, the”
[English] “political economist, good farming must perish with large
farms; the very idea that good farming can exist, unless on large farms
cultivated with great capital, they hold to be absurd. Edition: current;
Page: [265] Draining, manuring, economical arrangement, cleaning the
land, regular rotations, valuable stock and implements, all belong
exclusively to large farms, worked by large capital, and by hired
labour. This reads very well; but if we raise our eyes from their books
to their fields, and coolly compare what we see in the best districts
farmed in large farms, with what we see in the best districts farmed in
small farms, we see, and there is no blinking the fact, better crops on
the ground in Flanders, East Friesland, Holstein, in short, on the whole
line of the arable land of equal quality of the Continent, from the
Sound to Calais, than we see on the line of British coast opposite to
this line, and in the same latitudes, from the Frith of Forth all round
to Dover. Minute labour on small portions of arable ground gives
evidently, in equal soils and climate, a superior productiveness, where
these small portions belong in property, as in Flanders, Holland,
Friesland, and Ditmarsch in Holstein, to the farmer. It is not pretended
by our agricultural writers, that our large farmers, even in
Berwickshire, Roxburghshire, or the Lothians, approach to the gardenlike
cultivation, attention to manures, drainage, and clean state of the
land, or in productiveness from a small space of soil not originally
rich, which distinguish the small farmers of Flanders, or their system.
In the hest-farmed parish in Scotland or England, more land is wasted in
the corners and borders of the fields of large farms, in the roads
through them, unnecessarily wide because they are bad, and bad because
they are wide, in neglected commons, waste spots, useless belts and
clumps of sorry trees, and such unproductive areas, than would maintain
the poor of the parish, if they were all laid together and cultivated.
But large capital applied to farming is of course only applied to the
very best of the soils of a country. It cannot touch the small
unproductive spots which require more time and labour to fertilize them
than is consistent with a quick return of capital. But although hired
time and labour cannot be applied beneficially to such cultivation, the
owner' own time and labour may. He is working for no higher terms at
first from his land than a bare living. But in the course of generations
fertility and value are produced; a better living, and even very
improved processes of husbandry, are attained. Furrow draining, stall
feeding all summer, liquid manures, are universal in the husbandry of
the small farms of Flanders, Lombardy, Switzerland. Our most improving
districts under large farms are but beginning to adopt them. Dairy
husbandry even, and the manufacture of the largest cheeses by the
co-operation of many Edition: current; Page: [266] small farmers,∗. the
mutual assurance of property against fire and hail-storms, by the
co-operation of small farmers—the most scientific and expensive of all
agricultural operations in modern times, the manufacture of beet-root
sugar—the supply of the European markets with flax and hemp, by the
husbandry of small farmers—the abundance of legumes, fruits, poultry, in
the usual diet even of the lowest classes abroad, and the total want of
such variety at the tables even of our middle classes, and this variety
and abundance essentially connected with the husbandry of small
farmers—all these are features in the occupation of a country by small
proprietor-farmers, which must make the inquirer pause before he admits
the dogma of our land doctors at home, that large farms worked by hired
labour and great capital can alone bring out the greatest productiveness
of the soil and furnish the greatest supply of the necessaries and
conveniences of life to the inhabitants of a country.”

§ 4. Among the many flourishing regions of Germany in which peasant
properties prevail, I select the Palatinate, for the advantage of
quoting, from an English source, the results of recent personal
observation of its agriculture and its people. Mr. Howitt, a writer
whose habit it is to see all English objects and English socialities en
beau, and who, in treating of the Rhenish peasantry, certainly does not
underrate the rudeness of their implements, and the inferiority of their
ploughing, nevertheless shows that under the invigorating influence of
the feelings of proprietorship, they make up for the imperfections of
their apparatus by the intensity of their Edition: current; Page: [267]
application. “The peasant harrows and clears his land till it is in the
nicest order, and it is admirable to see the crops which he obtains.”∗.
“The peasants†. are the great and everpresent objects of country life.
They are the great population of the country, because they themselves
are the possessors. This country is, in fact, for the most part, in the
hands of the people. It is parcelled out among the multitude.... The
peasants are not, as with us, for the most part, totally cut off from
property in the soil they cultivate, totally dependent on the labour
afforded by others-they are themselves the proprietors. It is, perhaps,
from this cause that they are probably the most industrious peasantry in
the world. They labour busily, early and late, because they feel that
they are labouring for themselves.... The German peasants work hard, but
they have no actual want. Every man has his house, his orchard, his
roadside trees, commonly so heavy with fruit, that he is obliged to prop
and secure them all ways, or they would be torn to pieces. He has his
corn-plot, his plot for mangel-wurzel, for hemp, and so on. He is his
own master; and he, and every member of his family, have the strongest
motives to labour. You see the effect of this in that unremitting
diligence which is beyond that of the whole world besides, and his
economy, which is still greater. The Germans, indeed, are not so active
and lively as the English. You never see them in a bustle, or as though
they meant to knock off a vast deal in a little time.... They are, on
the contrary, slow, but for ever doing. They plod on from day to day,
and year to year—the most patient, untirable, and persevering of
animals. The English peasant is so cut off from the idea of property,
that he comes habitually to look upon it as a thing from which he is
warned by the laws of the large proprietors, and becomes, in
consequence, spiritless, purposeless.... The German bauer, on the
contrary, looks on the country as made for him and his fellow-men. He
feels himself a man; he has a stake in the country, as good as that of
the bulk of his neighbours; no man can threaten him with ejection, or
the workhouse, so long as he is active and economical. He walks,
therefore, with a bold step; he looks you in the face with the air of a
free man, but of a respectful one.”

Of their industry, the same writer thus further speaks: “There is not an
hour of the year in which they do not find unceasing occupation. In the
depth of winter, when the weather permits them by any Edition: current;
Page: [268] means to get out of doors, they are always finding something
to do. They carry out their manure to their lands while the frost is in
them. If there is not frost, they are busy cleaning ditches and felling
old fruit trees, or such as do not bear well. Such of them as are too
poor to lay in a sufficient stock of wood, find plenty of work in
ascending into the mountainous woods, and bringing thence fuel. It would
astonish the English common people to see the intense labour with which
the Germans earn their firewood. In the depths of frost and snow, go
into any of their hills and woods, and there you will find them hacking
up stumps, cutting off branches, and gathering, by all means which the
official wood-police will allow, boughs, stakes, and pieces of wood,
which they convey home with the most incredible toil and patience.”∗.
After a description of theircareful and laborious vineyard culture, he
continues,†. “In England, with its great quantity of grass lands, and
its large farms, so soon as the grain is in, and the fields are shut up
for hay grass, the country seems in a comparative state of rest and
quiet. But here they are everywhere, and for ever, hoeing and mowing,
planting and cutting, weeding and gathering. They have a succession of
crops like a market-gardener. They have their carrots, poppies, hemp,
flax, saintfoin, lucerne, rape, colewort, cabbage, rotabaga, black
turnips, Swedish and white turnips, teazles, Jerusalem artichokes,
mangel-wurzel, parsnips, kidney-beans, field beans, and peas, vetches,
Indian corn, buckwheat, madder for the manufacturer, potatoes, their
great crop of tobacco, millet—all, or the greater part, under the family
management, in their own family allotments. They have had these things
first to sow, many of them to transplant, to hoe, to weed, to clear of
insects, to top; many of them to mow and gather in successive crops.
They have their water-meadows, of which kind almost all their meadows
are, to flood, to mow, and reflood; watercourses to reopen and to make
anew: their early fruits to gather, to bring to market with their green
crops of vegetables; their cattle, sheep, calves, foals, most of them
prisoners, and poultry to look after; their vines, as they shoot
rampantly in the summer heat, to prune, and thin out the leaves when
they are too thick: and any one may imagine what a scene of incessant
labour it is.”

This interesting sketch, to the general truth of which any observant
traveller in that highly cultivated and populous region Edition:
current; Page: [269] can bear witness, accords with the more elaborate
delineation by a distinguished inhabitant, Professor Rau, in his little
treatise On the Agriculture of the Palatinate.∗. Dr. Rau bears testimony
not only to the industry, but to the skill and intelligence of the
peasantry; their judicious employment of manures, and excellent rotation
of crops; the progressive improvement of their agriculture for
generations past, and the spirit of further improvement which is still
active. “The indefatigableness of the country people, who may be seen in
activity all the day and all the year, and are never idle, because they
make a good distribution of their labours, and find for every interval
of time a suitable occupation, is as well known as their zeal is
praiseworthy in turning to use every circumstance which presents itself,
in seizing upon every useful novelty which offers, and even in searching
out new and advantageous methods. One easily perceives that the peasant
of this district has reflected much on his occupation: he can give
reasons for his modes of proceeding, even if those reasons are not
always tenable; he is as exact an observer of proportions as it is
possible to be from memory, without the aid of figures: he attends to
such general signs of the times as appear to augur him either benefit or
harm.”†.

1. The experience of all other parts of Germany is similar. “In Saxony,”
says Mr. Kay, “it is a notorious fact, that during the last thirty
years, and since the peasants became the proprietors of the land, there
has been a rapid and continual improvement in the condition of the
houses, in the manner of living, in the dress of the peasants, and
particularly in the culture of the land. I have twice walked through
that part of Saxony called Saxon Switzerland, in company with a German
guide, and on purpose to see the state of the villages and of the
farming, and I can safely challenge contradiction when I affirm that
there is no farming in all Europe superior to the laboriously careful
cultivation of the valleys of that part of Saxony. There, as in the
cantons of Berne, Vaud, and Zurich, and in the Rhine provinces, the
farms are singularly flourishing. They are kept in beautiful condition,
and are always neat and well managed. The ground is cleared as if it
were a garden. No hedges or brushwood encumber it. Scarcely a rush or
thistle or a bit of rank grass is to be seen. The meadows are well
watered every spring with liquid manure, saved from the drainings
Edition: current; Page: [270] of the farm yards. The grass is so free
from weeds that the Saxon meadows reminded me more of English lawns than
of anything else I had seen. The peasants endeavour to outstrip one
another in the quantity and quality of the produce, in the preparation
of the ground, and in the general cultivation of their respective
portions. All the little proprietors are eager to find out how to farm
so as to produce the greatest results: they diligently seek after
improvements; they send their children to the agricultural schools in
order to fit them to assist their fathers; and each proprietor soon
adopts a new improvement introduced by any of his neighbours.”∗. If this
be not overstated, it denotes a state of intelligence very different not
only from that of English labourers but of English farmers.

Mr. Kay' book, published in 1850, contains a mass of evidence gathered
from observation and inquiries in many different parts of Europe,
together with attestations from many distinguished writers, to the
beneficial effects of peasant properties. Among the testimonies which he
cites respecting their effect on agriculture, I select the following.

“Reichensperger, himself an inhabitant of that part of Prussia where the
land is the most subdivided, has published a long and very elaborate
work to show the admirable consequences of a system of freeholds in
land. He expresses a very decided opinion that not only are the gross
products of any given number of acres held and cultivated by small or
peasant proprietors greater than the gross products of an equal number
of acres held by a few great proprietors, and cultivated by tenant
farmers, but that the net products of the former, after deducting all
the expenses of cultivation, are also greater than the net products of
the latter.... He mentions one fact which seems to prove that the
fertility of the land in countries where the properties are small must
be rapidly increasing. He says that the price of the land which is
divided into small properties in the Prussian Rhine provinces is much
higher, and has been rising much more rapidly, than the price of land on
the great estates. He and Professor Rau both say that this rise in the
price of the small estates would have ruined the more recent purchasers,
unless the productiveness of the small estates had increased in at least
an equal proportion; and as the small proprietors have been gradually
becoming more and more Edition: current; Page: [271] prosperous,
notwithstanding the increasing prices they have paid for their land, he
argues, with apparent justness, that this would seem to show that not
only the gross profits of the small estates, but the net profits also
have been gradually increasing, and that the net profits per acre of
land, when farmed by small proprietors, are greater than the net profits
per acre of land farmed by a great proprietor. He says, with seeming
truth, that the increasing price of land in the small estates cannot be
the mere effect of competition, or it would have diminished the profits
and the prosperity of the small proprietors, and that this result has
not followed the rise.

“Albrecht Thaer, another celebrated German writer on the different
systems of agriculture, in one of his later works (Grundsätze der
rationellen Landwirthschaft) expresses his decided conviction, that the
net produce of land is greater when farmed by small proprietors than
when farmed by great proprietors or their tenants.... This opinion of
Thaer is all the more remarkable as, during the early part of his life,
he was very strongly in favour of the English system of great estates
and great farms.”

Mr. Kay adds from his own observation, “The peasant farming of Prussia,
Saxony, Holland, and Switzerland is the most perfect and economical
farming I have ever witnessed in any country.”∗.

§ 5. But the most decisive example in opposition to the English
prejudice against cultivation by peasant proprietors, is the case of
Belgium. The soil is originally one of the worst in Europe. “The
provinces,” says Mr. M'Culloch,†. “of West and East Flanders, and
Hainault, form a far stretching plain, of which the luxuriant vegetation
indicates the indefatigable care and labour bestowed upon its
cultivation; for the natural soil consists almost wholly of barren sand,
and its great fertility is entirely the result of very skilful
management and judicious application of various manures.” There exists a
carefully prepared and comprehensive treatise on Flemish Husbandry, in
the Farmer' Series of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge.
The writer observes‡. that the Flemish agriculturists “seem to want
nothing but a space to work upon: whatever be the quality or texture of
the soil, in time they will make it produce something. The sands in the
Campine can be compared to nothing but the sand on the sea-shore, which
they probably were originally. It is highly interesting to follow
Edition: current; Page: [272] step by step the progress of improvement.
Here you see a cottage and rude cow-shed erected on a spot of the most
unpromising aspect. The loose white sand blown into regular mounds is
only kept together by the roots of the heath: a small spot only is
levelled and surrounded by a ditch: part of this is covered with young
broom, part is planted with potatoes, and perhaps a small patch of
diminutive clover may show itself:” but manures, both solid and liquid,
are collecting, “and this is the nucleus from which, in a few years, a
little farm will spread around.... If there is no manure at hand, the
only thing that can be sown, on pure sand, at first is broom: this grows
in the most barren soils; in three years it is fit to cut, and produces
some return in faggots for the bakers and brickmakers. The leaves which
have fallen have somewhat enriched the soil, and the fibres of the roots
have given a slight degree of compactness. It may now be ploughed and
sown with buckwheat, or even with rye without manure. By the time this
is reaped, some manure may have been collected, and a regular course of
cropping may begin. As soon as clover and potatoes enable the farmer to
keep cows and make manure, the improvement goes on rapidly; in a few
years the soil undergoes a complete change: it becomes mellow and
retentive of moisture, and enriched by the vegetable matter afforded by
the decomposition of the roots of clover and other plants.... After the
land has been gradually brought into a good state, and is cultivated in
a regular manner, there appears much less difference between the soils
which have been originally good, and those which have been made so by
labour and industry. At least the crops in both appear more nearly alike
at harvest, than is the case in soils of different qualities in other
countries. This is a great proof of the excellency of the Flemish
system; for it shows that the land is in a constant state of
improvement, and that the deficiency of the soil is compensated by
greater attention to tillage and manuring, especially the latter.”

The people who labour thus intensely on their small properties or farms,
have practised for centuries those principles of rotation of crops and
economy of manures, which in England are counted among modern
discoveries: and even now the superiority of their agriculture, as a
whole, to that of England, is admitted by competent judges. “The
cultivation of a poor light soil, or a moderate soil,” says the writer
last quoted,∗. “is generally superior in Flanders to that of the most
improved farms of the same kind in Britain. We Edition: current; Page:
[273] surpass the Flemish farmer greatly in capital, in varied
implements of tillage, in the choice and breeding of cattle and sheep,”
(though, according tothe same authority,∗. they are much “before us in
the feeding of their cows,”) “and the British farmer is in general a man
of superior education to the Flemish peasant. But in the minute
attention to the qualities of the soil, in the management and
application of manures of different kinds, in the judicious succession
of crops, and especially in the economy of land, so that every part of
it shall be in a constant state of production, we have still something
to learn from the Flemings,” and not from an instructed and enterprising
Fleming here and there, but from the general practice.

Much of the most highly cultivated part of the country consists of
peasant properties, managed by the proprietors, always either wholly or
partly by spade industry.†. “When the land is cultivated entirely by the
spade, and no horses are kept, a cow is kept for every three acres of
land, and entirely fed on artificial grasses and roots. This mode of
cultivation is principally adopted in the Waes district, where
properties are very small. All the labour is done by the different
members of the family;” children soon beginning “to assist in various
minute operations, according to their age and strength, such as weeding,
hoeing, feeding the cows. If they can raise rye and wheat enough to make
their bread, and potatoes, turnips, carrots and clover, for the cows,
they do well; and the produce of the sale of their rape-seed, their
flax, their hemp, and their butter, after deducting the expense of
manure purchased, which is always considerable, gives them a very good
profit. Suppose the whole extent of the land to be six acres, which is
not an uncommon occupation, and which one man can manage;” then (after
describing the cultivation), “if a man with his wife and three young
children are considered as equal to three and a half grown up men, the
family will require thirty-nine bushels of grain, forty-nine bushels of
potatoes, a fat hog, and the butter and milk of one cow: an acre and a
half of land will produce the grain and potatoes, and allow some corn to
finish the fattening of the hog, which has the extra buttermilk: another
acre in clover, carrots, and potatoes, together with the stubble
turnips, will more than feed the cow; consequently two and a half acres
of land is sufficient to feed this family, and the produce of the other
three and a half may be sold to pay Edition: current; Page: [274] the
rent or the interest of purchase-money, wear and tear of implements,
extra manure, and clothes for the family. But these acres are the most
profitable on the farm, for the hemp, flax, and colza are included; and
by having another acre in clover and roots, a second cow can be kept,
and its produce sold. We have, therefore, a solution of the problem, how
a family can live and thrive on six acres of moderate land.” After
showing by calculation that this extent of land can be cultivated in the
most perfect manner by the family without any aid from hired labour, the
writer continues, “In a farm of ten acres entirely cultivated by the
spade, the addition of a man and a woman to the members of the family
will render all the operations more easy; and with horse and cart to
carry out the manure, and bring home the produce, and occasionally draw
the harrows, fifteen acres may be very well cultivated.... Thus it will
be seen,” (this is the result of some pages of details and
calculations,∗.) “that by spade husbandry, an industrious man with a
small capital, occupying only fifteen acres of good light land, may not
only live and bring up a family, paying a good rent, but may accumulate
a considerable sum in the course of his life.” But the indefatigable
industry by which he accomplishes this, and of which so large a portion
is expended not in the mere cultivation, but in the improvement, for a
distant return, of the soil itself—has that industry no connexion with
not paying rent? Could it exist, without presupposing either a virtually
permanent tenure, or the certain prospect, by labour and economy on
hired land, of becoming one day a landed proprietor?

As to their mode of living, “the Flemish farmers and labourers live much
more economically than the same class in England: they seldom eat meat,
except on Sundays and in harvest: buttermilk and potatoes with brown
bread is their daily food.” It is on this kind of evidence that English
travellers, as they hurry through Europe, pronounce the peasantry of
every Continental country poor and miserable, its agricultural and
social system a failure, and the English the only régime under which
labourers are well off. It is, truly enough, the only régime under which
labourers, whether well off or not, never attempt to be better. So
little are English labourers accustomed to consider it possible that a
labourer should not spend all he earns, that they habitually mistake the
signs of economy for those of poverty. Observe the true interpretation
of the phenomena.

Edition: current; Page: [275]
“Accordingly they are gradually acquiring capital, and their great
ambition is to have land of their own. They eagerly seize every
opportunity of purchasing a small farm, and the price is so raised by
competition, that land pays little more than two per cent interest for
the purchase money. Large properties gradually disappear, and are
divided into small portions, which sell at a high rate. But the wealth
and industry of the population is continually increasing, being rather
diffused through the masses than accumulated in individuals.”

With facts like these, known and accessible, it is not a little
surprising to find the case of Flanders referred to not in
recommendation of peasant properties, but as a warning against them; on
no better ground than a presumptive excess of population, inferred from
the distress which existed among the peasantry of Brabant and East
Flanders in the disastrous year 1846–47. The evidence which I have cited
from a writer conversant with the subject, and having no economical
theory to support, shows that the distress, whatever may have been its
severity, arose from no insufficiency in these little properties to
supply abundantly, in any ordinary circumstances, the wants of all whom
they have to maintain. It arose from the essential condition to which
those are subject who employ land of their own in growing their own
food, namely, that the vicissitudes of the seasons must be borne by
themselves, and cannot, as in the case of large farmers, be shifted from
them to the consumer. When we remember the season of 1846, a partial
failure of all kinds of grain, and an almost total one of the potato, it
is no wonder that in so unusual a calamity the produce of six acres,
half of them sown with flax, hemp, or oil seeds, should fall short of a
year' provision for a family. But we are not to contrast the distressed
Flemish peasant with an English capitalist who farms several hundred
acres of land. If the peasant were an Englishman, he would not be that
capitalist, but a day labourer under a capitalist. And is there no
distress, in times of dearth, among day labourers? Was there none, that
year, in countries where small proprietors and small farmers are
unknown? I am aware of no reason for believing that the distress was
greater in Belgium, than corresponds to the proportional extent of the
failure of crops compared with other countries.∗.

Edition: current; Page: [276]
§ 6.1. The evidence of the beneficial operation of peasant properties in
the Channel Islands is of so decisive a character, that I cannot help
adding to the numerous citations already made, part of a description of
the economical condition of those islands, by a writer who combines
personal observation with an attentive study of the information afforded
by other. Mr. William Thornton, in his Plea for Peasant Proprietors, a
book which by the excellence both of its materials and of its execution,
deserves to be regarded as the standard work on that side of the
question, speaks of the island of Guernsey in the following terms: “Not
even in England is nearly so large a quantity of produce sent to market
from a tract of such limited extent. This of itself might prove that the
cultivators must be far removed above poverty, for being absolute owners
of all the produce raised by them, they of course sell only what they do
not themselves require. But the satisfactoriness of their condition is
apparent to every observer. ‘The happiest community,’ says Mr. Hill,
‘which it has ever been my lot to fall in with, is to be found in this
little island of Guernsey.’ ‘No matter,’ says Sir George Head, ‘to what
point the traveller may choose to bend his way, comfort everywhere
prevails.’ What most surprises the English visitor in his first walk or
drive beyond the bounds of St. Peter' Port is the appearance of the
habitations with which the landscape is thickly studded. Many of them
are such as in his own country would belong to persons of middle rank;
but he is puzzled to guess what sort of people live in the other, which,
though in general not large enough for farmers, are almost invariably
much too good in every respect for day labourers... Literally, in the
whole island, with the exception of a few fishermen' huts, there is not
one so mean as to be likened to the ordinary habitation of an English
farm labourer.... ‘Look,’ says a late Bailiff of Guernsey, Mr. De L'Isle
Brock, ‘at the hovels of the English, and compare them with the cottages
of our peasantry.’ ... Beggars are utterly unknown.... Pauperism,
able-bodied pauperism at least, is Edition: current; Page: [277] nearly
as rare as mendicancy. The Savings Banks accounts also bear witness to
the general abundance enjoyed by the labouring classes of Guernsey. In
the year 1841, there were in England, out of a population of nearly
fifteen millions, less than 700,000 depositors, or one in every twenty
persons, and the average amount of the deposits was 30l. In Guernsey, in
the same year, out of a population of 26,000, the number of depositors
was 1920, and the average amount of the deposits 40l.”∗. The evidence as
to Jersey and Alderney is of a similar character.

Of the efficiency and productiveness of agriculture on the small
properties of the Channel islands, Mr. Thornton produces ample evidence,
the result of which he sums up as follows: “Thus it appears that in the
two principal Channel Islands, the agricultural population is, in the
one twice, and in the other, three times, as dense as in Britain, there
being in the latter country, only one cultivator to twenty-two acres of
cultivated land, while in Jersey there is one to eleven, and in Guernsey
one to seven acres. Yet the agriculture of these islands maintains,
besides cultivators, nonagricultural populations, respectively four and
five times as dense as that of Britain. This difference does not arise
from any superiority of soil or climate possessed by the Channel
Islands, for the former is naturally rather poor, and the latter is not
better than in the southern counties of England. It is owing entirely to
the assiduous care of the farmers, and to the abundant use of manure.”†.
“In the year 1837,” he says in another place,‡. “the average yield of
wheat in the large farms of England was only twenty-one bushels, and the
highest average for any one county was no more than twenty-six bushels.
The highest average since claimed for the whole of England is thirty
bushels. In Jersey, where the average size of farms is only sixteen
acres, the average produce of wheat per acre was stated by Inglis in
1834 to be thirty-six bushels; but it is proved by official tables to
have been forty bushels in the five years ending with 1833. In Guernsey,
where farms are still smaller, four quarters per acre, according to
Inglis, is considered a good, but still a very common crop.” “Thirty
shillings§. an acre would be thought in England a very fair rent for
middling land; but in the Channel Islands, it is only very inferior land
that would not let for at least 4l.”

§ 7. It is from France, that impressions unfavourable to peasant
Edition: current; Page: [278] properties are generally drawn; it is in
France that the system is so often asserted to have brought forth its
fruit in the most wretched possible agriculture, and to be rapidly
reducing, if not to have already reduced the peasantry, by subdivision
of land, to the verge of starvation. It is difficult to account for the
general prevalence of impressions so much the reverse of truth. The
agriculture of France was wretched and the peasantry in great indigence
before the Revolution. At that time they were not, so universally as at
present, landed proprietors. There were, however, considerable districts
of France where the land, even then, was to a great extent the property
of the peasantry, and among these were many of the most conspicuous
exceptions to the general bad agriculture and to the general poverty. An
authority, on this point, not to be disputed, is Arthur Young, the
inveterate enemy of small farms, the coryphaeus of the modern English
school of agriculturists; who yet, travelling over nearly the whole of
France in 1787, 1788, and 1789, when he finds remarkable excellence of
cultivation, never hesitates to ascribe it to peasant property. “Leaving
Sauve,” says he,∗. “I was much struck with a large tract of land,
seemingly nothing but huge rocks; yet most of it enclosed and planted
with the most industrious attention. Every man has an olive, a mulberry,
an almond, or a peach tree, and vines scattered among them; so that the
whole ground is covered with the oddest mixture of these plants and
bulging rocks, that can be conceived. The inhabitants of this village
deserve encouragement for their industry; and if I were a French
minister they should have it. They would soon turn all the deserts
around them into gardens. Such a knot of active husbandmen, who turn
their rocks into scenes of fertility, because I suppose their own, would
do the same by the wastes, if animated by the same omnipotent
principle.” Again:†. “Walk to Rossendal,” (near Dunkirk) “where M. le
Brun has an improvement on the Dunes, which he very obligingly showed
me. Between the town and that place is a great number of neat little
houses, built each with its garden, and one or two fields enclosed, of
most wretched blowing dune sand, naturally as white as snow, but
improved by industry. The magic of property turns sand to gold.” And
again:‡. “Going out of Gange, I was surprised to find by far the
greatest exertion in Edition: current; Page: [279] irrigation which I
had yet seen in France; and then passed by some steep mountains, highly
cultivated in terraces. Much watering at St. Lawrence. The scenery very
interesting to a farmer. From Gange, to the mountain of rough ground
which I crossed, the ride has been the most interesting which I have
taken in France; the efforts of industry the most vigorous; the
animation the most lively. An activity has been here, that has swept
away all difficulties before it, and has clothed the very rocks with
verdure. It would be a disgrace to common sense to ask the cause; the
enjoyment of property must have done it. Give a man the secure
possession of a bleak rock, and he will turn it into a garden; give him
a nine years' lease of a garden, and he will convert it into a desert.”

In his description of the country at the foot of the Western Pyrenees,
he speaks no longer from surmise, but from knowledge. “Take∗. the road
to Moneng, and come presently to a scene which was so new to me in
France, that I could hardly believe my own eyes. A succession of many
well-built, tight, and comfortable farming cottages built of stone and
covered with tiles; each having its little garden, enclosed by clipt
thorn-hedges, with plenty of peach and other fruit-trees, some fine oaks
scattered in the hedges, and young trees nursed up with so much care,
that nothing but the fostering attention of the owner could effect
anything like it. To every house belongs a farm, perfectly well
enclosed, with grass borders mown and neatly kept around the
corn-fields, with gates to pass from one enclosure to another. There are
some parts of England (where small yeomen still remain) that resemble
this country of Béarn; but we have very little that is equal to what I
have seen in this ride of twelve miles from Pau to Moneng. It is all in
the hands of little proprietors, without the farms being so small as to
occasion a vicious and miserable population. An air of neatness, warmth,
and comfort breathes over the whole. It is visible in their new built
houses and stables; in their little gardens; in their hedges; in the
courts before their doors; even in the coops for their poultry, and the
sties for their hogs. A peasant does not think of rendering his pig
comfortable, if his own happiness hang by the thread of a nine years'
lease. We are now in Béarn, within a few miles of the cradle of Henry
IV. Do they inherit these blessings from that good prince? The benignant
genius of that good monarch seems to reign still over the country; each
peasant has the fowl in the pot.” Edition: current; Page: [280] He
frequently notices the excellence of the agriculture of French Flanders,
where the farms “are all small, and much in the hands of little
proprietors.”∗. In the Pays de Caux, also a country of small properties,
the agriculture was miserable; of which his explanation was that it “is
a manufacturing country, and farming is but a secondary pursuit to the
cotton fabric, which spreads over the whole of it.”†. The same district
is still a seat of manufactures, and a country of small proprietors, and
is now, whether we judge from the appearance of the crops or from the
official returns, one of the best cultivated in France. In “Flanders,
Alsace, and part of Artois, as well as on the banks of the Garonne,
France possesses a husbandry equal to our own.”‡. Those countries, and a
considerable part of Quercy, “are cultivated more like gardens than
farms. Perhaps they are too much like gardens, from the smallness of
properties.”§. In those districts the admirable rotation of crops, so
long practised in Italy, but at that time generally neglected in France,
was already universal. “The rapid succession of crops, the harvest of
one being but the signal of sowing immediately for a second,” (the same
fact which strikes all observers in the valley of the Rhine) “can
scarcely be carried to greater perfection: and this is a point, perhaps,
of all others the most essential to good husbandry, when such crops are
so justly distributed as we generally find them in these provinces;
cleaning and ameliorating ones being made the preparation for such as
foul and exhaust.”

It must not, however, be supposed, that Arthur Young' testimony on the
subject of peasant properties is uniformly favourable. In Lorraine,
Champagne, and elsewhere, he finds the agriculture bad, and the small
proprietors very miserable, in consequence, as he says, of the extreme
subdivision of the land. His opinion is thus summed up:||. “Before I
travelled, I conceived that small farms, in property, were very
susceptible of good cultivation; and that the occupier of such, having
no rent to pay, might be sufficiently at his ease to work improvements,
and carry on a vigorous husbandry; but what I have seen in France, has
greatly lessened my good opinion of them. In Flanders, I saw excellent
husbandry on properties of 30 to 100 acres; but we seldom find here such
small patches of property as are common in other provinces. In Alsace,
and on the Garonne, that is, on soils of such exuberant fertility as to
demand no exertions, some small properties also are well cultivated. In
Béarn, I passed Edition: current; Page: [281] through a region of little
farmers, whose appearance, neatness, ease, and happiness charmed me; it
was what property alone could, on a small scale, effect; but these were
by no means contemptibly small; they are, as I judged by the distance
from house to house, from 40 to 80 acres. Except these, and a very few
other instances, I saw nothing respectable on small properties, except a
most unremitting industry. Indeed, it is necessary to impress on the
reader' mind, that though the husbandry I met with, in a great variety
of instances on little properties, was as bad as can be well conceived,
yet the industry of the possessors was so conspicuous, and so
meritorious, that no commendations would be too great for it. It was
sufficient to prove that property in land is, of all others, the most
active instigator to severe and incessant labour. And this truth is of
such force and extent, that I know no way so sure of carrying tillage to
a mountain top, as by permitting the adjoining villagers to acquire it
in property; in fact, we see that in the mountains of Languedoc, &c.,
they have conveyed earth in baskets, on their backs, to form a soil
where nature had denied it.”

The experience, therefore, of this celebrated agriculturist and apostle
of the grande culture, may be said to be, that the effect of small
properties, cultivated by peasant proprietors, is admirable when they
are not too small: so small, namely, as not fully to occupy the time and
attention of the family; for he often complains, with great apparent
reason, of the quantity of idle time which the peasantry had on their
hands when the land was in very small portions, notwithstanding the
ardour with which they toiled to improve their little patrimony in every
way which their knowledge or ingenuity could suggest. He recommends,
accordingly, that a limit of subdivision should be fixed by law; and
this is by no means an indefensible proposition in countries, if such
there are, where the morcellement, having already gone farther than the
state of capital and the nature of the staple articles of cultivation
render advisable, still continues progressive. That each peasant should
have a patch of land, even in full property, if it is not sufficient to
support him in comfort, is a system with all the disadvantages, and
scarcely any of the benefits, of small properties; since he must either
live in indigence on the produce of his land, or depend as habitually as
if he had no landed possessions, on the wages of hired labour: which,
besides, if all the holdings surrounding him are of similar dimensions,
he has little prospect of finding. The benefits of peasant properties
are Edition: current; Page: [282] conditional on their not being too
much subdivided; that is, on their not being required to maintain too
many persons, in proportion to the produce that can be raised from them
by those persons. The question resolves itself, like most questions
respecting the condition of the labouring classes, into one of
population. Are small properties a stimulus to undue multiplication, or
a check to it?

Edition: current; Page: [283]


CHAPTER VII.: continuation of the same subject

§ 1. Before examining the influence of peasant properties on the
ultimate economical interests of the labouring class, as determined by
the increase of population, let us note the points respecting the moral
and social influence of that territorial arrangement, which may be
looked upon as established, either by the reason of the case, or by the
facts and authorities cited in the preceding chapter.

The reader new to the subject must have been struck with the powerful
impression made upon all the witnesses to whom I have referred, by what
a Swiss statistical writer calls the “almost superhuman industry” of
peasant proprietors.∗. On this point at least, authorities are
unanimous. Those who have seen only one country of peasant properties,
always think the inhabitants of that country the most industrious in the
world. There is as little doubt among observers, with what feature in
the condition of the peasantry this pre-eminent industry is connected.
It is the “magic of property” which, in the words of Arthur Young,
“turns sand into gold.” The idea of property does not, however,
necessarily imply that there should be no rent, any more than that there
should be no taxes. It merely implies that the rent should be a fixed
charge, not liable to be raised against the possessor by his own
improvements, or by the will of a landlord. A tenant at a quit-rent is,
to all intents and purposes, a proprietor; a copyholder is not less so
than a freeholder. What is wanted is permanent possession on fixed
terms. “Give a man the secure possession of a bleak rock, and he will
turn it into a garden; give him a nine years' lease of a garden, and he
will convert it into a desert.”

The details which have been cited, and those, still more minute, to be
found in the same authorities, concerning the habitually elaborate
system of cultivation, and the thousand devices of the peasant
proprietor for making every superfluous hour and odd Edition: current;
Page: [284] moment instrumental to some increase in the future produce
and value of the land, will explain what has been said in a previous
chapter∗. respecting the far larger gross produce which, with anything
like parity of agricultural knowledge, is obtained from the same quality
of soil on small farms, at least when they are the property of the
cultivator. The treatise on Flemish Husbandry is especially instructive
respecting the means by which untiring industry does more than outweigh
inferiority of resources, imperfection of implements, and ignorance of
scientific theories. The peasant cultivation of Flanders and Italy is
affirmed to produce heavier crops, in equal circumstances of soil, than
the best cultivated districts of Scotland and England. It produces them,
no doubt, with an amount of labour which, if paid for by an employer,
would make the cost to him more than equivalent to the benefit; but to
the peasant it is not cost, it is the devotion of time which he can
spare, to a favourite pursuit, if we should not rather say a ruling
passion.†.

1 We have seen, too, that it is not solely by superior exertion that the
Flemish cultivators succeed in obtaining these brilliant results. The
same motive which gives such intensity to their industry, placed them
earlier in possession of an amount of agricultural knowledge, not
attained until much later in countries where agriculture was carried on
solely by hired labour. An equally high testimony Edition: current;
Page: [285] is borne by M. de Lavergne∗. to the agricultural skill of
the small proprietors in those parts of France to which the petite
culture is really suitable. “In the rich plains of Flanders, on the
banks of the Rhine, the Garonne, the Charente, the Rhone, all the
practices which fertilize the land and increase the productiveness of
labour are known to the very smallest cultivators, and practised by
them, however considerable may be the advances which they require. In
their hands, abundant manures, collected at great cost, repair and
incessantly increase the fertility of the soil, in spite of the activity
of cultivation. The races of cattle are superior, the crops magnificent.
Tobacco, flax, colza, madder, beetroot, in some places; in others, the
vine, the olive, the plum, the mulberry, only yield their abundant
treasures to a population of industrious labourers. Is it not also to
the petite culture that we are indebted for most of the garden produce
obtained by dint of great outlay in the neighbourhood of Paris?”

§ 2. Another aspect of peasant properties, in which it is essential that
they should be considered, is that of an instrument of popular
education. Books and schooling are absolutely necessary to education;
but not all-sufficient. The mental faculties will be most developed
where they are most exercised; and what gives more exercise to them than
the having a multitude of interests, none of which can be neglected, and
which can be provided for only by varied efforts of will and
intelligence? Some of the disparagers of small properties lay great
stress on the cares and anxieties which beset the peasant proprietor of
the Rhineland or Flanders. It is precisely those cares and anxieties
which tend to make him a superior being to an English day-labourer. It
is, to be sure, rather abusing the privileges of fair argument to
represent the condition of a day-labourer as not an anxious one. I can
conceive no circumstances in which he is free from anxiety, where there
is a possibility of being out of employment; unless he has access to a
profuse dispensation of parish pay, and no shame or reluctance in
demanding it.1. The day-labourer has, in the existing state of society
and Edition: current; Page: [286] population, many of the anxieties
which have not an invigorating effect on the mind, and none of those
which have. The position of the peasant proprietor of Continental Europe
is the reverse. From the anxiety which chills and paralyses—the
uncertainty of having food to eat—few persons are more exempt: it
requires as rare a concurrence of circumstances as the potato failure
combined with an universal bad harvest, to bring him within reach of
that danger. His anxieties are the ordinary vicissitudes of more and
less; his cares are that he takes his fair share of the business of
life; that he is a free human being, and not perpetually a child, which
seems to be the approved condition of the labouring classes according to
the prevailing philanthropy. He is no longer a being of a different
order from the middle classes; he has pursuits and objects like those
which occupy them, and give to their intellects the greatest part of
such cultivation as they receive. If there is a first principle in
intellectual education, it is this—that the discipline which does good
to the mind is that in which the mind is active, not that in which it is
passive. The secret for developing the faculties is to give them much to
do, and much inducement to do it. This detracts nothing from the
importance, and even necessity, of other kinds of mental cultivation.
The possession of property will not prevent the peasant from being
coarse, selfish, and narrow-minded. These things depend on other
influences, and other kinds of instruction. But this great stimulus to
one kind of mental activity, in no way impedes any other means of
intellectual development. On the contrary, by cultivating the habit of
turning to practical use every fragment of knowledge acquired, it helps
to render that schooling and reading fruitful, which without some such
auxiliary influence are in too many cases like seed thrown on a rock.

§ 3. It is not on the intelligence alone, that the situation of a
peasant proprietor exercises an improving influence. It is no less
propitious to the moral virtues of prudence, temperance, and
self-control. Day-labourers, where the labouring class mainly consists
of them, are usually improvident: they spend carelessly to the full
extent of their means, and let the future shift for itself. This is so
notorious, that many persons strongly interested in the welfare of the
labouring classes, hold it as a fixed opinion that an increase of wages
would do them little good, unless accompanied by at least a
corresponding improvement in their tastes and habits. The tendency of
peasant proprietors, and of those who hope to Edition: current; Page:
[287] become proprietors, is to the contrary extreme; to take even too
much thought for the morrow. They are oftener accused of penuriousness
than of prodigality. They deny themselves reasonable indulgences, and
live wretchedly in order to economize. In Switzerland almost everybody
saves, who has any means of saving; the case of the Flemish farmers has
been already noticed: among the French, though a pleasure-loving and
reputed to be a self-indulgent people, the spirit of thrift is diffused
through the rural population in a manner most gratifying as a whole, and
which in individual instances errs rather on the side of excess than
defect. Among those who, from the hovels in which they live, and the
herbs and roots which constitute their diet, are mistaken by travellers
for proofs and specimens of general indigence, there are numbers who
have hoards in leathern bags, consisting of sums in five franc pieces,
which they keep by them perhaps for a whole generation, unless brought
out to be expended in their most cherished gratification—the purchase of
land. If there is a moral inconvenience attached to a state of society
in which the peasantry have land, it is the danger of their being too
careful of their pecuniary concerns; of its making them crafty, and
“calculating” in the objectionable sense. The French peasant is no
simple countryman, no downright “paysan du Danube;” both in fact and in
fiction he is now “le rusé paysan.” That is the stage which he has
reached in the progressive development which the constitution of things
has imposed on human intelligence and human emancipation. But some
excess in this direction is a small and a passing evil compared with
recklessness and improvidence in the labouring classes, and a cheap
price to pay for the inestimable worth of the virtue of self-dependence,
as the general characteristic of a people: a virtue which is one of the
first conditions of excellence in the human character—the stock on which
if the other virtues are not grafted, they have seldom any firm root; a
quality indispensable in the case of a labouring class, even to any
tolerable degree of physical comfort; and by which the peasantry of
France, and of most European countries of peasant proprietors, are
distinguished beyond any other labouring population.

§ 4. Is it likely that a state of economical relations so conducive to
frugality and prudence in every other respect, should be prejudicial to
it in the cardinal point of increase of population? That it is so, is
the opinion expressed by most of those English political economists who
have written anything about the matter. Edition: current; Page: [288]
Mr. M'Culloch' opinion is well known. Mr. Jones affirms,∗. that a
“peasant population raising their own wages from the soil, and consuming
them in kind, are universally acted upon very feebly by internal checks,
or by motives disposing them to restraint. The consequence is, that
unless some external cause, quite independent of their will, forces such
peasant cultivators to slacken their rate of increase, they will, in a
limited territory, very rapidly approach a state of want and penury, and
will be stopped at last only by the physical impossibility of procuring
subsistence.” He elsewhere†. speaks of such a peasantry as “exactly in
the condition in which the animal disposition to increase their numbers
is checked by the fewest of those balancing motives and desires which
regulate the increase of superior ranks or more civilized people.” The
“causes of this peculiarity,” Mr. Jones promised to point out in a
subsequent work, which never made its appearance. I am totally unable to
conjecture from what theory of human nature, and of the motives which
influence human conduct, he would have derived them. Arthur Young
assumes the same “peculiarity” as a fact; but, though not much in the
habit of qualifying his opinions, he does not push his doctrine to so
violent an extreme as Mr. Jones; having, as we have seen, himself
testified to various instances in which peasant populations such as Mr.
Jones speaks of, were not tending to “a state of want and penury”, and
were in no danger whatever of coming into contact with “physical
impossibility of procuring subsistence.”

That there should be discrepancy of experience on this matter, is easily
to be accounted for. Whether the labouring people live by land or by
wages, they have always hitherto multiplied up to the limit set by their
habitual standard of comfort. When that standard was low, not exceeding
a scanty subsistence, the size of properties, as well as the rate of
wages, has been kept down to what would barely support life. Extremely
low ideas of what is necessary for subsistence, are perfectly compatible
with peasant properties; and if a people have always been used to
poverty, and habit has reconciled them to it, there will be
over-population, and excessive subdivision of land. But this is not to
the purpose. The true question is, supposing a peasantry to possess land
not insufficient but sufficient for their comfortable support, are they
more, or less, likely to fall from this state of comfort through
improvident multiplication, than if they were living in an equally
comfortable manner as hired Edition: current; Page: [289] labourers? All
à priori considerations are in favour of their being less likely. The
dependence of wages on population is a matter of speculation and
discussion. That wages would fall if population were much increased is
often a matter of real doubt, and always a thing which requires some
exercise of the thinking faculty for its intelligent recognition. But
every peasant can satisfy himself from evidence which he can fully
appreciate, whether his piece of land can be made to support several
families in the same comfort as it supports one. Few people like to
leave to their children a worse lot in life than their own. The parent
who has land to leave, is perfectly able to judge whether the children
can live upon it or not: but people who are supported by wages, see no
reason why their sons should be unable to support themselves in the same
way, and trust accordingly to chance. “In even the most useful and
necessary arts and manufactures,” says Mr. Laing,∗. “the demand for
labourers is not a seen, known, steady, and appreciable demand: but it
is so in husbandry” under small properties. “The labour to be done, the
subsistence that labour will produce out of his portion of land, are
seen and known elements in a man' calculation upon his means of
subsistence. Can his square of land, or can it not, subsist a family?
Can he marry or not? are questions which every man can answer without
delay, doubt, or speculation. It is the depending on chance, where
judgment has nothing clearly set before it, that causes reckless,
improvident marriages in the lower, as in the higher classes, and
produces among us the evils of over-population; and chance necessarily
enters into every man' calculations, when certainty is removed
altogether; as it is, where certain subsistence is, by our distribution
of property, the lot of but a small portion instead of about two-thirds
of the people.”

There never has been a writer more keenly sensible of the evils brought
upon the labouring classes by excess of population, than Sismondi, and
this is one of the grounds of his earnest advocacy of peasant
properties. He had ample opportunity, in more countries than one, for
judging of their effect on population. Let us see his testimony. “In the
countries in which cultivation by small proprietors still continues,
population increases regularly and rapidly until it has attained its
natural limits; that is to say, inheritances continue to be divided and
subdivided among several sons, as long as, by an increase of labour,
each family can extract an equal income from a smaller portion of land.
A father who possessed a Edition: current; Page: [290] vast extent of
natural pasture, divides it among his sons, and they turn it into fields
and meadows; his sons divide it among their sons, who abolish fallows:
each improvement in agricultural knowledge admits of another step in the
subdivision of property. But there is no danger lest the proprietor
should bring up his children to make beggars of them. He knows exactly
what inheritance he has to leave them; he knows that the law will divide
it equally among them; he sees the limit beyond which this division
would make them descend from the rank which he has himself filled, and a
just family pride, common to the peasant and to the nobleman, makes him
abstain from summoning into life, children for whom he cannot properly
provide. If more are born, at least they do not marry, or they agree
among themselves, which of several brothers shall perpetuate the family.
It is not found that in the Swiss Cantons, the patrimonies of the
peasants are ever so divided as to reduce them below an honourable
competence; though the habit of foreign service, by opening to the
children a career indefinite and uncalculable, sometimes calls forth a
super-abundant population.”∗.

There is similar testimony respecting Norway. Though there is no law or
custom of primogeniture, and no manufactures to take off a surplus
population, the subdivision of property is not carried to an injurious
extent. “The division of the land among children,” says Mr. Laing,†.
“appears not, during the thousand years it has been in operation, to
have had the effect of reducing the landed properties to the minimum
size that will barely support human existence. I have counted from
five-and-twenty to forty cows upon farms, and that in a country in which
the farmer must, for at least seven months in the year, have winter
provender and houses provided for all the cattle. It is evident that
some cause or other, operating on aggregation of landed property,
counteracts the dividing effects of partition among children. That cause
can be no other than what I have long conjectured would be effective in
such a social arrangement; viz. that in a country where land is held,
not in tenancy merely, as in Ireland, but in full ownership, its
aggregation by the deaths of co-heirs, and by the marriages of the
female heirs among the body of landholders, will balance its subdivision
by the equal succession of children. The whole mass of property will, I
conceive, be found in such a state of society to consist of as many
estates of the class of 1000l., as many of 100l., as many of 10l., a
year, at one period as another.” That this should happen, supposes
Edition: current; Page: [291] diffused through society a very
efficacious prudential check to population; and it is reasonable to give
part of the credit of this prudential restraint to the peculiar
adaptation of the peasant-proprietary system for fostering it.

1 “In some parts of Switzerland,” says Mr. Kay,∗. “as in the canton of
Argovie for instance, a peasant never marries before he attains the age
of twenty-five years, and generally much later in life; and in that
canton the women very seldom marry before they have attained the age of
thirty.... Nor do the division of land and the cheapness of the mode of
conveying it from one man to another, encourage the providence of the
labourers of the rural districts only. They act in the same manner,
though perhaps, in a less degree, upon the labourers of the smaller
towns. In the smaller provincial towns it is customary for a labourer to
own a small plot of ground outside the town. This plot he cultivates in
the evening as his kitchen garden. He raises in it vegetables and fruits
for the use of his family during the winter. After his day' work is
over, he and his family repair to the garden for a short time, which
they spend in planting, sowing, weeding, or preparing for sowing or
harvest, according to the season. The desire to become possessed of one
of these gardens operates very strongly in strengthening prudential
habits and in restraining improvident marriages. Some of the
manufacturers in the canton of Argovie told me that a townsman was
seldom contented until he had bought a garden, or a garden and house,
and that the town labourers generally deferred their marriages for some
years, in order to save enough to purchase either one or both of these
luxuries.”

The same writer shows by statistical evidence†. that in Prussia the
average age of marriage is not only much later than in England, but “is
gradually becoming later than it was formerly,” while at the same time
“fewer illegitimate children are born in Prussia than in any other of
the European countries.” “Wherever I travelled,” says Mr. Kay,‡. “in
North Germany and Switzerland, I was assured by all that the desire to
obtain land, which was felt by all the peasants, was acting as the
strongest possible check upon undue increase of population.”§.

In Flanders, according to Mr. Fauche, the British Consul at Edition:
current; Page: [292] Ostend,∗. “farmers” sons and those who have the
means to become farmers will delay their marriage until they get
possession of a farm.” Once a farmer, the next object is to become a
proprietor. “The first thing a Dane does with his savings,” says Mr.
Browne, the Consul at Copenhagen,†. “is to purchase a clock, then a
horse and cow, which he hires out, and which pays a good interest. Then
his ambition is to become a petty proprietor, and this class of persons
is better off than any in Denmark. Indeed, I know of no people in any
country who have more easily within their reach all that is really
necessary for life than this class, which is very large in comparison
with that of labourers.”

But the experience which most decidedly contradicts the asserted
tendency of peasant proprietorship to produce excess of population, is
the case of France. In that country the experiment is not tried in the
most favourable circumstances, a large proportion of the properties
being too small. The number of landed proprietors in France is not
exactly ascertained, but on no estimate does it fall much short of five
millions; which, on the lowest calculation of the number of persons of a
family (and for France it ought to be a low calculation), shows much
more than half the population as either possessing, or entitled to
inherit, landed property. A majority of the properties are so small as
not to afford a subsistence to the proprietors, of whom, according to
some computations, as many as three millions are obliged to eke out
their means of support either by working for hire, or by taking
additional land, generally on metayer tenure. When the property
possessed is not sufficient to relieve the possessor from dependence on
wages, the condition of a proprietor loses much of its characteristic
efficacy as a check to over-population: and if the prediction so often
made in England had been realized, and France had become a “pauper
warren,” the experiment would have proved nothing against the tendencies
of the same system of agricultural economy in other circumstances. But
what is the fact? That the rate of increase of the French Edition:
current; Page: [293] population is the slowest in Europe. During the
generation which the Revolution raised from the extreme of hopeless
wretchedness to sudden abundance, a great increase of population took
place. But a generation has grown up, which, having been born in
improved circumstances, has not learnt to be miserable; and upon them
the spirit of thrift operates most conspicuously, in keeping the
increase of population within the increase of national wealth. In a
table, drawn up by Professor Rau,∗. of the rate of annual increase of
the Edition: current; Page: [294] populations of various countries, that
of France, from 1817 to 1827, is stated at [lf0199_math_001.jpg] per
cent, that of England during a similar decennial period being
[lf0199_math_002.jpg] annually, and that of the United States nearly 3.
According to the Official returns as analysed by M. Legoyt,∗. the
increase of the population, which from 1801 to 1806 was at the rate of
1.28 per cent annually, averaged only 0.47 per cent from 1806 to 1831;
from 1831 to 1836 it averaged 0.60 per cent; from 1836 to 1841, 0.41 per
cent, and from 1841 to 1846, 0.68 per cent.†. 1. At the census of 1851
the rate of annual increase shown was only 1.08 per cent in the five
years, or 0.21 annually; and at the census of 1856 only 0.71 per cent in
five years, or 0.14 annually: so that, in the words of M. de Lavergne,
“la population ne s'accroît presque plus en France.”‡. Even this slow
increase is wholly the effect of a diminution of deaths; the number of
births not increasing at all, while the proportion of the births to the
population is constantly diminishing.‡. This slow growth of the numbers
of the people, while Edition: current; Page: [295] capital increases
much more rapidly, has caused a noticeable improvement in the condition
of the labouring class. The circumstances of that portion of the class
who are landed proprietors are not easily ascertained with precision,
being of course extremely variable; but the mere labourers, who derived
no direct benefit from the changes in landed property which took place
at the Revolution, have unquestionably much improved in condition since
that period.∗. Edition: current; Page: [296] Dr. Rau testifies to a
similar fact in the case of another country in which the subdivision of
the land is probably excessive, the Palatinate.∗.

I am not aware of a single authentic instance which supports the
assertion that rapid multiplication is promoted by peasant properties.
Instances may undoubtedly be cited of its not being prevented by them,
and one of the principal of these is Belgium; the prospects of which, in
respect to population, are at present a matter of considerable
uncertainty. Belgium has the most rapidly increasing population on the
Continent; and when the circumstances of the country require, as they
must soon do, that this rapidity should be checked, there will be a
considerable strength of existing habit to be broken through. One of the
unfavourable circumstances is the great power possessed over the minds
of the people by the Catholic priesthood, whose influence is everywhere
strongly exerted against restraining population. As yet, however, it
must be remembered that the indefatigable industry and great
agricultural skill of the people have rendered the existing rapidity of
increase practically innocuous; the great number of large estates still
undivided affording by their gradual dismemberment, a resource for the
necessary augmentation of the gross produce; and there are, besides,
many large manufacturing towns, and mining and coal districts, which
attract and employ a considerable portion of the annual increase of
population.

§5. But even where peasant properties are accompanied by Edition:
current; Page: [297] an excess of numbers, this evil is not necessarily
attended with the additional economical disadvantage of too great a
subdivision of the land. It does not follow because landed property is
minutely divided, that farms will be so. As large properties are
perfectly compatible with small farms, so are small properties with
farms of an adequate size; and a subdivision of occupancy is not an
inevitable consequence of even undue multiplication among peasant
proprietors. As might be expected from their admirable intelligence in
things relating to their occupation, the Flemish peasantry have long
learnt this lesson. “The habit of not dividing properties,” says Dr.
Rau,∗. “and the opinion that this is advantageous, have been so
completely preserved in Flanders, that even now, when a peasant dies
leaving several children, they do not think of dividing his patrimony,
though it be neither entailed nor settled in trust; they prefer selling
it entire, and sharing the proceeds, considering it as a jewel which
loses its value when it is divided.” That the same feeling must prevail
widely even in France, is shown by the great frequency of sales of land,
amounting in ten years to a fourth part of the whole soil of the
country: and M. Passy, in his tract On the Changes in the Agricultural
Condition of the Department of the Eure since the year 1800,†. states
other facts tending to the same conclusion. “The example,” says he, “of
this department attests that there does not exist, as some writers have
imagined, between the distribution of property and that of cultivation,
a connexion which tends invincibly to assimilate them. In no portion of
it have changes of ownership had a perceptible influence on the size of
holdings. While, in districts of small farming, lands belonging to the
same owner are ordinarily distributed among many tenants, so neither is
it uncommon, in places where the grande culture prevails, for the same
farmer to rent the lands of several proprietors. In the plains of Vexin,
in particular, many active and rich cultivators do not content
themselves with a single farm; others add to the lands of their
principal holding, all those in the neighbourhood which they are able to
hire, and in this manner make up a total extent which in some cases
reaches or exceeds two hundred hectares” (five hundred English acres).
“The more the estates are Edition: current; Page: [298] dismembered, the
more frequent do this sort of arrangements become: and as they conduce
to the interest of all concerned, it is probable that time will confirm
them.”

1 “In some places,” says M. de Lavergne,∗. “in the neighbourhood of
Paris, for example, where the advantages of the grande culture become
evident, the size of farms tends to increase, several farms are thrown
together into one, and farmers enlarge their holdings by renting
parcelles from a number of different proprietors. Elsewhere farms, as
well as properties of too great extent, tend to division. Cultivation
spontaneously finds out the organization which suits it best.” It is a
striking fact, stated by the same eminent writer,†. that the departments
which have the greatest number of small côtes foncières, are the Nord,
the Somme, the Pas de Calais, the Seine Inférieure, the Aisne, and the
Oise; all of them among the richest and best cultivated, and the
first-mentioned of them the very richest and best cultivated, in France.

Undue subdivision, and excessive smallness of holdings, are undoubtedly
a prevalent evil in some countries of peasant proprietors, and
particularly in parts of Germany and France. The governments of Bavaria
and Nassau have thought it necessary to impose a legal limit to
subdivision, and the Prussian Government unsuccessfully proposed the
same measures to the Estates of its Rhenish Provinces. But I do not
think it will anywhere be found that the petite culture is the system of
the peasants, and the grande culture that of the great landlords: on the
contrary, wherever the small properties are divided among too many
proprietors, I believe it to be true that the large properties also are
parcelled out among too many farmers, and that the cause is the same in
both cases, a backward state of capital, skill, and agricultural
enterprise. There is reason to believe that the subdivision in France is
not more excessive than is accounted for by this cause; that it is
diminishing, not increasing; and that the terror expressed in some
quarters, at the progress of the morcellement, is one of the most
groundless of real or pretended panics.‡.

Edition: current; Page: [299]
If peasant properties have any effect in promoting subdivision beyond
the degree which corresponds to the agricultural practices of the
country, and which is customary on its large estates, the cause must lie
in one of the salutary influences of the system; the eminent degree in
which it promotes providence on the part of those who, not being yet
peasant proprietors, hope to become so. In England, where the
agricultural labourer has no investment for his savings but the savings
bank, and no position to which he can rise by any exercise of economy,
except perhaps that of a petty shopkeeper, with its chances of
bankruptcy, there is nothing at all resembling the intense spirit of
thrift which takes possession of one who, from being a day labourer, can
raise himself by saving to the condition of a landed proprietor.
According to almost all authorities, the real cause of the morcellement
is the higher price which can be obtained for land by selling it to the
peasantry, as an investment for their small accumulations, than by
disposing of it entire to some rich purchaser who has no object but to
live on its income, without improving it. The hope of obtaining such an
investment is the most powerful of inducements, to those who are without
land, to practise the industry, frugality, and self-restraint, on which
their success in this object of ambition is dependent.

As the result of this enquiry into the direct operation and indirect
Edition: current; Page: [300] influences of peasant properties, I
conceive it to be established, that there is no necessary connexion
between this form of landed property and an imperfect state of the arts
of production; that it is favourable in quite as many respects as it is
unfavourable, to the most effective use of the powers of the soil; that
no other existing state of agricultural economy has so beneficial an
effect on the industry, the intelligence, the frugality, and prudence of
the population, nor tends on the whole so much to discourage an
improvident increase of their numbers; and that no existing state,
therefore, is on the whole so favourable both to their moral and their
physical welfare. Compared with the English system of cultivation by
hired labour, it must be regarded as eminently beneficial to the
labouring class.∗. We are not on the present occasion called upon to
Edition: current; Page: [301] compare it with the joint ownership of the
land by associations of labourers.1.

Edition: current; Page: [302]


CHAPTER VIII.: of Metayers

§ 1. From the case in which the produce of land and labour belongs
undividedly to the labourer, we proceed to the cases in which it is
divided, but between two classes only, the labourers and the landowners:
the character of capitalists merging in the one or the other, as the
case may be. It is possible indeed to conceive that there might be only
two classes of persons to share the produce, and that a class of
capitalists might be one of them; the character of labourer and that of
landowner being united to form the other. This might occur in two ways.
The labourers, though owning the land, might let it to a tenant, and
work under him as hired servants. But this arrangement, even in the very
rare cases which could give rise to it, would not require any particular
discussion, since it would not differ in any material respect from the
threefold system of labourers, capitalists, and landlords. The other
case is the not uncommon one, in which a peasant proprietor owns and
cultivates the land, but raises the little capital required, by a
mortgage upon it. Neither does this case present any important
peculiarity. There is but one person, the peasant himself, who has any
right or power of interference in the management. He pays a fixed
annuity as interest to a capitalist, as he pays another fixed sum in
taxes to the government. Without dwelling further on these cases, we
pass to those which present marked features of peculiarity.

When the two parties sharing in the produce are the labourer or
labourers and the landowner, it is not a very material circumstance in
the case which of the two furnishes the stock, or whether, as sometimes
happens, they furnish it, in a determinate proportion, between them. The
essential difference does not lie in this, but in another circumstance,
namely, whether the division of the produce between the two is regulated
by custom or by competition. We will begin with the former case; of
which the metayer culture is the principal, and in Europe almost the
sole, example.

Edition: current; Page: [303]
The principle of the metayer system, is that the labourer, or peasant,
makes his engagement directly with the landowner, and pays, not a fixed
rent, either in money or in kind, but a certain proportion of the
produce, or rather of what remains of the produce after deducting what
is considered necessary to keep up the stock. The proportion is usually,
as the name imports, one-half; but in several districts in Italy it is
two-thirds. Respecting the supply of stock, the custom varies from place
to place; in some places the landlord furnishes the whole, in others
half, in others some particular part, as for instance the cattle and
seed, the labourer providing the implements.∗. “This connexion,” says
Sismondi, speaking chiefly of Tuscany, †. “is often the subject of a
contract, to define certain services and certain occasional payments to
which the metayer binds himself; nevertheless the differences in the
obligations of one such contract and another are inconsiderable; usage
governs alike all these engagements, and supplies the stipulations which
have not been expressed; and the landlord who attempted to depart from
usage, who exacted more than his neighbour, who took for the basis of
the agreement anything but the equal division of the crops, would render
himself so odious, he would be so sure of not obtaining a metayer who
was an honest man, that the contract of all the metayers may be
considered as identical, at least in each province, and never gives rise
to any competition among peasants in search of employment, or any offer
to cultivate the soil on cheaper terms than one another.” To the same
effect Châteauvieux,‡. speaking of the metayers of Piedmont. “They
consider it,” (the farm) “as a patrimony, and never think of renewing
the lease, but go on from Edition: current; Page: [304] generation to
generation, on the same terms, without writings or registries.”∗.

§ 2. When the partition of the produce is a matter of fixed usage, not
of varying convention, political economy has no laws of distribution to
investigate. It has only to consider, as in the case of peasant
proprietors, the effects of the system first on the condition of the
peasantry, morally and physically, and secondly, on the efficiency of
the labour. In both these particulars the metayer system has the
characteristic advantages of peasant properties, but has them in a less
degree. The metayer has less motive to exertion than the peasant
proprietor, since only half the fruits of his industry, instead of the
whole, are his own. But he has a much stronger motive than a day
labourer, who has no other interest in the result than not to be
dismissed. If the metayer cannot be turned out except for some violation
of his contract, he has a stronger motive to exertion than any
tenant-farmer who has not a lease. The metayer is at least his landlord'
partner, and a half-sharer in their joint gains. Where, too, the
permanence of his tenure is guaranteed by custom, he acquires local
attachments, and much of the feelings of a proprietor. I am supposing
that this half produce is sufficient to yield him a comfortable support.
Whether it is so, depends (in any given state of aciculture) on the
degree of subdivision of the land; which depends on the operation of the
population principle. A multiplication of people, beyond the number that
can be properly supported on the land or taken off by manufactures, is
incident even to a peasant proprietary, and of course not less but
rather more incident to a metayer population. The tendency, however,
which we noticed in the proprietary system, to promote prudence on this
point, is in no small degree common to it with the metayer system.
There, also, it is a matter of easy and exact calculation whether a
family can be supported or not. If it is easy to see whether the owner
of the whole produce can increase the production so as to maintain a
Edition: current; Page: [305] greater number of persons equally well, it
is a not less simple problem whether the owner of half the produce can
do so.∗. There is one check which this system seems to offer, over and
above those held out even by the proprietary system; there is a
landlord, who may exert a controlling power, by refusing his consent to
a subdivision. I do not, however, attach great importance to this check,
because the farm may be loaded with superfluous hands without being
subdivided; and because, so long as the increase of hands increases the
gross produce, which is almost always the case, the landlord, who
receives half the produce, is an immediate gainer, the inconvenience
falling only on the labourers. The landlord is no doubt liable in the
end to suffer from their poverty, by being forced to make advances to
them, especially in bad seasons; and a foresight of this ultimate
inconvenience may operate beneficially on such landlords as prefer
future security to present profit.

The characteristic disadvantage of the metayer system is very fairly
stated by Adam Smith. After pointing out that metayers “have a plain
interest that the whole produce should be as great as possible, in order
that their own proportion may be so,” he continues,†. “it could never,
however, be the interest of this species of cultivators to lay out, in
the further improvement of the land, any part of the little stock which
they might save from their own share of the produce, because the lord
who laid out nothing, was to get one-half of whatever it produced. The
tithe, which is but a tenth of the produce, is found to be a very great
hindrance to improvement. A tax, therefore, which amounted to one-half,
must have been an Edition: current; Page: [306] effectual bar to it. It
might be the interest of a metayer to make the land produce as much as
could be brought out of it by means of the stock furnished by the
proprietor; but it could never be his interest to mix any part of his
own with it. In France, where five parts out of six of the whole kingdom
are said to be still occupied by this species of cultivators, the
proprietors complain that their metayers take every opportunity of
employing the master' cattle rather in carriage than in cultivation;
because in the one case they get the whole profits to themselves, in the
other they share them with their landlord”” It is indeed implied in the
very nature of the tenure, that all improvements which require
expenditure of capital must be made with the capital of the landlord.
This, however, is essentially the case even in England, whenever the
farmers are tenants-at-will: or (if Arthur Young is right) even on a
“nine years” lease.” If the landlord is willing to provide capital for
improvements, the metayer has the strongest interest in promoting them,
since half the benefit of them will accrue to himself. As however the
perpetuity of tenure which, in the case we are discussing, he enjoys by
custom, renders his consent a necessary condition; the spirit of
routine, and dislike of innovation, characteristic of an agricultural
people when not corrected by education, are no doubt, as the advocates
of the system seem to admit, a serious hindrance to improvement.

§ 3. The metayer system has met with no mercy from English authorities.
“There is not one word to be said in favour of the practice,” says
Arthur Young,∗. and a “thousand arguments that might be used against it.
The hard plea of necessity can alone be urged in its favour; the poverty
of the farmers being so great, that the landlord must stock the farm, or
it could not be stocked at all: this is a most cruel burden to a
proprietor, who is thus obliged to run much of the hazard of farming in
the most dangerous of all methods, that of trusting his property
absolutely in the hands of people who are generally ignorant, many
careless, and some undoubtedly wicked.... In this most miserable of all
the modes of letting land, the defrauded landlord receives a
contemptible rent; the farmer is in the lowest state of poverty; the
land is miserably cultivated; and the nation suffers as severely as the
parties themselves.... Wherever†. this system prevails, it may be taken
for granted that a useless and miserable population is found....
Edition: current; Page: [307] Wherever the country (that I saw) is poor
and unwatered, in the Milanese, it is in the hands of metayers; they are
almost always in debt to their landlord for seed or food, and “their
condition is more wretched than that of a day labourer.... There∗. are
but few districts” (in Italy) “where lands are let to the occupying
tenant at a money-rent; but wherever it is found, their crops are
greater; a clear proof of the imbecility of the metaying system.”
“Wherever it” (the metayer system) “has been adopted,” says Mr.
M'Culloch,†. “it has put a stop to all improvement, and has reduced the
cultivators to the most abject poverty.” Mr. Jones‡. shares the common
opinion, and quotes Turgot and Destutt-Tracy in support of it. The
impression, however, of all these writers (notwithstanding Arthur Young'
occasional references to Italy) seems to be chiefly derived from France,
and France before the Revolution.§. Now the situation of French metayers
under the old régime by no means represents the typical form of the
contract. It is essential to that form that the proprietor pays all the
taxes. But in France the exemption of the noblesse from direct taxation
had led the Government to throw the whole burthen of their
ever-increasing fiscal exactions upon the occupiers: and it is to these
exactions that Turgot ascribed the extreme wretchedness of the metayers:
a wretchedness in some cases so excessive, that in Limousin and
Angoumois (the provinces which he administered) they had seldom more,
according to him, after deducting all burthens, than from twenty-five to
thirty livres (20 to 24 shillings) per head for their whole annual
consumption: “je ne dis pas en argent, mais en comptant tout ce qu'ils
consomment en nature sur ce qu'ils ont récolté.”||. When we add that
they had not the virtual fixity Edition: current; Page: [308] of tenure
of the metayers of Italy (“in Limousin,” says Arthur Young,∗. “the
metayers are considered as little better than menial servants, removable
at pleasure, and obliged to conform in all things to the will of the
landlords,”) it is evident that their case affords no argument against
the metayer system in its better form. A population who could call
nothing their own, who, like the Irish cottiers, could not in any
contingency be worse off, had nothing to restrain them from multiplying,
and subdividing the land, until stopped by actual starvation.

We shall find a very different picture, by the most accurate
authorities, of the metayer cultivation of Italy. In the first place, as
to subdivision. In Lombardy, according to Châteauvieux,†. there are few
farms which exceed fifty acres, and few which have less than ten. These
farms are all occupied by metayers at half profit. They invariably
display “an extent‡. and a richness in buildings rarely known in any
other country in Europe.” Their plan “affords the greatest room with the
least extent of building; is best adapted to arrange and secure the
crop; and is, at the same time, the most economical, and the least
exposed to accidents by fire.” The courtyard “exhibits a whole so
regular and commodious, and a system of such care and good order, that
our dirty and ill-arranged farms can convey no adequate idea of.” The
same description applies to Piedmont. The rotation of crops is
excellent. “I should think§. no country can bring so large a portion of
its produce to market as Piedmont.” Though the soil is not naturally
very fertile, “the number of cities is prodigiously great.”201D; The
agriculture must, therefore, be eminently favourable to the net as well
as to the gross produce of the land. “Each plough works thirty-two acres
in the season.... Nothing can be more perfect or neater than the hoeing
and moulding up the maize, when in full growth, by a single plough, with
a pair of oxen, without injury to a single plant, while all the weeds
are effectually destroyed.” So much for agricultural skill. “Nothing can
be so excellent as the crop which precedes and that which follows it.”
The wheat “is thrashed by a cylinder, drawn by a horse, and guided by a
boy, while the labourers Edition: current; Page: [309] turn over the
straw with forks. This process lasts nearly a fortnight; it is quick and
economical, and completely gets out the grain.... In no part of the
world are the economy and the management of the land better understood
than in Piedmont, and this explains the phenomenon of its great
population, and immense export of provisions.” All this under metayer
cultivation.

Of the valley of the Arno, in its whole extent, both above and below
Florence, the same writer thus speaks:∗. —“Forests of olive-trees
covered the lower parts of the mountains, and by their foliage concealed
an infinite number of small farms, which peopled these parts of the
mountains; chestnut-trees raised their heads on the higher slopes, their
healthy verdure contrasting with the pale tint of the olive-trees, and
spreading a brightness over this amphitheatre. The road was bordered on
each side with village-houses, not more than a hundred paces from each
other.... They are placed at a little distance from the road, and
separated from it by a wall, and a terrace of some feet in extent. On
the wall are commonly placed many vases of antique forms, in which
flowers, aloes, and young orange-trees are growing. The house itself is
completely covered with vines.... Before these houses we saw groups of
peasant females dressed in white linen, silk corsets, and straw-hats,
ornamented with flowers.... These houses being so near each other, it is
evident that the land annexed to them must be small, and that property,
in these valleys, must be very much divided; the extent of these domains
being from three to ten acres. The land lies round the houses, and is
divided into fields by small canals, or rows of trees, some of which are
mulberry-trees, but the greatest number poplars, the leaves of which are
eaten by the cattle. Each tree supports a vine.... These divisions,
arrayed in oblong squares, are large enough to be cultivated by a plough
without wheels, and a pair of oxen. There is a pair of oxen between ten
or twelve of the farmers; they employ them successively in the
cultivation of all the farms.... Almost every farm maintains a
well-looking horse, which goes in a small two-wheeled cart, neatly made,
and painted red; they serve for all the purposes of draught for the
farm, and also to convey the farmer' daughters to mass and to balls.
Thus, on holidays, hundreds of these little carts are seen flying in all
directions, carrying the young women, decorated with flowers and
ribbons.”

This is not a picture of poverty; and so far as agriculture Edition:
current; Page: [310] is concerned, it effectually redeems metayer
cultivation, as existing in these countries, from the reproaches of
English writers; but with respect to the condition of the cultivators,
Châteauvieux' testimony is, in some points, not so favourable. “It is∗.
neither the natural fertility of the soil, nor the abundance which
strikes the eye of the traveller, which constitute the well-being of its
inhabitants. It is the number of individuals among whom the total
produce is divided, which fixes the portion that each is enabled to
enjoy. Here it is very small. I have thus far, indeed, exhibited a
delightful country, well watered, fertile, and covered with a perpetual
vegetation; I have shown it divided into countless enclosures, which,
like so many beds in a garden, display a thousand varying productions; I
have shown, that to all these enclosures are attached well-built houses,
clothed with vines, and decorated with flowers; but, on entering them,
we find a total want of all the conveniences of life, a table more than
frugal, and a general appearance of privation.” Is not Châteauvieux here
unconsciously contrasting the condition of the metayers with that of the
farmers of other countries, when the proper standard with which to
compare it is that of the agricultural day-labourers?

Arthur Young says,†. “I was assured that these metayers are (especially
near Florence) much at their ease; that on holidays they are dressed
remarkably well, and not without objects of luxury, as silver, gold, and
silk; and live well, on plenty of bread, wine, and legumes. In some
instances this may possibly be the case, but the general fact is
contrary. It is absurd to think that metayers, upon such a farm as is
cultivated by a pair of oxen, can live at their ease; and a clear proof
of their poverty is this, that the landlord, who provides half the live
stock, is often obliged to lend the peasant money to procure his
half.... The metayers, not in the vicinity of the city, are so poor,
that landlords even lend them corn to eat: their food is black bread,
made of a mixture with vetches; and their drink is very little wine,
mixed with water, and called aquarolle; meat on Sundays only; their
dress very ordinary.” Mr. Jones admits the superior comfort of the
metayers near Florence, and attributes it partly to straw-platting, by
which the women of the peasantry can earn, according to Châteauvieux,‡.
from fifteen to twenty pence a day. But even this fact tells in favour
of the metayer system: for in those parts of England in Edition:
current; Page: [311] which either straw-platting or lace-making is
carried on by the women and children of the labouring class, as in
Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire, the condition of the class is not
better, but rather worse than elsewhere, the wages of agricultural
labour being depressed by a full equivalent.

In spite of Châteauvieux' statement respecting the poverty of the
metayers, his opinion, in respect to Italy at least, is given in favour
of the system. “It occupies∗. and constantly interests the proprietors,
which is never the case with great proprietors who lease their estates
at fixed rents. It establishes a community of interests, and relations
of kindness between the proprietors and the metayers; a kindness which I
have often witnessed, and from which result great advantages in the
moral condition of society. The proprietor under this system, always
interested in the success of the crop, never refuses to make an advance
upon it, which the land promises to repay with interest. It is by these
advances and by the hope thus inspired, that the rich proprietors of
land have gradually perfected the whole rural economy of Italy. It is to
them that it owes the numerous systems of irrigation which water its
soil, as also the establishment of the terrace culture on the hills:
gradual but permanent improvements, which common peasants, for want of
means, could never have effected, and which could never have been
accomplished by the farmers, nor by the great proprietors who let their
estates at fixed rents, because they are not sufficiently interested.
Thus the interested system forms of itself that alliance between the
rich proprietor, whose means provide for the improvement of the culture,
and the metayer whose care and labour are directed, by a common
interest, to make the most of these advances.”

But the testimony most favourable to the system is that of Sismondi,
which has the advantage of being specific, and from accurate knowledge;
his information being not that of a traveller, but of a resident
proprietor, intimately acquainted with rural life. His statements apply
to Tuscany generally, and more particularly to the Val di Nievole, in
which his own property lay, and which is not within the supposed
privileged circle immediately round Florence. It is one of the districts
in which the size of farms appears to be the smallest. The following is
his description of the dwellings and mode of life of the metayers of
that district.†.

Edition: current; Page: [312]
“The house, built of good walls with lime and mortar, has always at
least one story, sometimes two, above the ground floor. On the ground
floor are generally the kitchen, a cowhouse for two horned cattle, and
the storehouse, which takes its name, tinaia, from the large vats (tini)
in which the wine is put to ferment, without any pressing: it is there
also that the metayer locks up his casks, his oil, and his grain. Almost
always there is also a shed supported against the house, where he can
work under cover to mend his tools, or chop forage for his cattle. On
the first and second stories are two, three, and often four bedrooms.
The largest and most airy of these is generally destined by the metayer,
in the months of May and June, to the bringing up of silkworms. Great
chests to contain clothes and linen, and some wooden chairs, are the
chief furniture of the chambers; but a newly-married wife always brings
with her a wardrobe of walnut wood. The beds are uncurtained and
unroofed, but on each of them, besides a good paillasse filled with the
elastic straw of the maize plant, there are one or two mattresses of
wool, or, among the poorest, of tow, a good blanket, sheets of strong
hempen cloth, and on the best bed of the family a coverlet of silk
padding, which is spread on festival days. The only fireplace is in the
kitchen; and there also is the great wooden table where the family
dines, and the benches; the great chest which serves at once for keeping
the bread and other provisions, and for kneading; a tolerably complete
though cheap assortment of pans, dishes, and earthenware plates: one or
two metal lamps, a steelyard, and at least two copper pitchers for
drawing and holding water. The linen and the working clothes of the
family have all been spun by the women of the house. The clothes, both
of men and of women, are of the stuff called mezza lana when thick, mola
when thin, and made of a coarse thread of hemp or tow, filled up with
cotton or wool; it is dried by the same women by whom it is spun. It
would hardly be believed what a quantity of cloth and of mezza lana the
peasant women are able to accumulate by assiduous industry; how many
sheets there are in the store; what a number of shirts, jackets,
trowsers, petticoats, and gowns are possessed by every member of the
family. By way of example I add in a note the inventory of the peasant
family best known to me: it is neither one of the richest nor of the
poorest, and lives happily by its industry on half the produce of less
than ten arpents of land.∗. The young women had a marriage portion of
fifty crowns, Edition: current; Page: [313] twenty paid down, and the
rest by instalments of two every year. The Tuscan crown is worth six
francs [4s. 10d.]. The commonest marriage portion of a peasant girl in
the other parts of Tuscany, where the metairies are larger, is 100
crowns, 600 francs.”

Is this poverty, or consistent with poverty? When a common, M. de
Sismondi even says the common, marriage portion of a metayer' daughter
is 24l. English money, equivalent to at least 50l. in Italy and in that
rank of life; when one whose dowry is only half that amount, has the
wardrobe described, which is represented by Sismondi as a fair average;
the class must be fully comparable, in general condition, to a large
proportion even of capitalist farmers in other countries; and
incomparably above the day-labourers of any country, except a new
colony, or the United States. Very little can be inferred, against such
evidence, from a traveller' impression of the poor quality of their
food. Its unexpensive character may be rather the effect of economy than
of necessity. Costly feeding is not the favourite luxury of a southern
people; their diet in all classes is principally vegetable, and no
peasantry on the Continent has the superstition of the English labourer
respecting white bread. But the nourishment of the Tuscan peasant,
according to Sismondi, “is wholesome and various: its basis is an
excellent wheaten bread, brown, but pure from bran and from all mixture.
In the bad season they take but two meals a day: at ten in the morning
they eat their pollenta, at the beginning of the night their soup, and
after it bread with a relish of some sort (companatico). In summer they
have three meals, at eight, at one, and in the evening; but the fire is
lighted only once a day, for dinner, which consists of soup, and a dish
of salt meat or dried fish, or haricots, or greens, which are eaten with
bread. Salt meat enters in a very small quantity into this diet, for it
is reckoned that forty pounds of salt pork per head suffice amply for a
year' provision; twice a week a small piece of it is put into the soup.
On Sundays they have always on Edition: current; Page: [314] the table a
dish of fresh meat, but a piece which weighs only a pound or a pound and
a half suffices for the whole family, however numerous it may be. It
must not be forgotten that the Tuscan peasants generally produce olive
oil for their own consumption: they use it not only for lamps, but as
seasoning to all the vegetables prepared for the table, which it renders
both more savoury and more nutritive. At breakfast their food is bread,
and sometimes cheese and fruit; at supper, bread and salad. Their drink
is composed of the inferior wine of the country, the vinella or piquette
made by fermenting in water the pressed skins of the grapes. They
always, however, reserve a little of their best wine for the day when
they thresh their corn, and for some festivals which are kept in
families. About fifty bottles of vinella per annum and five sacks of
wheat (about 1000 pounds of bread) are considered as the supply
necessary for a full grown man.”

The remarks of Sismondi on the moral influences of this state of society
are not less worthy of attention. The rights and obligations of the
metayer being fixed by usage, and all taxes and rates being paid by the
proprietor, “the metayer has the advantages of landed property without
the burthen of defending it. It is the landlord to whom, with the land,
belong all its disputes: the tenant lives in peace with all his
neighbours; between him and them there is no motive for rivalry or
distrust, he preserves a good understanding with them, as well as with
his landlord, with the tax-collector, and with the church: he sells
little, and buys little; he touches little money, but he seldom has any
to pay. The gentle and kindly character of the Tuscans is often spoken
of, but without sufficiently remarking the cause which has contributed
most to keep up that gentleness; the tenure, by which the entire class
of farmers, more than three-fourths of the population, are kept free
from almost every occasion for quarrel.” The fixity of tenure which the
metayer, so long as he fulfils his own obligations, possesses by usage,
though not by law, gives him the local attachments, and almost the
strong sense of personal interest, characteristic of a proprietor. “The
metayer lives on his metairie as on his inheritance, loving it with
affection, labouring incessantly to improve it, confiding in the future,
and making sure that his land will be tilled after him by his children
and his children' children. In fact the majority of metayers live from
generation to generation on the same farm; they know it in its details
with a minuteness which the feeling of property can alone give. The
plots terrassed Edition: current; Page: [315] up, one above the other,
are often not above four feet wide; but there is not one of them, the
qualities of which the metayer has not studied. This one is dry, the
other is cold and damp: here the soil is deep; there it is a mere crust
which hardly covers the rock; wheat thrives best on one, rye on another:
here it would be labour wasted to sow Indian corn, elsewhere the soil is
unfit for beans and lupins, further off flax will grow admirably, the
edge of this brook will be suited for hemp. In this way one learns with
surprise from the metayer, that in a space of ten arpents, the soil, the
aspect, and the inclination of the ground present greater variety than a
rich farmer is generally able to distinguish in a farm of five hundred
acres. For the latter knows that he is only a temporary occupant; and
moreover, that he must conduct his operations by general rules, and
neglect details. But the experienced metayer has had his intelligence so
awakened by interest and affection, as to be the best of observers; and
with the whole future before him, he thinks not of himself alone, but of
his children and grandchildren. Therefore, when he plants an olive, a
tree which lasts for centuries, and excavates at the bottom of the
hollow in which he plants it a channel to let out the water by which it
would be injured, he studies all the strata of the earth which he has to
dig out.”∗.

§ 4. I do not offer these quotations as evidence of the intrinsic
excellence of the metayer system; but they surely suffice to prove that
neither “land miserably cultivated” nor a people in “the most abject
poverty” have any necessary connexion with it, and that the unmeasured
vituperation lavished upon the system by English writers is grounded on
an extremely narrow view of the subject. Edition: current; Page: [316] I
look upon the rural economy of Italy as simply so much additional
evidence in favour of small occupations with permanent tenure. It is an
example of what can be accomplished by those two elements, even under
the disadvantage of the peculiar nature of the metayer contract, in
which the motives to exertion on the part of the tenant are only half as
strong as if he farmed the land on the same footing of perpetuity at a
money-rent, either fixed, or varying according to some rule which would
leave to the tenant the whole benefit of his own exertions. The metayer
tenure is not one which we should be anxious to introduce where the
exigencies of society had not naturally given birth to it; but neither
ought we to be eager to abolish it on a mere à priori view of its
disadvantages. If the system in Tuscany works as well in practice as it
is represented to do, with every appearance of minute knowledge, by so
competent an authority as Sismondi; if the mode of living of the people,
and the size of farms, have for ages maintained and still maintain
themselves∗. such as they are said to be by him, it were to be regretted
that a state of rural well-being so much beyond what is realized in most
European countries, should be put to hazard by an attempt to introduce,
under the guise of agricultural improvement, a system of money-rents and
capitalist farmers. Even where the metayers are poor, and the
subdivision great, it is not to be assumed as of course, that the change
would be for the better. The enlargement of farms, and the introduction
of what are called improvements, usually diminish the number of
labourers employed on the land; and unless the growth of capital in
trade and manufactures affords an opening for the displaced population,
or unless there are reclaimable wastes on which they can be located,
competition will so reduce wages, that they will probably be worse off
as day-labourers than they were as metayers.

Mr. Jones very properly objects against the French Economists of the
last century, that in pursuing their favourite object of introducing
money-rents, they turned their minds solely to putting farmers in the
place of metayers, instead of transforming the existing metayers into
farmers; which, as he justly remarks, can scarcely Edition: current;
Page: [317] be effected, unless, to enable the metayers to save and
become owners of stock, the proprietors submit for a considerable time
to a diminution of income, instead of expecting an increase of it, which
has generally been their immediate motive for making the attempt. If
this transformation were effected, and no other change made in the
metayer' condition; if, preserving all the other rights which usage
insures to him, he merely got rid of the landlord' claim to half the
produce, paying in lieu of it a moderate fixed rent; he would be so far
in a better position than at present, as the whole, instead of only half
the fruits of any improvement he made, would now belong to himself; but
even so, the benefit would not be without alloy; for a metayer, though
not himself a capitalist, has a capitalist for his partner, and has the
use, in Italy at least, of a considerable capital, as is proved by the
excellence of the farm buildings: and it is not probable that the
landowners would any longer consent to peril their moveable property on
the hazards of agricultural enterprise, when assured of a fixed money
income without it. Thus would the question stand, even if the change
left undisturbed the metayer' virtual fixity of tenure, and converted
him, in fact, into a peasant proprietor at a quitrent. But if we suppose
him converted into a mere tenant, displaceable at the landlord' will,
and liable to have his rent raised by competition to any amount which
any unfortunate being in search of subsistence can be found to offer or
promise for it; he would lose all the features in his condition which
preserve it from being deteriorated; he would be cast down from his
present position of a kind of half proprietor of the land, and would
sink into a cottier tenant.

Edition: current; Page: [318]


CHAPTER IX.: of Cottiers

§ 1. By the general appellation of cottier tenure I shall designate all
cases without exception in which the labourer makes his contract for
land without the intervention of a capitalist farmer, and in which the
conditions of the contract, especially the amount of rent, are
determined not by custom but by competition. The principal European
example of this tenure is Ireland, and it is from that country that the
term cottier is derived.∗. By far the greater part of the agricultural
population of Ireland might until very lately have been said to be1.
cottier-tenants; except so far as the Ulster tenant-right constituted an
exception. There was, indeed, a numerous class of labourers who (we may
presume through the refusal either of proprietors or of tenants in
possession to permit any further subdivision) had been unable to obtain
even the smallest patch of land as permanent tenants. But, from the
deficiency of capital, the custom of paying wages in land was so
universal, that even those who worked as casual labourers for the
cottiers or for such larger farmers as were found in the country, were
usually paid not in money, but by permission to cultivate for the season
a piece of ground, which was generally delivered to them by the farmer
ready manured, and was known by the name of conacre. For this they
agreed to pay a money rent, often of several pounds an acre, but no
money actually passed, the debt being worked out in labour, at a money
valuation.

The produce, on the cottier system, being divided into two Edition:
current; Page: [319] portions, rent, and the remuneration of the
labourer; the one is evidently determined by the other. The labourer has
whatever the landlord does not take: the condition of the labourer
depends on the amount of rent. But rent, being regulated by competition,
depends upon the relation between the demand for land, and the supply of
it. The demand for land depends on the number of competitors, and the
competitors are the whole rural population. The effect, therefore, of
this tenure, is to bring the principle of population to act directly on
the land, and not, as in England, on capital. Rent, in this state of
things, depends on the proportion between population and land. As the
land is a fixed quantity, while population has an unlimited power of
increase; unless something checks that increase, the competition for
land soon forces up rent to the highest point consistent with keeping
the population alive. The effects, therefore, of cottier tenure depend
on the extent to which the capacity of population to increase is
controlled, either by custom, by individual prudence, or by starvation
and disease.

It would be an exaggeration to affirm, that cottier tenancy is
absolutely incompatible with a prosperous condition of the labouring
class. If we could suppose it to exist among a people to whom a high
standard of comfort was habitual; whose requirements were such, that
they would not offer a higher rent for land than would leave them an
ample subsistence, and whose moderate increase of numbers left no
unemployed population to force up rents by competition, save when the
increasing produce of the land from increase of skill would enable a
higher rent to be paid without inconvenience; the cultivating class
might be as well remunerated, might have as large a share of the
necessaries and comforts of life, on this system of tenure as on any
other. They would not, however, while their rents were arbitrary, enjoy
any of the peculiar advantages which metayers on the Tuscan system
derive from their connexion with the land. They would neither have the
use of a capital belonging to their landlords, nor would the want of
this be made up by the intense motives to bodily and mental exertion
which act upon the peasant who has a permanent tenure. On the contrary,
any increased value given to the land by the exertions of the tenant,
would have no effect but to raise the rent against himself, either the
next year, or at farthest when his lease expired. The landlords might
have justice or good sense enough not to avail of the advantage which
competition would give them; and different landlords would do so in
different degrees. But it is never safe to expect that a class or body
of men Edition: current; Page: [320] will act in opposition to their
immediate pecuniary interest; and even a doubt on the subject would be
almost as fatal as a certainty, for when a person is considering whether
or not to undergo a present exertion or sacrifice for a comparatively
remote future, the scale is turned by a very small probability that the
fruits of the exertion or of the sacrifice will be taken away from him.
The only safeguard against these uncertainties would be the growth of a
custom, insuring a permanence of tenure in the same occupant, without
liability to any other increase of rent than might happen to be
sanctioned by the general sentiments of the community. The Ulster
tenant-right is such a custom. The very considerable sums which outgoing
tenants obtain from their successors, for the goodwill of their farms,∗.
in the first place actually limit the competition for land to persons
who have such sums to offer: while the same fact also proves that full
advantage is not taken by the landlord of even that more limited
competition, since the landlord' rent does not amount to the whole of
what the incoming tenant not only offers but actually pays. He does so
in the full confidence that the rent will not be raised; and for this he
has the guarantee of a custom, not recognised by law, but deriving its
binding force from another sanction, perfectly well understood in
Ireland.† Without one or other of these supports, a custom limiting the
rent of land is not likely to grow up in any progressive community. If
wealth and population were stationary, rent also would generally be
stationary, and after remaining a long time unaltered, would probably
come to be considered unalterable. But all progress in wealth and
population tends to a rise of rents. Under a metayer system there is an
established mode in which the owner of land is sure of participating in
the increased produce drawn from it. But on the Edition: current; Page:
[321] cottier system he can only do so by a readjustment of the
contract, while that readjustment, in a progressive community, would
almost always be to his advantage. His interest, therefore, is decidedly
opposed to the growth of any custom commuting rent into a fixed demand.

§ 2. Where the amount of rent is not limited, either by law or custom, a
cottier system has the disadvantages of the worst metayer system, with
scarcely any of the advantages by which, in the best forms of that
tenure, they are compensated. It is scarcely possible that cottier
agriculture should be other than miserable. There is not the same
necessity that the condition of the cultivators should be so. Since by a
sufficient restraint on population competition for land could be kept
down, and extreme poverty prevented; habits of prudence and a high
standard of comfort, once established, would have a fair chance of
maintaining themselves: though even in these favourable circumstances
the motives to prudence would be considerably weaker than in the case of
metayers, protected by custom (like those of Tuscany) from being
deprived of their farms: since a metayer family, thus protected, could
not be impoverished by any other improvident multiplication than their
own, but a cottier family, however prudent and self-restraining, may
have the rent raised against it by the consequences of the
multiplication of other families. Any protection to the cottiers against
this evil could only be derived from a salutary sentiment of duty or
dignity, pervading the class. From this source, however, they might
derive considerable protection. If the habitual standard of requirement
among the class were high, a young man might not choose to offer a rent
which would leave him in a worse condition than the preceding tenant; or
it might be the general custom, as it actually is in some countries, not
to marry until a farm is vacant.

But it is not where a high standard of comfort has rooted itself in the
habits of the labouring class, that we are ever called upon to consider
the effects of a cottier system. That system is found only where the
habitual requirements of the rural labourers are the lowest possible;
where as long as they are not actually starving, they will multiply: and
population is only checked by the diseases, and the shortness of life,
consequent on insufficiency of merely physical necessaries. This was1.
the state of the largest portion of the Irish peasantry. When a people
have sunk into this state, Edition: current; Page: [322] and still more
when they have been in it from time immemorial, the cottier system is an
almost insuperable obstacle to their emerging from it. When the habits
of the people are such that their increase is never checked but by the
impossibility of obtaining a bare support, and when this support can
only be obtained from land, all stipulations and agreements respecting
amount of rent are merely nominal; the competition for land makes the
tenants undertake to pay more than it is possible they should pay, and
when they have paid all they can, more almost always remains due.

“As it may fairly be said of the Irish peasantry,” said Mr. Revans, the
Secretary to the Irish Poor Law Enquiry Commission,∗. “that every family
which has not sufficient land to yield its food has one or more of its
members supported by begging, it will easily be conceived that every
endeavour is made by the peasantry to obtain small holdings, and that
they are not influenced in their biddings by the fertility of the land,
or by their ability to pay the rent, but solely by the offer which is
most likely to gain them possession. The rents which they promise, they
are almost invariably incapable of paying; and consequently they become
indebted to those under whom they hold, almost as soon as they take
possession. They give up, in the shape of rent, the whole produce of the
land with the exception of a sufficiency of potatoes for a subsistence;
but as this is rarely equal to the promised rent, they constantly have
against them an increasing balance. In some cases, the largest quantity
of produce which their holdings ever yielded, or which, under their
system of tillage, they could in the most favourable seasons be made to
yield, would not be equal to the rent bid; consequently, if the peasant
fulfilled his engagement with his landlord, which he is rarely able to
accomplish, he would till the ground for nothing, and give his landlord
a premium for being allowed to till it. On the seacoast, fishermen, and
in the northern counties those who have looms, frequently pay more in
rent than the market value of the whole produce of the land they hold.
It might be supposed that they would be better without land under such
circumstances. But fishing might fail during a week or two, and so might
the demand for the produce of the loom, when, did they not possess the
land upon which their food is grown, they might starve. The full amount
of the rent bid, however, is rarely paid. The peasant remains Edition:
current; Page: [323] constantly in debt to his landlord; his miserable
possessions—the wretched clothing of himself and of his family, the two
or three stools, and the few pieces of crockery, which his wretched
hovel contains, would not, if sold, liquidate the standing and generally
accumulating debt. The peasantry are mostly a year in arrear, and their
excuse for not paying more is destitution. Should the produce of the
holding, in any year, be more than usually abundant, or should the
peasant by any accident become possessed of any property, his comforts
cannot be increased; he cannot indulge in better food, nor in a greater
quantity of it. His furniture cannot be increased, neither can his wife
or children be better clothed. The acquisition must go to the person
under whom he holds. The accidental addition will enable him to reduce
his arrear of rent, and thus to defer ejectment. But this must be the
bound of his expectation.”

As an extreme instance of the intensity of competition for land, and of
the monstrous height to which it occasionally forced up the nominal
rent; we may cite from the evidence taken by Lord Devon' Commission,∗. a
fact attested by Mr. Hurly, Clerk of the Crown for Kerry: “I have known
a tenant bid for a farm that I was perfectly well acquainted with, worth
50l. a year: I saw the competition get up to such an extent, that he was
declared the tenant at 450l.”

§ 3. In such a condition, what can a tenant gain by any amount of
industry or prudence, and what lose by any recklessness? If the landlord
at any time exerted his full legal rights, the cottier would not be able
even to live. If by extra exertion he doubled the produce of his bit of
land, or if he prudently abstained from producing mouths to eat it up,
his only gain would be to have more left to pay to his landlord; while,
if he had twenty children, they would still be fed first, and the
landlord could only take what was left. Almost alone amongst mankind the
cottier is in this condition, that he can scarcely be either better or
worse off by any act of his own. If he were industrious or prudent,
nobody but his landlord would gain; if he is lazy or intemperate, it is
at his landlord' expense. A situation more devoid of motives to either
labour or self-command, imagination itself cannot conceive. The
inducements of free human beings are taken away, and those of a slave
not substituted. He has nothing to hope, and nothing to fear, except
being dispossessed of his holding, and against this he protects himself
by the ultima ratio of a defensive civil war. Rockism and Whiteboyism
were1. the determination of Edition: current; Page: [324] a people who
had nothing that could be called theirs but a daily meal of the lowest
description of food, not to submit to being deprived of that for other
people' convenience.

Is it not, then, a bitter satire on the mode in which opinions are
formed on the most important problems of human nature and life, to find
public instructors of the greatest pretension, imputing the backwardness
of Irish industry, and the want of energy of the Irish people in
improving their condition, to a peculiar indolence and insouciance in
the Celtic race? Of all vulgar modes of escaping from the consideration
of the effect of social and moral influences on the human mind, the most
vulgar is that of attributing the diversities of conduct and character
to inherent natural differences. What race would not be indolent and
insouciant when things are so arranged, that they derive no advantage
from forethought or exertion? If such are the arrangements in the midst
of which they live and work, what wonder if the listlessness and
indifference so engendered are not shaken off the first moment an
opportunity offers when exertion would really be of use? It is very
natural that a pleasure-loving and sensitively organized people like the
Irish, should be less addicted to steady routine labour than the
English, because life has more excitements for them independent of it;
but they are not less fitted for it than their Celtic brethren the
French, nor less so than the Tuscans, or the ancient Greeks. An
excitable organization is precisely that in which, by adequate
inducements, it is easiest to kindle a spirit of animated exertion. It
speaks nothing against the capacities of industry in human beings, that
they will not exert themselves without motive. No labourers work harder,
in England or America, than the Irish; but not under a cottier system.

4. The multitudes who till the soil of India, are in a condition
sufficiently analogous to the cottier system, and at the same time
sufficiently different from it, to render the comparison of the two a
source of some instruction. In most parts of India there are, and
perhaps have always been, only two contracting parties, the landlord and
the peasant: the landlord being generally the sovereign, except where he
has, by a special instrument, conceded his rights to an individual, who
becomes his representative. The payments, however, of the peasants, or
ryots as they are termed, have seldom if ever been regulated, as in
Ireland, by competition. Though the customs locally obtaining were
infinitely various, and though practically no custom could be maintained
against the sovereign' will, Edition: current; Page: [325] there was
always a rule of some sort common to a neighbourhood; the collector did
not make his separate bargain with the peasant, but assessed each
according to the rule adopted for the rest. The idea was thus kept up of
a right of property in the tenant, or at all events, of a right to
permanent possession; and the anomaly arose of a fixity of tenure in the
peasant-farmer, co-existing with an arbitrary power of increasing the
rent.

When the Mogul government substituted itself throughout the greater part
of India for the Hindoo rulers, it proceeded on a different principle. A
minute survey was made of the land, and upon that survey an assessment
was founded, fixing the specific payment due to the government from each
field. if this assessment had never been exceeded, the ryots would have
been in the comparatively advantageous position of peasant-proprietors,
subject to a heavy, but a fixed quit-rent. The absence, however, of any
real protection against illegal extortions, rendered this improvement in
their condition rather nominal than real; and, except during the
occasional accident of a humane and vigorous local administrator, the
exactions had no practical limit but the inability of the ryot to pay
more.

It was to this state of things that the English rulers of India
succeeded; and they were, at an early period, struck with the importance
of putting an end to this arbitrary character of the land-revenue, and
imposing a fixed limit to the government demand. They did not attempt to
go back to the Mogul valuation. it has been in general the very rational
practice of the English Government in India to pay little regard to what
was laid down as the theory of the native institutions, but to inquire
into the rights which existed and were respected in practice, and to
protect and enlarge those. For a long time, however, it blundered
grievously about matters of fact, and grossly misunderstood the usages
and rights which it found existing. Its mistakes arose from the
inability of ordinary minds to imagine a state of social relations
fundamentally different from those with which they are practically
familiar. England being accustomed to great estates and great landlords,
the English rulers took it for granted that India must possess the like;
and looking round for some set of people who might be taken for the
objects of their search, they pitched upon a sort of tax-gatherers
called zemindars. “The zemindar,” says the philosophical historian of
India,∗. “had some of the attributes which belong to a landowner; he
collected the rents of a particular district, he governed the
cultivators of that Edition: current; Page: [326] district, lived in
comparative splendour, and his son succeeded him when he died. The
zemindars, therefore, it was inferred without delay, were the
proprietors of the soil, the landed nobility and gentry of India. It was
not considered that the zemindars, though they collected the rents, did
not keep them; but paid them all away with a small deduction to the
government. It was not considered that if they governed the ryots, and
in many respects exercised over them despotic power, they did not govern
them as tenants of theirs, holding their lands either at will or by
contract under them. The possession of the ryot was an hereditary
possession; from which it was unlawful for the zemindar to displace him;
for every farthing which the zemindar drew from the ryot, he was bound
to account; and it was only by fraud, if, out of all that he collected,
he retained an ana more than the small proportion which, as pay for
collection, he was permitted to receive.”

“There was an opportunity in India,” continues the historian, “to which
the history of the world presents not a parallel. Next after the
sovereign, the immediate cultivators had, by far, the greatest portion
of interest in the soil. For the rights (such as they were) of the
zemindars, a complete compensation might have easily been made. The
generous resolution was adopted, of sacrificing to the improvement of
the country, the proprietary rights of the sovereign. The motives to
improvement which property gives, and of which the power was so justly
appreciated, might have been bestowed upon those upon whom they would
have operated with a force incomparably greater than that with which
they could operate upon any other class of men: they might have been
bestowed upon those from whom alone, in every country, the principal
improvements in agriculture must be derived, the immediate cultivators
of the soil. And a measure worthy to be ranked among the noblest that
ever were taken for the improvement of any country, might have helped to
compensate the people of India for the miseries of that misgovernment
which they had so long endured. But the legislators were English
aristocrats; and aristocratical prejudices prevailed.”

The measure proved a total failure, as to the main effects which its
well meaning promoters expected from it. Unaccustomed to estimate the
mode in which the operation of any given institution is modified even by
such variety of circumstances as exists within a single kingdom, they
flattered themselves that they had created, throughout the Bengal
provinces, English landlords, and it proved Edition: current; Page:
[327] that they had only created Irish ones. The new landed aristocracy
disappointed every expectation built upon them. They did nothing for the
improvement of their estates, but everything for their own ruin. The
same pains not being taken, as had been taken in Ireland, to enable
landlords to defy the consequences of their improvidence, nearly the
whole land of Bengal had to be sequestrated and sold, for debts or
arrears of revenue, and in one generation most of the ancient zemindars
had ceased to exist. Other families, mostly the descendants of Calcutta
money dealers, or of native officials who had enriched themselves under
the British government, now occupy their place; and live as useless
drones on the soil which has been given up to them. Whatever the
government has sacrificed of its pecuniary claims, for the creation of
such a class, has at the best been wasted.1.

In the parts of India into which the British rule has been more recently
introduced, the blunder has been avoided of endowing a useless body of
great landlords with gifts from the public revenue. In most parts of the
Madras and in part of the Bombay Presidency, the rent is paid directly
to the government by the immediate cultivator. In the North-Western
Provinces, the government makes its engagement with the village
community collectively, determining the share to be paid by each
individual, but holding them jointly responsible for each other'
default. But in the greater part of India, the immediate cultivators
have not obtained a perpetuity of tenure at a fixed rent. The government
manages the land on the principle on which a good Irish landlord manages
his estate: not putting it up to competition, not asking the cultivators
Edition: current; Page: [328] what they will promise to pay, but
determining for itself what they can afford to pay, and defining its
demand accordingly. In many districts a portion of the cultivators are
considered as tenants of the rest, the government making its demand from
those only (often a numerous body) who are looked upon as the successors
of the original settlers or conquerors of the village. Sometimes the
rent is fixed only for one year, sometimes for three or five; but the
uniform tendency of present policy is towards long leases, extending, in
the northern provinces of India, to a term of thirty years. This
arrangement has not existed for a sufficient time to have shown by
experience, how far the motives to improvement which the long lease
creates in the minds of the cultivators, fall short of the influence of
a perpetual settlement.∗. But the two plans, of annual settlements and
of short leases, are irrevocably condemned. They can only be said to
have succeeded, in comparison with the unlimited oppression which
existed before. They are approved by nobody, and were never looked upon
in any other light than as temporary arrangements, to be abandoned when
a more complete knowledge of the capabilities of the count should afford
data for something more permanent.1.

Edition: current; Page: [329]


CHAPTER X.: means of abolishing cottier tenancy

1. When the first edition of this work was written and published,1. the
question, what is to be done with a cottier population, was to the
English Government the most urgent of practical questions. The majority
of a population of eight millions, having long grovelled in helpless
inertness and abject poverty under the cottier system, reduced by its
operation to mere food of the cheapest description, and to an incapacity
of either doing or willing anything for the improvement of their lot,
had at last, by the failure of that lowest quality of food, been plunged
into a state in which the alternative seemed to be either death, or to
be permanently supported by other people, or a radical change in the
economical arrangements under which it had hitherto been their
misfortune to live. Such an emergency had compelled attention to the
subject from the legislature and from the nation, but it could hardly be
said with much result; for, the evil having originated in a system of
land tenancy which withdrew from the people every motive to industry or
thrift except the fear of starvation, the remedy provided by Parliament
was to take away even that, by conferring on them a legal claim to
eleemosynary support: while, towards correcting the cause of the
mischief, nothing was done, beyond vain complaints, though at the price
to the national treasury of ten millions sterling for the delay.

“It is needless,” (I observed) “to expend any argument in proving that
the very foundation of the economical evils of Ireland is the cottier
system; that while peasant rents fixed by competition are the practice
of the country, to expect industry, useful activity, any restraint on
population but death, or any the smallest diminution of poverty, is to
look for figs on thistles and grapes on thorns. If Edition: current;
Page: [330] our practical statesmen are not ripe for the recognition of
this fact; or if while they acknowledge it in theory, they have not a
sufficient feeling of its reality, to be capable of founding upon it any
course of conduct; there is still another, and a purely physical
consideration, from which they will find it impossible to escape. If the
one crop on which the people have hitherto supported themselves
continues to be precarious, either some new and great impulse must be
given to agricultural skill and industry, or the soil of Ireland can no
longer feed anything like its present population. The whole produce of
the western half of the island, leaving nothing for rent, will not now
keep permanently in existence the whole of its people: and they will
necessarily remain an annual charge on the taxation of the empire, until
they are reduced either by emigration or by starvation to a number
corresponding with the low state of their industry, or unless the means
are found of making that industry much more productive.”

1 Since these words were written, events unforeseen by any one have
saved the English rulers of Ireland from the embarrassments which would
have been the just penalty of their indifference and want of foresight.
Ireland, under cottier agriculture, could no longer supply food to its
population: Parliament, by way of remedy, applied a stimulus to
population, but none at all to production; the help, however, which had
not been provided for the people of Ireland by political wisdom, came
from an unexpected source. Self-supporting emigration—the Wakefield
system, brought into effect on the voluntary principle and on a gigantic
scale (the expenses of those who followed being paid from the earnings
of those who went before) has, for the present, reduced the population
down to the number for which the existing agricultural system can find
employment and support. The census of 1851, compared with that of 1841,
showed in round numbers a diminution of population of a million and a
half. The subsequent census (of 1861) shows a further diminution of
about half a million. The Irish having thus found the way to that
flourishing continent which for generations will be capable of
supporting in undiminished comfort the increase of the population of the
whole world; the peasantry of Ireland having learnt to fix their eyes on
a terrestrial paradise beyond the ocean, as a sure refuge both from the
oppression of the Saxon and from the tyranny of nature; there can be
little doubt that however Edition: current; Page: [331] much the
employment for agricultural labour may hereafter be diminished by the
general introduction throughout Ireland of English farming—or even if,
like the county of Sutherland, all Ireland should be turned into a
grazing farm—the superseded people would migrate to America with the
same rapidity, and as free of cost to the nation, as the million of
Irish who went thither during the three years previous to 1851. Those
who think that the land of a country exists for the sake of a few
thousand landowners, and that as long as rents are paid, society and
government have fulfilled their function, may see in this consummation a
happy end to Irish difficulties.

But this is not a time, nor is the human mind now in a condition, in
which such insolent pretensions can be maintained. The land of Ireland,
the land of every country, belongs to the people of that country. The
individuals called landowners have no right, in morality and justice, to
anything but the rent, or compensation for its saleable value. With
regard to the land itself, the paramount consideration is, by what mode
of appropriation and of cultivation it can be made most useful to the
collective body of its inhabitants. To the owners of the rent it may be
very convenient that the bulk of the inhabitants, despairing of justice
in the country where they and their ancestors have lived and suffered,
should seek on another continent that property in land which is denied
to them at home. But the legislature of the empire ought to regard with
other eyes the forced expatriation of millions of people. When the
inhabitants of a country quit the country en masse because its
Government will not make it a place fit for them to live in, the
Government is judged and condemned. There is no necessity for depriving
the landlords of one farthing of the pecuniary value of their legal
rights; but justice requires that the actual cultivators should be
enabled to become in Ireland what they will become in
America—proprietors of the soil which they cultivate.

Good policy requires it no less. Those who, knowing neither Ireland nor
any foreign country, take as their sole standard of social and
economical excellence English practice, propose as the single remedy for
Irish wretchedness, the transformation of the cottiers into hired
labourers. But this is rather a scheme for the improvement of Irish
agriculture, than of the condition of the Irish people. The status of a
day-labourer has no charm for infusing forethought, frugality, or
self-restraint, into a people devoid of them. If the Irish peasant could
be universally changed into Edition: current; Page: [332] receivers of
wages, the old habits and mental characteristics of the people
remaining, we should merely see four or five millions of people living
as day-labourers in the same wretched manner in which as cottiers they
lived before; equally passive in the absence of every comfort, equally
reckless in multiplication, and even, perhaps, equally listless at their
work; since they could not be dismissed in a body, and if they could,
dismissal would now be simply remanding them to the poor-rate. Far other
would be the effect of making them peasant proprietors. A people who in
industry and providence have everything to learn—who are confessedly
among the most backward of European populations in the industrial
virtues—require for their regeneration the most powerful incitements by
which those virtues can be stimulated: and there is no stimulus as yet
comparable to property in land. A permanent interest in the soil to
those who till it, is almost a guarantee for the most unwearied
laboriousness: against over-population, thought not infallible, it is
the best preservative yet known, and where it failed, any other plan
would probably fail much more egregiously; the evil would be beyond the
reach of merely economic remedies.

The case of Ireland is similar in its requirements to that of India. In
India, though great errors have from time to time been committed, no one
ever proposed, under the name of agricultural improvement, to eject the
ryots or peasant farmers from their possession; the improvement that has
been looked for, has been through making their tenure more secure to
them, and the sole difference of opinion is between those who contend
for perpetuity, and those who think that long leases will suffice. The
same question exists as to Ireland: and it would be idle to deny that
long leases, under such landlords as are sometimes to be found do effect
wonders, even in Ireland. But then they must be leases at a low rent.
Long leases are in no way to be relied on for getting rid of cottierism.
During the existence of cottier tenancy, leases have always been long;
twenty-one years and three lives concurrent, was a usual term. But the
rent being fixed by competition, at a higher amount than could be paid,
so that the tenant neither had, nor could by any exertion acquire, a
beneficial interest in the land, the advantage of a lease was nearly
nominal. In India, the government, where it has not imprudently made
over its proprietary rights to the zemindars,1. is able to prevent this
evil, because, being itself the landlord, it can fix the rent according
to its own judgment; but under individual Edition: current; Page: [333]
landlords, while rents are fixed by competition, and the competitors are
a peasantry struggling for subsistence, nominal rents are inevitable,
unless the population is so thin, that the competition itself is only
nominal. The majority of landlords will grasp at immediate money and
immediate power; and so long as they find cottiers eager to offer them
everything, it is useless to rely on them for tempering the vicious
practice by a considerate self-denial.

A perpetuity is a stronger stimulus to improvement than a long lease:
not only because the longest lease, before coming to an end, passes
through all the varieties of short leases down to no lease at all; but
for more fundamental reasons. It is very shallow, even in pure
economics, to take no account of the influence of imagination: there is
a virtue in “for ever” beyond the longest term of years; even if the
term is long enough to include children, and all whom a person
individually cares for, yet until he has reached that high degree of
mental cultivation at which the public good (which also includes
perpetuity) acquires a paramount ascendancy over his feelings and
desires, he will not exert himself with the same ardour to increase the
value of an estate, his interest in which diminishes in value every
year. Besides, while perpetual tenure is the general rule of landed
property, as it is in all the counties of Europe, a tenure for a limited
period, however long, is sure to be regarded as a something of inferior
consideration and dignity, and inspires less of ardour to obtain it, and
of attachment to it when obtained. But where a country is under cottier
tenure, the question of perpetuity is quite secondary to the more
important point, a limitation of the rent. Rent paid by a capitalist who
farms for profit, and not for bread, may safely be abandoned to
competition; rent paid by labourers cannot, unless the labourers were in
a state of civilization and improvement which labourers have nowhere yet
reached, and cannot easily reach under such a tenure. Peasant rents
ought never to be arbitrary, never at the discretion of the landlord:
either by custom or law, it is imperatively necessary that they should
be fixed; and where no mutually advantageous custom, such as the metayer
system of Tuscany, has established itself, reason and experience
recommend that they should be fixed by authority: thus changing the rent
into a quit-rent, and the farmer into a peasant proprietor.

For carrying this change into effect on a sufficiently large scale to
accomplish the complete abolition of cottier tenancy, the mode Edition:
current; Page: [334] which most obviously suggests itself is the direct
one of doing the thing outright by Act of Parliament; making the whole
land of Ireland the property of the tenants, subject to the rents now
really paid (not the nominal rent), as a fixed rent charge. This, under
the name of “fixity of tenure,” was one of the demands of the Repeal
Association during the most successful period of their agitation; and
was better expressed by Mr. Conner, its earliest, most enthusiastic, and
most indefatigable apostle,∗. by the words, “a valuation and a
perpetuity.” In such a measure there would not have been any injustice,
provided the landlords were compensated for the present value of the
chances of increase which they were prospectively required to forego.
The rupture of existing social relations would hardly have been more
violent than that effected by the ministers Stein and Hardenberg when,
by a series of edicts, in the early part of the present century, they
revolutionized the state of landed property in the Prussian monarchy,
and left their names to posterity among the greatest benefactors of
their country. To enlightened foreigners writing on Ireland, Von Raumer
and Gustave de Beaumont, a remedy of this sort seemed so exactly and
obviously what the disease required, that they had some difficulty in
comprehending how it was that the thing was not yet done.

This, however, would have been, in the first place, a complete
expropriation of the higher classes of Ireland: which, if there is any
truth in the principles we have laid down, would be perfectly
warrantable, but only if it were the sole means of effecting a great
public good. In the second place, that there should be none but peasant
proprietors, is in itself far from desirable. Large farms, cultivated by
large capital, and owned by persons of the best education which the
country can give, persons qualified by instruction to appreciate
scientific discoveries, and able to bear the delay and risk of costly
experiments, are an important part of a good agricultural system. Many
such landlords there are even in Ireland; and it would be a public
misfortune to drive them from their posts. A large proportion also of
the present holdings are probably still too small to try the proprietary
system under the greatest advantages; nor are the tenants always the
persons one would desire to select as the first occupants of
peasant-properties. There are numbers of them on whom it would have a
more beneficial effect to give Edition: current; Page: [335] them the
hope of acquiring a landed property by industry and frugality, than the
property itself in immediate possession.1.

There are, however, much milder measures, not open to similar
objections, and which, if pushed to the utmost extent of which they are
susceptible, would realize in no inconsiderable degree the object
sought. One of them would be, to enact that whoever reclaims waste land
becomes the owner of it, at a fixed quit-rent equal to a moderate
interest on its mere value as waste. It would of course be a necessary
part of this measure, to make compulsory on landlords the surrender of
waste lands (not of an ornamental character) whenever required for
reclamation. Another expedient, and one in which individuals could
co-operate, would be to buy as much as possible of the land offered for
sale, and sell it again in small portions as peasant-properties. A
Society for this purpose Edition: current; Page: [336] was at one time
projected (though the attempt to establish it proved unsuccessful) on
the principles, so far as applicable, of the Freehold Land Societies
which have been so successfully established in England, not primarily
for agricultural, but for electoral purposes.1.

This is a mode in which private capital may be employed in renovating
the social and agricultural economy of Ireland, not only without
sacrifice but with considerable profit to its owners. The remarkable
success of the Waste Land Improvement Society, which proceeded on a plan
far less advantageous to the tenant, is an instance of what an Irish
peasantry can be stimulated to do, Edition: current; Page: [337] by a
sufficient assurance that what they do will be for their own advantage.
It is not even indispensable to adopt perpetuity as the rule; long
leases at moderate rents, like those of the Waste Land Society, would
suffice, if a prospect were held out to the farmers of being allowed to
purchase their farms with the capital which they might acquire, as the
Society' tenants were so rapidly acquiring under the influence of its
beneficent system.∗. When the lands were sold, the funds of the
association would be liberated, and it might recommence operations in
some other quarter.

§ 2.1. Thus far I had written in 1856. Since that time the great crisis
of Irish industry has made further progress, and it is necessary to
consider how its present state affects the opinions, on prospects or on
practical measures, expressed in the previous part of this chapter.

Edition: current; Page: [338]
The principal change in the situation consists in the great diminution,
holding out a hope of the entire extinction, of cottier tenure. The
enormous decrease in the number of small holdings, and increase in those
of a medium size, attested by the statistical returns, sufficiently
proves the general fact, and all testimonies show that the tendency
still continues.∗. It is probable that the repeal of the corn laws,
necessitating a change in the exports of Ireland from the products of
tillage to those of pasturage, would of itself have sufficed to bring
about this revolution in tenure. A grazing farm can only be Edition:
current; Page: [339] managed by a capitalist farmer, or by the landlord.
But a change involving so great a displacement of the population has
been immensely facilitated and made more rapid by the vast emigration,
as well as by that greatest boon ever conferred on Ireland by any
Government, the Encumbered Estates Act; the best provisions of which
have since, through the Landed Estates Court, been permanently
incorporated into the social system of the country. The greatest part of
the soil of Ireland, there is reason to believe, is now farmed either by
the landlords, or by small capitalist farmers. That these farmers are
improving in circumstances, and accumulating capital, there is
considerable evidence, in particular the great increase of deposits in
the banks of which they are the principal customers. So far as that
class is concerned, the chief thing still wanted is security of tenure,
or assurance of compensation for improvements. The means of supplying
these wants are now engaging the attention of the most competent minds;
Judge Longfield' address, in the autumn of 1864, and the sensation
created by it, are an era in the subject, and a point has now been
reached when we may confidently expect that within a very few years
something effectual will be done.

But what, meanwhile, is the condition of the displaced cottiers, so far
as they have not emigrated; and of the whole class who subsist by
agricultural labour, without the occupation of any land? As yet, their
state is one of great poverty, with but slight prospect of improvement.
Money wages, indeed, have risen much above the wretched level of a
generation ago: but the cost of subsistence has also risen so much above
the old potato standard, that the real improvement is not equal to the
nominal; and according to the best information to which I have access,
there is little appearance of an improved standard of living among the
class. The population, in fact, reduced though it be, is still far
beyond what the country can support as a mere grazing district of
England. It may not, perhaps, be strictly true that, if the present
number of inhabitants are to be maintained at home, it can only be
either on the old vicious system of cottierism, or as small proprietors
growing their own food. The lands which will remain under tillage would,
no doubt, if sufficient security for outlay were given, admit of a more
extensive employment of labourers by the small capitalist farmers; and
this, in the opinion of some competent judges, might enable the country
to support the present number of its population in actual existence. But
no one will pretend that this resource is sufficient to maintain
Edition: current; Page: [340] them in any condition in which it is fit
that the great body of the peasantry of a country should exist.
Accordingly the emigration, which for a time had fallen off, has, under
the additional stimulus of bad seasons, revived in all its strength. It
is calculated that within the year 1864 not less than 100,000 emigrants
left the Irish shores. As far as regards the emigrants themselves and
their posterity, or the general interests of the human race, it would be
folly to regret this result. The children of the immigrant Irish receive
the education of Americans, and enter, more rapidly and completely than
would have been possible in the country of their descent, into the
benefits of a higher state of civilization. In twenty or thirty years
they are not mentally distinguishable from other Americans. The loss,
and the disgrace, are England' : and it is the English people and
government whom it chiefly concerns to ask themselves, how far it will
be to their honour and advantage to retain the mere soil of Ireland, but
to lose its inhabitants. With the present feelings of the Irish people,
and the direction which their hope of improving their condition seems to
be permanently taking, England, it is probable, has only the choice
between the depopulation of Ireland, and the conversion of a part of the
labouring population into peasant proprietors. The truly insular
ignorance of her public men respecting a form of agricultural economy
which predominates in nearly every other civilized country, makes it
only too probable that she will choose the worse side of the
alternative. Yet there are germs of a tendency to the formation of
peasant proprietors on Irish soil, which require only the aid of a
friendly legislator to foster them; as is shown in the following extract
from a private communication by my eminent and valued friend, Professor
Cairnes:—

“On the sale, some eight or ten years ago, of the Thomond,
Portarlington, and Kingston estates, in the Encumbered Estates Court, it
was observed that a considerable number of occupying tenants purchased
the fee of their farms. I have not been able to obtain any information
as to what followed that proceeding—whether the purchasers continued to
farm their small properties, or under the mania of landlordism tried to
escape from their former mode of life. But there are other facts which
have a hearing on this question. In those parts of the country where
tenant-right prevails, the prices given for the goodwill of a farm are
enormous. The following figures, taken from the schedule of an estate in
the neighbourhood of Newry, now passing through the Landed Estates
Court, Edition: current; Page: [341] will give an idea, but a very
inadequate one, of the prices which this mere customary right generally
fetches.

“Statement showing the prices at which the tenant-right of certain farms
near Newry was sold:—

            Acres.           Rent.              Purchase-money of tenant-right.
  ----- --- -------- ------- ------- ---------- ---------------------------------
  Lot   1   23       .. ..   £74     .. .. ..   £ 33
        2   24       .. ..   77      .. .. ..   240
        3   13       .. ..   39      .. .. ..   110
        4   14       .. ..   34      .. .. ..   85
        5   10       .. ..   33      .. .. ..   172
        6   5        .. ..   13      .. .. ..   75
        7   8        .. ..   26      .. .. ..   130
        8   11       .. ..   33      .. .. ..   130
        9   2        .. ..   5       .. .. ..   5
            ———              ———                ———
            110              £334               £980

“The prices here represent on the whole about three years' purchase of
the rental: but this, as I have said, gives but an inadequate idea of
that which is frequently, indeed of that which is ordinarily, paid. The
right, being purely customary, will vary in value with the confidence
generally reposed in the good faith of the landlord. In the present
instance, circumstances have come to light in the course of the
proceedings connected with the sale of the estate, which give reason to
believe that the confidence in this case was not high; consequently, the
rates above given may be taken as considerably under those which
ordinarily prevail. Cases, as I am informed on the highest authority,
have in other parts of the country come to light, also in the Landed
Estates Court, in which the price given for the tenant-right was equal
to that of the whole fee of the land. It is a remarkable fact that
people should be found to give, say twenty or twenty-five years'
purchase, for land which is still subject to a good round rent. Why, it
will be asked, do they not purchase land out and out for the same, or a
slightly larger, sum? The answer to this question, I believe is to be
found in the state of our land laws. The cost of transferring land in
small portions is, relatively to the purchase money, very considerable,
even in the Landed Estates Court; while the goodwill of a farm may be
transferred without any cost at all. The cheapest conveyance that could
be drawn in that Court, where the utmost economy, consistent with the
present mode of remunerating legal services, is strictly enforced,
would, irrespective of stamp duties, cost 10l.—a very sensible addition
to the purchase of a small peasant estate: a conveyance to transfer
Edition: current; Page: [342] a thousand acres might not cost more, and
would probably not cost much more. But in truth, the mere cost of
conveyance represents but the least part of the obstacles which exist to
obtaining land in small portions. A far more serious impediment is the
complicated state of the ownership of land, which renders it frequently
impracticable to subdivide a property into such portions as would bring
the land within the reach of small bidders. The remedy for this state of
things, however, lies in measures of a more radical sort than I fear it
is at all probable that any House of Commons we are soon likely to see
would even with patience consider. A registry of titles may succeed in
reducing this complex condition of ownership to its simplest expression;
but where real complication exists, the difficulty is not to be got rid
of by mere simplicity of form; and a registry of titles—while the powers
of disposition at present enjoyed by landowners remain undiminished,
while every settler and testator has an almost unbounded licence to
multiply interests in land, as pride, the passion for dictation, or mere
whim may suggest—will, in my opinion, fail to reach the root of the
evil. The effect of these circumstances is to place an immense premium
upon large dealings in land—indeed in most cases practically to preclude
all other than large dealing; and while this is the state of the law,
the experiment of peasant proprietorship, it is plain, cannot be fairly
tried. The facts, however, which I have stated, show, I think,
conclusively, that there is no obstacle in the disposition of the people
to the introduction of this system.”

I have concluded a discussion, which has occupied a space almost
disproportioned to the dimensions of this work; and I here close the
examination of those simpler forms of social economy in which the
produce of the land either belongs undividedly to one class, or is
shared only between two classes. We now proceed to the hypothesis of a
threefold division of the produce, among labourers, landlords, and
capitalists; and in order to connect the coming discussions as closely
as possible with those which have now for some time occupied us, I shall
commence with the subject of Wages.1.

Edition: current; Page: [343]


CHAPTER XI.: of Wages

§ 1. Under the head of Wages are to be considered, first, the causes
which determine or influence the wages of labour generally, and
secondly, the differences that exist between the wages of different
employments. It is convenient to keep these two classes of
considerations separate; and in discussing the law of wages, to proceed
in the first instance as if there were no other kind of labour than
common unskilled labour, of the average degree of hardness and
disagreeableness.

Wages, like other things, may be regulated either by competition or by
custom. In this country there are few kinds of labour of which the
remuneration would not be lower than it is, if the employer took the
full advantage of competition. Competition, however, must be regarded,
in the present state of society, as the principal regulator of wages,
and custom or individual character only as a modifying circumstance, and
that in a comparatively slight degree.1.

Wages, then, depend mainly upon the demand and supply of labour; or as
it is often expressed, on the proportion between population and capital.
By population is here meant the number only of the labouring class, or
rather of those who work for hire; and by capital only circulating
capital, and not even the whole of that, but the part which is expended
in the direct purchase of labour. To this, however, must be added all
funds which, without Edition: current; Page: [344] forming a part of
capital, are paid in exchange for labour, such as the wages of soldiers,
domestic servants, and all other unproductive labourers. There is
unfortunately no mode of expressing by one familiar term, the aggregate
of what has been called the wages-fund of a country: and as the wages of
productive labour form nearly the whole of that fund, it is usual to
overlook the smaller and less important part, and to say that wages
depend on population and capital. It will be convenient to employ this
expression, remembering, however, to consider it as elliptical, and not
as a literal statement of the entire truth.

With these limitations of the terms, wages not only depend upon the
relative amount of capital and population, but cannot, under the rule of
competition,1. be affected by anything else. Wages (meaning, of course,
the general rate) cannot rise, but by an increase of the aggregate funds
employed in hiring labourers, or a diminution in the number of the
competitors for hire; nor fall, except either by a diminution of the
funds devoted to paying labour, or by an increase in the number of
labourers to be paid.2.

§ 2. There are, however, some facts in apparent contradiction to this
doctrine, which it is incumbent on us to consider and explain.

For instance, it is a common saying that wages are high when trade is
good. The demand for labour in any particular employment is more
pressing, and higher wages are paid, when there is a brisk demand for
the commodity produced; and the contrary when there is what is called a
stagnation: then workpeople are dismissed, and those who are retained
must submit to a reduction of wages: though in these cases there is
neither more nor less capital than before. This is true; and is one of
those complications in the concrete phenomena, which obscure and
disguise the operation of general causes: but it is not really
inconsistent with the principles laid down. Capital which the owner does
not employ in purchasing labour, but keeps idle in his hands, is the
same thing to the labourers, for the time being, as if it did not exist.
All capital is, from the variations of trade, occasionally in this
state. A manufacturer, finding a slack demand for his commodity,
forbears to employ labourers in increasing a stock which he finds it
difficult to dispose of; or if he goes on until all his capital is
locked up in unsold goods, then at least he must of necessity pause
until he can get paid for Edition: current; Page: [345] some of them.
But no one expects either of these states to be permanent; if he did, he
would at the first opportunity remove his capital to some other
occupation, in which it would still continue to employ labour. The
capital remains unemployed for a time, during which the labour market is
overstocked, and wages fall. Afterwards the demand revives, and perhaps
becomes unusually brisk, enabling the manufacturer to sell his commodity
even faster than he can produce it: his whole capital is then brought
into complete efficiency, and if he is able, he borrows capital in
addition, which would otherwise have gone into some other employment. At
such times wages, in his particular occupation, rise. If we suppose,
what in strictness is not absolutely impossible, that one of these fits
of briskness or of stagnation should affect all occupations at the same
time, wages altogether might undergo a rise or a fall. These, however,
are but temporary fluctuations: the capital now lying idle will next
year be in active employment, that which is this year unable to keep up
with the demand will in its turn be locked up in crowded warehouses; and
wages in these several departments will ebb and flow accordingly: but
nothing can permanently alter general wages, except an increase or a
diminution of capital itself (always meaning by the term, the funds of
all sorts, devoted to the payment of labour) compared with the quantity
of labour offering itself to be hired.

Again, it is another common notion that high prices make high wages;
because the producers and dealers, being better off, can afford to pay
more to their labourers. I have already said that a brisk demand, which
causes temporary high prices, causes also temporary high wages. But high
prices, in themselves, can only raise wages if the dealers, receiving
more, are induced to save more, and make an addition to their capital,
or at least to their purchases of labour. This is indeed likely enough
to be the case; and if the high prices came direct from heaven, or even
from abroad, the labouring class might be benefited, not by the high
prices themselves, but by the increase of capital occasioned by them.
The same effect, however, is often attributed to a high price which is
the result of restrictive laws, or which is in some way or other to be
paid by the remaining members of the community; they having no greater
means than before to pay it with. High prices of this sort, if they
benefit one class of labourers, can only do so at the expense of others;
since if the dealers by receiving high prices are enabled to make
greater savings, or otherwise increase their Edition: current; Page:
[346] purchases of labour, all other people by paying those high prices
have their means of saving, or of purchasing labour, reduced in an equal
degree; and it is a matter of accident whether the one alteration or the
other will have the greatest effect on the labour market. Wages will
probably be temporarily higher in the employment in which prices have
risen, and somewhat lower in other employments: in which case, while the
first half of the phenomenon excites notice, the other is generally
overlooked, or if observed, is not ascribed to the cause which really
produced it. Nor will the partial rise of wages last long: for though
the dealers in that one employment gain more, it does not follow that
there is room to employ a greater amount of savings in their own
business: their increasing capital will probably flow over into other
employments, and there counterbalance the diminution previously made in
the demand for labour by the diminished savings of other classes.

Another opinion often maintained is, that wages (meaning of course money
wages) vary with the price of food; rising when it rises, and falling
when it falls. This opinion is, I conceive, only partially true; and in
so far as true, in no way affects the dependence of wages on the
proportion between capital and labour: since the price of food, when it
affects wages at all, affects them through that law. Dear or cheap food,
caused by variety of seasons, does not affect wages (unless they are
artificially adjusted to it by law or charity): or rather, it has some
tendency to affect them in the contrary way to that supposed; since in
times of scarcity people generally compete more violently for
employment, and lower the labour market against themselves. But dearness
or cheapness of food, when of a permanent character, and capable of
being calculated on beforehand, may affect wages. In the first place, if
the labourers have, as is often the case, no more than enough to keep
them in working condition, and enable them barely to support the
ordinary number of children, it follows that if food grows permanently
dearer without a rise of wages, a greater number of the children will
prematurely die; and thus wages will ultimately be higher, but only
because the number of people will be smaller, than if food had remained
cheap. But, secondly, even though wages were high enough to admit of
food' becoming more costly without depriving the labourers and their
families of necessaries; though they could bear, physically speaking, to
be worse off, perhaps they would not consent to be so. They might have
habits of comfort which were to them as necessaries, and sooner than
forego which, they would put Edition: current; Page: [347] an additional
restraint on their power of multiplication; so that wages would rise,
not by increase of deaths but by diminution of births. In these cases,
then, wages do adapt themselves to the price of food, though after an
interval of almost a generation. Mr. Ricardo considers these two cases
to comprehend all cases. He assumes, that there is everywhere a minimum
rate of wages: either the lowest with which it is physically possible to
keep up the population, or the lowest with which the people will choose
to do so. To this minimum he assumes that the general rate of wages
always tends; that they can never be lower, beyond the length of time
required for a diminished rate of increase to make itself felt, and can
never long continue higher. This assumption contains sufficient truth to
render it admissible for the purposes of abstract science; and the
conclusion which Mr. Ricardo draws from it, namely, that wages in the
long run rise and fall with the permanent price of food, is, like almost
all his conclusions, true hypothetically, that is, granting the
suppositions from which he sets out. But in the application to practice,
it is necessary to consider that the minimum of which he speaks,
especially when it is not a physical, but what may be termed a moral
minimum, is itself liable to vary. If wages were previously so high that
they could bear reduction, to which the obstacle was a high standard of
comfort habitual among the labourers, a rise in the price of food, or
any other disadvantageous change in their circumstances, may operate in
two ways: it may correct itself by a rise of wages brought about through
a gradual effect on the prudential check to population; or it may
permanently lower the standard of living of the class, in case their
previous habits in respect of population prove stronger than their
previous habits in respect of comfort. In that case the injury done to
them will be permanent, and their deteriorated condition will become a
new minimum, tending to perpetuate itself as the more ample minimum did
before. It is to be feared that of the two modes in which the cause may
operate, the last is the most frequent, or at all events sufficiently
so, to render all propositions ascribing a self-repairing quality to the
calamities which befal the labouring classes, practically of no
validity. There is considerable evidence that the circumstances of the
agricultural labourers in England have more than once in our history
sustained great permanent deterioration, from causes which operated by
diminishing the demand for labour, and which, if population had
exercised its power of self-adjustment in obedience to the previous
standard of comfort, could only have had a temporary effect: but
Edition: current; Page: [348] unhappily the poverty in which the class
was plunged during a long series of years brought that previous standard
into disuse; and the next generation, growing up without having
possessed those pristine comforts, multiplied in turn without any
attempt to retrieve them.∗.

The converse case occur when, by improvements in agriculture, the repeal
of corn laws, or other such causes, the necessaries of the labourers are
cheapened, and they are enabled, with the same wages, to command greater
comforts than before. Wages will not fall immediately; it is even
possible that they may rise; but they will fall at last, so as to leave
the labourers no better off than before, unless during this interval of
prosperity the standard of comfort regarded as indispensable by the
class, is permanently raised. Unfortunately this salutary effect is by
no means to be counted upon; it is a much more difficult thing to raise,
than to lower, the scale of living which the labourer will consider as
more indispensable than marrying and having a family. If they content
themselves with enjoying the greater comfort while it lasts, but do not
learn to require it, they will people down to their old scale of living.
If from poverty their children had previously been insufficiently fed or
improperly nursed, a greater number will now be reared, and the
competition of these, when they grow up, will depress wages, probably in
full proportion to the greater cheapness of food. If the effect is not
produced in this mode, it will be produced by earlier and more numerous
marriages, or by an increased number of births to a marriage. According
to all experience, a great increase invariably takes place in the number
of marriages, in seasons of cheap food and full employment. I cannot,
therefore, agree in the importance so often attached to the repeal of
the corn laws, considered merely as a labourers' question, or to any of
the schemes, of which some one or other is at all times in vogue, for
making the labourers a very little better off. Things which only affect
them a very little, make no permanent impression upon their habits and
requirements, and they soon slide back into their former state. To
produce permanent advantage, the temporary cause operating upon them
must be sufficient to make a great change in their condition—a change
such as will be felt for many years, notwithstanding any stimulus which
it may Edition: current; Page: [349] give during one generation to the
increase of people. When, indeed, the improvement is of this signal
character, and a generation grows up which has always been used to an
improved scale of comfort, the habits of this new generation in respect
to population become formed upon a higher minimum, and the improvement
in their condition becomes permanent. Of cases in point, the most
remarkable is France after the Revolution. The majority of the
population being suddenly raised from misery, to independence and
comparative comfort; the immediate effect was that population,
notwithstanding the destructive wars of the period, started forward with
unexampled rapidity, partly because improved circumstances enabled many
children to be reared who would otherwise have died, and partly from
increase of births. The succeeding generation however grew up with
habits considerably altered; and though the country was never before in
so prosperous a state, the annual number of births is now nearly
stationary,∗. and the increase of population extremely slow.†.

§ 3. Wages depend, then, on the proportion between the number of the
labouring population, and the capital or other funds devoted to the
purchase of labour; we will say, for shortness, the capital. If wages
are higher at one time or place than at another, if the subsistence and
comfort of the class of hired labourers are more ample, it is for no
other reason than because capital bears a greater proportion to
population. It is not the absolute amount of accumulation Edition:
current; Page: [350] or of production, that is of importance to the
labouring class; it is not the amount even of the funds destined for
distribution among the labourers: it is the proportion between those
funds and the numbers among whom they are shared. The condition of the
class can be bettered in no other way than by altering that proportion
to their advantage; and every scheme for their benefit, which does not
proceed on this as its foundation, is, for all permanent purposes, a
delusion.

In countries like North America and the Australian colonies, where the
knowledge and arts of civilized life, and a high effective desire of
accumulation, co-exist with a boundless extent of unoccupied land, the
growth of capital easily keeps pace with the utmost possible increase of
population, and is chiefly retarded by the impracticability of obtaining
labourers enough. All, therefore, who can possibly be born, can find
employment without overstocking the market: every labouring family
enjoys in abundance the necessaries, many of the comforts, and some of
the luxuries of life; and, unless in case of individual misconduct, or
actual inability to work, poverty does not, and dependence need not,
exist. A similar advantage, though in a less degree, is occasionally
enjoyed by some special class of labourers in old countries, from an
extraordinarily rapid growth, not of capital generally, but of the
capital employed in a particular occupation. So gigantic has been the
progress of the cotton manufacture since the inventions of Watt and
Arkwright, that the capital engaged in it has probably quadrupled in the
time which population requires for doubling. While, therefore, it has
attracted from other employments nearly all the hands which geographical
circumstances and the habits or inclinations of the people rendered
available; and while the demand it created for infant labour has
enlisted the immediate pecuniary interest of the operatives in favour of
promoting, instead of restraining, the increase of population;
nevertheless wages in the great seats of the manufacture are generally
so high, that the collective earnings of a family amount, on an average
of years, to a very satisfactory sum; and there is, as yet, no sign of
permanent decrease, while the effect has also been felt in raising the
general standard of agricultural wages in the counties adjoining.

But those circumstances of a country, or of an occupation, in which
population can with impunity increase at its utmost rate, are rare, and
transitory. Very few are the countries presenting the needful union of
conditions. Either the industrial arts are backward Edition: current;
Page: [351] and stationary, and capital therefore increases slowly; or
the effective desire of accumulation being low, the increase soon
reaches its limit; or, even though both these elements are at their
highest known degree, the increase of capital is checked, because there
is not fresh land to be resorted to, of as good quality as that already
occupied. Though capital should for a time double itself simultaneously
with population, if all this capital and population are to find
employment on the same land, they cannot without an unexampled
succession of agricultural inventions continue doubling the produce;
therefore, if wages do not fall, profits must; and when profits fall,
increase of capital is slackened. Besides, even if wages did not fall,
the price of food (as will be shown more fully hereafter) would in these
circumstances necessarily rise; which is equivalent to a fall of wages.

Except, therefore, in the very peculiar cases which I have just noticed,
of which the only one of any practical importance is that of a new
colony, or a country in circumstances equivalent to it; it is impossible
that population should increase at its utmost rate without lowering
wages. Nor will the fall be stopped at any point, short of that which
either by its physical or its moral operation, checks the increase of
population. In no old country, therefore, does population increase at
anything like its utmost rate; in most, at a very moderate rate: in some
countries, not at all. These facts are only to be accounted for in two
ways. Either the whole number of births which nature admits of, and
which happen in some circumstances, do not take place; or if they do, a
large proportion of those who are born, die. The retardation of increase
results either from mortality or prudence; from Mr. Malthus' positive,
or from his preventive check: and one or the other of these must and
does exist, and very powerfully too, in all old societies. Wherever
population is not kept down by the prudence either of individuals or of
the state, it is kept down by starvation or disease.

Mr. Malthus has taken great pains to ascertain, for almost every country
in the world, which of these checks it is that operates; and the
evidence which he collected on the subject, in his Essay on Population,
may even now be read with advantage. Throughout Asia, and formerly in
most European countries in which the labouring classes were not in
personal bondage, there is, or was, no restrainer of population but
death. The mortality was not always the result of poverty: much of it
proceeded from unskilful and careless management of children, from
uncleanly and otherwise unhealthy habits Edition: current; Page: [352]
of life among the adult population, and from the almost periodical
occurrence of destructive epidemics. Throughout Europe these causes of
shortened life have much diminished, but they have not ceased to exist.
Until a period not very remote,1. hardly any of our large towns kept up
its population, independently of the stream always flowing into them
from the rural districts: this was still true of Liverpool until very
recently; and even in London, the mortality is larger, and the average
duration of life shorter, than in rural districts where there is much
greater poverty. In Ireland, epidemic fevers, and deaths from the
exhaustion of the constitution by insufficient nutriment, have always
accompanied even the most moderate deficiency of the potato crop.
Nevertheless, it cannot now be said that in any part of Europe,
population is principally kept down by disease, still less by
starvation, either in a direct or in an indirect form. The agency by
which it is limited is chiefly preventive, not (in the language of Mr.
Malthus) positive. But the preventive remedy seldom, I believe, consists
in the unaided operation of prudential motives on a class wholly or
mainly composed of labourers for hire, and looking forward to no other
lot. In England, for example, I much doubt if the generality of
agricultural labourers practise any prudential restraint whatever. They
generally marry as early, and have as many children to a marriage, as
they would or could do if they were settlers in the United States.
During the generation which preceded the enactment of the present Poor
Law, they received the most direct encouragement to this sort of
improvidence: being not only assured of support, on easy terms, whenever
out of employment, but, even when in employment, very commonly receiving
from the parish a weekly allowance proportioned to their number of
children; and the married with large families being always, from a
short-sighted economy, employed in preference to the unmarried; which
last premium on population still exists. Under such prompting, the rural
labourers acquired habits of recklessness, which are so congenial to the
uncultivated mind that in whatever manner produced, they in general long
survive their immediate causes. There are so many new elements at work
in society, even in those deeper strata which are inaccessible to the
mere movements on the surface, that it is hazardous to affirm anything
positive on the mental state or practical impulses of classes and bodies
of men, when the same assertion may be true to-day, and may require
great modification in a few years time. It does, however, Edition:
current; Page: [353] seem, that if the rate of increase of population
depended solely on the agricultural labourers, it would, as far as
dependent on births, and unless repressed by deaths, be as rapid in the
southern counties of England as in America. The restraining principle
lies in the very great proportion of the population composed of the
middle classes and the skilled artizans, who in this country almost
equal in number the common labourers, and on whom prudential motives do,
in a considerable degree, operate.

§ 4. Where a labouring class who have no property but their daily wages,
and no hope of acquiring it, refrain from over-rapid multiplication, the
cause, I believe, has always hitherto been, either actual legal
restraint, or a custom of some sort, which, without intention on their
part, insensibly moulds the conduct, or affords immediate inducements
not to marry. It is not generally known in how many countries of Europe
direct legal obstacles are opposed to improvident marriages. The
communications made to the original Poor Law Commission by our foreign
ministers and consuls in different parts of Europe, contain a
considerable amount of information on this subject. Mr. Senior, in his
preface to those communications,∗. says that in the countries which
recognise a legal right to relief, “marriage on the part of persons in
the actual receipt of relief appears to be everywhere prohibited, and
the marriage of those who are not likely to possess the means of
independent support is allowed by very few. Thus we are told that in
Norway no one can marry without ‘howing to the satisfaction of the
clergyman, that he is permanently settled in such a manner as to offer a
fair prospect that he can maintain a family.’

“In Mecklenburg, that ‘marriages are delayed by conscription in the
twenty-second year, and military service for six years; besides, the
parties must have a dwelling, without which a clergyman is not permitted
to marry them. The men marry at from twenty-five to thirty, the women
not much earlier, as both must first gain by service enough to establish
themselves.’

“In Saxony, that ‘a man may not marry before he is twenty-one years old,
if liable to serve in the army. In Dresden, professionists (by which
words artizans are probably meant) may not marry until they become
masters in their trade.’

“In Wurtemburg, that ‘no man is allowed to marry till his Edition:
current; Page: [354] twenty-fifth year, on account of his military
duties, unless permission be especially obtained or purchased: at that
age he must also obtain permission, which is granted on proving that he
and his wife would have together sufficient to maintain a family or to
establish themselves; in large towns, say from 800 to 1000 florins (from
66l. 13s. 4d. to 84l. 3s. 4d.); in smaller, from 400 to 500 florins; in
villages, 200 florins (16l. 13s. 4d.)’  ”∗.

The minister at Munich says, “The great cause why the number of the poor
is kept so low in this country arises from the prevention by law of
marriages in cases in which it cannot be proved that the parties have
reasonable means of subsistence; and this regulation is in all places
and at all times strictly adhered to. The effect of a constant and firm
observance of this rule has, it is true, a considerable influence in
keeping down the population of Bavaria, which is at present low for the
extent of country, but it has a most salutary effect in averting extreme
poverty and consequent misery.”†.

At Lubeck, “marriages among the poor are delayed by the necessity a man
is under, first, of previously proving that he is in a regular employ,
work, or profession, that will enable him to maintain a wife: and
secondly, of becoming a burgher, and equipping himself in the uniform of
the burgher guard, which together may cost him nearly 4l.”‡. At
Frankfort, “the government prescribes no age for marrying, but the
permission to marry is only granted on proving a livelihood.”§.

The allusion, in some of these statements, to military duties, points
out an indirect obstacle to marriage, interposed by the laws of some
countries in which there is no direct legal restraint. In Prussia, for
instance, the institutions which compel every able-bodied man to serve
for several years in the army, at the time of life at which imprudent
marriages are most likely to take place, are probably a full equivalent,
in effect on population, for the legal restrictions of the smaller
German states.

1. “So strongly,” says Mr. Kay, “do the people of Switzerland understand
from experience the expediency of their sons and daughters postponing
the time of their marriages, that the councils of state of four or five
of the most democratic of the cantons, elected, be it remembered, by
universal suffrage, have passed laws by which all young persons who
marry before they have proved to the Edition: current; Page: [355]
magistrate of their district that they are able to support a family, are
rendered liable to a heavy fine. In Lucerne, Argovie, Unterwalden, and,
I believe, St. Gall, Schweitz, and Uri, laws of this character have been
in force for many years.”∗.

§ 5. Where there is no general law restrictive of marriage, there are
often customs equivalent to it. When the guilds or trade corporations of
the Middle Ages were in vigour, their bye-laws or regulations were
conceived with a very vigilant eye to the advantage which the trade
derived from limiting competition: and they made it very effectually the
interest of artizans not to marry until after passing through the two
stages of apprentice and journeyman, and attaining the rank of master.†.
In Norway, where the labour is Edition: current; Page: [356] chiefly
agricultural, it is [1848] forbidden by law to engage a farm-servant for
less than a year; which was the general English practice until the
poor-laws destroyed it, by enabling the farmer to cast his labourers on
parish pay whenever he did not immediately require their labour. In
consequence of this custom, and of its enforcement by law, the whole of
the rather limited class of agricultural labourers in Norway have an
engagement for a year at least, which, if the parties are content with
one another, naturally becomes a permanent engagement: hence it is known
in every neighbourhood whether there is, or is likely to be, a vacancy,
and unless there is, a young man does not marry, knowing that he could
not obtain employment. The custom still [1848] exists in Cumberland and
Westmoreland, except that the term is half a year instead of a year; and
seems to be still attended with the same consequences. The farm-servants
“are lodged and boarded in their masters” houses, which they seldom
leave until, through the death of some relation or neighbour, they
succeed to the ownership or lease of a cottage farm. What is called
surplus labour does not here exist.”∗. I have mentioned in another
chapter the check to population in England during the last century, from
the difficulty of obtaining a separate dwelling place.†. Other customs
restrictive of population might be specified: in some parts of Italy, it
is the practice, according to Sismondi, among the poor, as it is well
known to be in the higher ranks, that all but one of the sons remain
unmarried. But such family arrangements are not likely to exist among
day-labourers. They are the resource of small proprietors and metayers,
for preventing too minute a subdivision of the land.

In England generally there is now scarcely a relic of these indirect
checks to population; except that in parishes owned by one or a very
small number of landowners, the increase of resident labourers is still
occasionally obstructed, by preventing cottages from being built, or by
pulling down those which exist; thus restraining the population liable
to become locally chargeable, without any material effect on population
generally, the work required in those parishes being performed by
labourers settled elsewhere. The surrounding districts always feel
themselves much aggrieved by this practice, against which they cannot
defend themselves by similar means, Edition: current; Page: [357] since
a single acre of land owned by any one who does not enter into the
combination, enables him to defeat the attempt, very profitably to
himself, by covering that acre with cottages. To meet these complaints
an Act has within the last few years been passed by Parliament, by which
the poor-rate is made a charge not on the parish, but on the whole
union.1. This enactment, in other respects very beneficial, removes the
small remnant of what was once a check to population: the value of
which, however, from the narrow limits of its operation, had become very
trifling.

§ 6. In the case, therefore, of the common agricultural labourer, the
checks to population may almost be considered as non-existent. If the
growth of the towns, and of the capital there employed, by which the
factory operatives are maintained at their present average rate of wages
notwithstanding their rapid increase, did not also absorb a great part
of the annual addition to the rural population, there seems no reason in
the present habits of the people why they should not fall into as
miserable a condition as the Irish previous to 1846; and if the market
for our manufactures should, I do not say fall off, but even cease to
expand at the rapid rate of the last fifty years, there is no certainty
that this fate may not be reserved for us.2. Without carrying our
anticipations forward to such a calamity, which the great and growing
intelligence of the factory population would, it may be hoped, avert, by
an adaptation of their habits to their circumstances; the existing
condition of the labourers of some of the most exclusively agricultural
counties, Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, Bedfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, is sufficiently painful to contemplate. The labourers
of these counties, with large families, and eight or perhaps nine
shillings3. for their weekly wages when in full employment, have for
some time been one of the stock objects of popular compassion: it is
time that they had the benefit also of some application of common sense.

Unhappily, sentimentality rather than common sense usually presides over
the discussion of these subjects; and while there is a growing
sensitiveness to the hardships of the poor, and a ready Edition:
current; Page: [358] disposition to admit claims in them upon the good
offices of other people, there is an all but universal unwillingness to
face the real difficulty of their position, or advert at all to the
conditions which nature has made indispensable to the improvement of
their physical lot. Discussions on the condition of the labourers,
lamentations over its wretchedness, denunciations of all who are
supposed to be indifferent to it, projects of one kind or another for
improving it, were in no country and in no time of the world so rife as
in the present generation; but there is a tacit agreement to ignore
totally the law of wages, or to dismiss it in a parenthesis, with such
terms as “hardhearted Malthusianism;” as if it were not a thousand times
more hardhearted to tell human beings that they may, than that they may
not, call into existence swarms of creatures who are sure to be
miserable, and most likely to be depraved; and forgetting that the
conduct, which it is reckoned so cruel to disapprove, is a degrading
slavery to a brute instinct in one of the persons concerned, and most
commonly, in the other, helpless submission to a revolting abuse of
power.1.

So long as mankind remained in a semi-barbarous state, with the
indolence and the few wants of a savage, it probably was not desirable
that population should be restrained; the pressure of physical want may
have been a necessary stimulus, in that stage of the human mind, to the
exertion of labour and ingenuity required for accomplishing that
greatest of all past changes in human modes of existence, by which
industrial life attained predominance over the hunting, the pastoral,
and the military or predatory state. Want, in that age of the world, had
its uses, as even slavery had; and there may be corners of the earth
where those uses are not yet superseded, though they might easily be so
were a helping hand held out by more civilized communities. But in
Europe the time, if it ever existed, is long past, when a life of
privation had the smallest tendency to make men either better workmen or
more civilized beings. It is, on the contrary, evident, that if the
agricultural labourers were better off, they would both work more
efficiently, and be better citizens. I ask, then, is it true, or not,
that if their numbers were fewer they would obtain higher wages? This is
the question, and no other: and it is idle to divert attention from it,
by Edition: current; Page: [359] attacking any incidental position of
Malthus or some other writer, and pretending that to refute that, is to
disprove the principle of population. Some, for instance, have achieved
an easy victory over a passing remark of Mr. Malthus, hazarded chiefly
by way of illustration, that the increase of food may perhaps be assumed
to take place in an arithmetical ratio, while population increases in a
geometrical: when every candid reader knows that Mr. Malthus laid no
stress on this unlucky attempt to give numerical precision to things
which do not admit of it, and every person capable of reasoning must see
that it is wholly superfluous to his argument. Others have attached
immense importance to a correction which more recent political
economists have made in the mere language of the earlier followers of
Mr. Malthus. Several writers had said that it is the tendency of
population to increase faster than the means of subsistence. The
assertion was true in the sense in which they meant it, namely, that
population would in most circumstances increase faster than the means of
subsistence, if it were not checked either by mortality or by prudence.
But inasmuch as these checks act with unequal force at different times
and places, it was possible to interpret the language of these writers
as if they had meant that population is usually gaining ground upon
subsistence, and the poverty of the people becoming greater. Under this
interpretation of their meaning, it was urged that the reverse is the
truth: that as civilization advances, the prudential check tends to
become stronger, and population to slacken its rate of increase,
relatively to subsistence; and that it is an error to maintain that
population, in any improving community, tends to increase faster than,
or even so fast as, subsistence. The word tendency is here used in a
totally different sense from that of the writers who affirmed the
proposition: but waving the verbal question, is it not allowed on both
sides, that in old countries, population presses too closely upon the
means of subsistence? And though its pressure diminishes, the more the
ideas and habits of the poorest class of labourers can be improved, to
which it is to be hoped that there is always some tendency in a
progressive country, yet since that tendency has hitherto been, and
still is, extremely faint, and (to descend to particulars) has not yet
extended to giving to the Wiltshire labourers higher wages than eight
shillings a week, the only thing which it is necessary to consider is,
whether that is a sufficient and suitable provision for a labourer? for
if not, population does, as an existing fact, bear too great a
proportion to the wages-fund; Edition: current; Page: [360] and whether
it pressed still harder or not quite so hard at some former period, is
practically of no moment, except that, if the ratio is an improving one,
there is the better hope that by proper aids and encouragements it may
be made to improve more and faster.

It is not, however, against reason, that the argument on this subject
has to struggle; but against a feeling of dislike, which will only
reconcile itself to the unwelcome truth, when every device is exhausted
by which the recognition of that truth can be evaded. It is necessary,
therefore, to enter into a detailed examination of these devices, and to
force every position which is taken up by the enemies of the population
principle in their determination to find some refuge for the labourers,
some plausible means of improving their condition, without requiring the
exercise, either enforced or voluntary, of any self-restraint, or any
greater control than at present over the animal power of multiplication.
This will be the object of the next chapter.1.

Edition: current; Page: [361]


CHAPTER XII.: of Popular Remedies for Low Wages

§ 1. The simplest expedient which can be imagined for keeping the wages
of labour up to the desirable point, would be to fix them by law: and
this is virtually the object aimed at in a variety of plans which have
at different times been, or still are, current, for remodelling the
relation between labourers and employers. No one probably ever suggested
that wages should be absolutely fixed; since the interests of all
concerned, often require that they should be variable: but some have
proposed to fix a minimum of wages, leaving the variations above that
point to be adjusted by competition. Another plan which has found many
advocates among the leaders of the operatives, is that councils should
be formed, which in England have been called local boards of trade, in
France “conseils de prud'hommes,” and other names; consisting of
delegates from the workpeople and from the employers, who, meeting in
conference, should agree upon a rate of wages, and promulgate it from
authority, to be binding generally on employers and workmen; the ground
of decision being, not the state of the labour-market, but natural
equity; to provide that the workmen shall have reasonable wages and the
capitalist reasonable profits.

Others again (but these are rather philanthropists interesting
themselves for the labouring classes, than the labouring people
themselves) are shy of admitting the interference of authority in
contracts for labour: they fear that if law intervened, it would
intervene rashly and ignorantly; they are convinced that two parties,
with opposite interests, attempting to adjust those interests by
negotiation through their representatives on principles of equity, when
no rule could be laid down to determine what was equitable, would merely
exasperate their differences instead of healing them; but what it is
useless to attempt by the legal sanction, these persons desire to
compass by the moral. Every employer, they think, ought to give
sufficient wages; and if he does it not willingly, should Edition:
current; Page: [362] be compelled to it by general opinion; the test of
sufficient wages being their own feelings, or what they suppose to be
those of the public. This is, I think, a fair representation of a
considerable body of existing opinion on the subject.

I desire to confine my remarks to the principle involved in all these
suggestions, without taking into account practical difficulties, serious
as these must at once be seen to be. I shall suppose that by one or
other of these contrivances, wages could be kept above the point to
which they would be brought by competition. This is as much as to say,
above the highest rate which can be afforded by the existing capital
consistently with employing all the labourers. For it is a mistake to
suppose that competition merely keeps down wages. It is equally the
means by which they are kept up. When there are any labourers
unemployed, these, unless maintained by charity, become competitors for
hire, and wages fall; but when all who were out of work have found
employment, wages will not, under the freest system of competition, fall
lower. There are strange notions afloat concerning the nature of
competition. Some people seem to imagine that its effect is something
indefinite; that the competition of sellers may lower prices, and the
competition of labourers may lower wages, down to zero, or some
unassignable minimum. Nothing can be more unfounded. Goods can only be
lowered in price by competition, to the point which calls forth buyers
sufficient to take them off; and wages can only be lowered by
competition until room is made to admit all the labourers to a share in
the distribution of the wages-fund. If they fell below this point, a
portion of capital would remain unemployed for want of labourers; a
counter-competition would commence on the side of capitalists, and wages
would rise.

Since, therefore, the rate of wages which results from competition
distributes the whole existing wages-fund among the whole labouring
population; if law or opinion succeeds in fixing wages above this rate,
some labourers are kept out of employment; and as it is not the
intention of the philanthropists that these should starve, they must be
provided for by a forced increase of the wages-fund; by a compulsory
saving. It is nothing to fix a minimum of wages, unless there be a
provision that work, or wages at least, be found for all who apply for
it. This, accordingly, is always part of the scheme; and is consistent
with the ideas of more people than would approve of either a legal or a
moral minimum of wages. Popular sentiment looks upon it as the duty of
the rich, or of the state, to find employ Edition: current; Page: [363]
ment for all the poor. If the moral influence of opinion does not induce
the rich to spare from their consumption enough to set all the poor to
work at “reasonable wages,” it is supposed to be incumbent on the state
to lay on taxes for the purpose, either by local rates or votes of
public money. The proportion between labour and the wages-fund would
thus be modified to the advantage of the labourers, not by restriction
of population, but by an increase of capital.

§ 2. If this claim on society could be limited to the existing
generation; if nothing more were necessary than a compulsory
accumulation, sufficient to provide permanent employment at ample wages
for the existing numbers of the people; such a proposition would have no
more strenuous supporter than myself. Society mainly consists of those
who live by bodily labour; and if society, that is, if the labourers,
lend their physical force to protect individuals in the enjoyment of
superfluities, they are entitled to do so, and have always done so, with
the reservation of a power to tax those superfluities for purposes of
public utility; among which purposes the subsistence of the people is
the foremost. Since no one is responsible for having been born, no
pecuniary sacrifice is too great to be made by those who have more than
enough, for the purpose of securing enough to all persons already in
existence.

But it is another thing altogether, when those who have produced and
accumulated are called upon to abstain from consuming until they have
given food and clothing, not only to all who now exist, but to all whom
these or their descendants may think fit to call into existence. Such an
obligation acknowledged and acted upon, would suspend all checks, both
positive and preventive; there would be nothing to hinder population
from starting forward at its rapidest rate; and as the natural increase
of capital would, at the best, not be more rapid than before, taxation,
to make up the growing deficiency, must advance with the same gigantic
strides. The attempt would of course be made to exact labour in exchange
for support. But experience has shown the sort of work to be expected
from recipients of public charity. When the pay is not given for the
sake of the work, but the work found for the sake of the pay,
inefficiency is a matter of certainty: to extract real work from
day-labourers without the power of dismissal, is only practicable by the
power of the lash. It is conceivable,1. doubtless, that this objection
might be Edition: current; Page: [364] got over. The fund raised by
taxation might be spread over the labour market generally, as seems to
be intended by the supporters of the droit au travail in France; without
giving to any unemployed labourer a right to demand support in a
particular place or from a particular functionary. The power of
dismissal as regards individual labourers, would then remain; the
government only undertaking to create additional employment when there
was a deficiency, and reserving, like other employers, the choice of its
own workpeople. But let them work ever so efficiently, the increasing
population could not, as we have so often shown, increase the produce
proportionally: the surplus, after all were fed, would bear a less and
less proportion to the whole produce, and to the population: and the
increase of people going on in a constant ratio, while the increase of
produce went on in a diminishing ratio, the surplus would in time be
wholly absorbed; taxation for the support of the poor would engross the
whole income of the country; the payers and the receivers would be
melted down into one mass. The check to population either by death or
prudence, could not then be staved off any longer, but must come into
operation suddenly and at once; everything which places mankind above a
nest of ants or a colony of beavers, having perished in the interval.

These consequences have been so often and so clearly pointed out by
authors of reputation, in writings known and accessible, that ignorance
of them on the part of educated persons is no longer pardonable. It is
doubly discreditable in any person setting up for a public teacher, to
ignore these considerations; to dismiss them silently, and discuss or
declaim on wages and poor-laws, not as if these arguments could be
refuted, but as if they did not exist.

Every one has a right to live. We will suppose this granted. But no one
has a right to bring creatures into life, to be supported by other
people. Whoever means to stand upon the first of these rights must
renounce all pretension to the last. If a man cannot support even
himself unless others help him, those others are entitled to say that
they do not also undertake the support of any offspring which it is
physically possible for him to summon into the world. Yet there are
abundance of writers and public speakers, including many of most
ostentatious pretensions to high feeling, whose views of life are so
truly brutish, that they see hardship in preventing paupers from
breeding hereditary paupers in the workhouse itself. Posterity will one
day ask with astonishment, what sort of people it could be among whom
such preachers could find proselytes.

Edition: current; Page: [365]
It would be possible for the state to guarantee employment at ample
wages to all who are born. But if it does this, it is bound in
self-protection, and for the sake of every purpose for which government
exists, to provide that no person shall be born without its consent. If
the ordinary and spontaneous motives to self-restraint are removed,
others must be substituted. Restrictions on marriage, at least
equivalent to those existing [1848] in some of the German states, or
severe penalties on those who have children when unable to support them,
would then be indispensable. Society can feed the necessitous, if it
takes their multiplication under its control; or (if destitute of all
moral feeling for the wretched offspring) it can leave the last to their
discretion, abandoning the first to their own care. But it cannot with
impunity take the feeding upon itself, and leave the multiplying free.

To give profusely to the people, whether under the name of charity or of
employment, without placing them under such influences that prudential
motives shall act powerfully upon them, is to lavish the means of
benefiting mankind, without attaining the object. Leave the people in a
situation in which their condition manifestly depends upon their
numbers, and the greatest permanent benefit may be derived from any
sacrifice made to improve the physical well-being of the present
generation, and raise, by that means, the habits of their children. But
remove the regulation of their wages from their own control; guarantee
to them a certain payment, either by law, or by the feeling of the
community; and no amount of comfort that you can give them will make
either them or their descendants look to their own self-restraint as the
proper means of preserving them in that state. You will only make them
indignantly claim the continuance of your guarantee, to themselves and
their full complement of possible posterity.

On these grounds some writers have altogether condemned the English
poor-law, and any system of relief to the able-bodied, at least when
uncombined with systematic legal precautions against over-population.
The famous Act of the 43rd of Elizabeth undertook, on the part of the
public, to provide work and wages for all the destitute able-bodied: and
there is little doubt that if the intent of that Act had been fully
carried out, and no means had been adopted by the administrators of
relief to neutralize its natural tendencies, the poor-rate would by this
time have absorbed the whole net produce of the land and labour of the
country. It is not at all surprising, therefore, that Mr. Malthus and
others should at Edition: current; Page: [366] first have concluded
against all poor-laws whatever. It required much experience, and careful
examination of different modes of poor-law management, to give assurance
that the admission of an absolute right to be supported at the cost of
other people, could exist in law and in fact, without fatally relaxing
the springs of industry and the restraints of prudence. This, however,
was fully substantiated, by the investigations of the original Poor Law
Commissioners. Hostile as they are unjustly accused of being to the
principle of legal relief, they are the first who fully proved the
compatibility of any Poor Law, in which a right to relief was
recognised, with the permanent interests of the labouring class and of
posterity. By a collection of facts, experimentally ascertained in
parishes scattered throughout England, it was shown that the guarantee
of support could be freed from its injurious effects upon the minds and
habits of the people, if the relief, though ample in respect to
necessaries, was accompanied with conditions which they disliked,
consisting of some restraints on their freedom, and the privation of
some indulgences. Under this proviso, it may be regarded as irrevocably
established, that the fate of no member of the community needs be
abandoned to chance; that society can and therefore ought to insure
every individual belonging to it against the extreme of want; that the
condition even of those who are unable to find their own support, needs
not be one of physical suffering, or the dread of it, but only of
restricted indulgence, and enforced rigidity of discipline. This is
surely something gained for humanity, important in itself, and still
more so as a step to something beyond; and humanity has no worse enemies
than those who lend themselves, either knowingly or unintentionally, to
bring odium on this law, or on the principles in which it originated.

§ 3. Next to the attempts to regulate wages, and provide artificially
that all who are willing to work shall receive an adequate price for
their labour, we have to consider another class of popular remedies,
which do not profess to interfere with freedom of contract; which leave
wages to be fixed by the competition of the market, but, when they are
considered insufficient, endeavour by some subsidiary resource to make
up to the labourers for the insufficiency. Of this nature was the
expedient resorted to by parish authorities during thirty or forty years
previous to 1834, generally known as the Allowance System. This was
first introduced, when, through a succession of bad seasons, and
consequent high prices of food, the Edition: current; Page: [367] wages
of labour had become inadequate to afford to the families of the
agricultural labourers the amount of support to which they had been
accustomed. Sentiments of humanity, joined with the idea then inculcated
in high quarters, that people ought not to be allowed to suffer for
having enriched their country with a multitude of inhabitants, induced
the magistrates of the rural districts to commence giving parish relief
to persons already in private employment: and when the practice had once
been sanctioned, the immediate interest of the farmers, whom it enabled
to throw part of the support of their labourers upon the other
inhabitants of the parish, led to a great and rapid extension of it. The
principle of this scheme being avowedly that of adapting the means of
every family to its necessities, it was a natural consequence that more
should be given to the married than to the single, and to those who had
large families than to those who had not: in fact, an allowance was
usually granted for every child. So direct and positive an encouragement
to population is not, however, inseparable from the scheme: the
allowance in aid of wages might be a fixed thing, given to all labourers
alike, and as this is the least objectionable form which the system can
assume, we will give it the benefit of the supposition.

It is obvious that this is merely another mode of fixing a minimum of
wages; no otherwise differing from the direct mode, than in allowing the
employer to buy the labour at its market price, the difference being
made up to the labourer from a public fund. The one kind of guarantee is
open to all the objections which have been urged against the other. It
promises to the labourers that they shall all have a certain amount of
wages, however numerous they may be: and removes, therefore, alike the
positive and the prudential obstacles to an unlimited increase. But
besides the objections common to all attempts to regulate wages without
regulating population, the allowance system has a peculiar absurdity of
its own. This is, that it inevitably takes from wages with one hand what
it adds to them with the other. There is a rate of wages, either the
lowest on which the people can, or the lowest on which they will
consent, to live. We will suppose this to be seven shillings a week.
Shocked at the wretchedness of this pittance, the parish authorities
humanely make it up to ten. But the labourers are accustomed to seven,
and though they would gladly have more, will live on that (as the fact
proves) rather than restrain the instinct of multiplication. Their
habits will not be altered for the better by giving them parish pay.
Receiving three shillings from the parish, they will be as well off
Edition: current; Page: [368] as before though they should increase
sufficiently to bring down wages to four shillings. They will
accordingly people down to that point; or perhaps, without waiting for
an increase of numbers, there are unemployed labourers enough in the
workhouse to produce the effect at once. It is well known that the
allowance system did practically operate in the mode described, and that
under its influence wages sank to a lower rate than had been known in
England before. During the last century, under a rather rigid
administration of the poor-laws, population increased slowly, and
agricultural wages were considerably above the starvation point. Under
the allowance system the people increased so fast, and wages sank so
low, that with wages and allowance together, families were worse off
than they had been before with wages alone. When the labourer depends
solely on wages, there is a virtual minimum. If wages fall below the
lowest rate which will enable the population to be kept up, depopulation
at least restores them to that lowest rate. But if the deficiency is to
be made up by a forced contribution from all who have anything to give,
wages may fall below starvation point; they may fall almost to zero.
This deplorable system, worse than any other form of poor-law abuse yet
invented, inasmuch as it pauperizes not merely the unemployed part of
the population but the whole, received a severe check from the Poor Law
of 1834: I wish it could be said that there are no signs of its
revival.1.

§ 4. But while this is generally condemned, there is another mode of
relief in aid of wages, which is still highly popular; a mode greatly
preferable, morally and socially, to parish allowance, but tending, it
is to be feared, to a very similar economical result: I mean the
much-boasted Allotment System. This, too, is a contrivance to compensate
the labourer for the insufficiency of his wages, by giving him something
else as a supplement to them: but instead of having them made up from
the poor-rate, he is enabled to make them up for himself, by renting a
small piece of ground, which he cultivates like a garden by spade
labour, raising potatoes and other vegetables for home consumption, with
perhaps some additional quantity for sale. If he hires the ground ready
manured, he sometimes pays for it at as high a rate as eight pounds an
acre: but getting his own labour and that of his family for nothing, he
Edition: current; Page: [369] is able to gain several pounds by it even
at so high a rent.∗. The patrons of the system make it a great point
that the allotment shall be in aid of wages, and not a substitute for
them; that it shall not be such as a labourer can live on, but only
sufficient to occupy the spare hours and days of a man in tolerably
regular agricultural employment, with assistance from his wife and
children. They usually limit the extent of a single allotment to a
quarter, or something between a quarter and half an acre. If it exceeds
this, without being enough to occupy him entirely, it will make him,
they say, a bad and uncertain workman for hire: if it is sufficient to
take him entirely out of the class of hired labourers, and to become his
sole means of subsistence, it will make him an Irish cottier: for which
assertion, at the enormous rents usually demanded, there is some
foundation. But in their precautions against cottierism, these
well-meaning persons do not perceive, that if the system they patronize
is not a cottier system, it is, in essentials, neither more nor less
than a system of conacre.

There is no doubt a material difference between eking out insufficient
wages by a fund raised by taxation, and doing the same thing by means
which make a clear addition to the gross produce of the country. There
is also a difference between helping a labourer by means of his own
industry, and subsidizing him in a mode which tends to make him careless
and idle. On both these points, allotments have an unquestionable
advantage over parish allowances. But in their effect on wages and
population, I see no reason why the two plans should substantially
differ. All subsidies in aid of wages enable the labourer to do with
less remuneration, and therefore ultimately bring down the price of
labour by the full amount, unless a change be wrought in the ideas and
requirements of the labouring class; an alteration in the relative value
which they set upon the gratification of their instincts, and upon the
increase of their comforts and the comforts of those connected with
them. That any such change in their character should be produced by the
allotment system, appears to me a thing not to be expected. The
possession of land, we are sometimes told, renders the labourer
provident. Property in land does so; or what is equivalent to property,
occupation on fixed terms and on a permanent tenure. But mere hiring
from year to year was never found to have any such effect. Did
possession of land render the Edition: current; Page: [370] Irishman
provident? Testimonies, it is true, abound, and I do not seek to
discredit them, of the beneficial change produced in the conduct and
condition of labourers, by receiving allotments. Such an effect is to be
expected while those who hold them are a small number; a privileged
class, having a status above the common level, which they are unwilling
to lose. They are also, no doubt, almost always, originally a select
class, composed of the most favourable specimens of the labouring
people: which, however, is attended with the inconvenience that the
persons to whom the system facilitates marrying and having children, are
precisely those who would otherwise be the most likely to practise
prudential restraint. As affecting the general condition of the
labouring class, the scheme, as it seems to me, must be either nugatory
or mischievous. If only a few labourers have allotments, they are
naturally those who could do best without them, and no good is done to
the class: while, if the system were general, and every or almost every
labourer had an allotment, I believe the effect would be much the same
as when every or almost every labourer had an allowance in aid of wages.
I think there can be no doubt that if, at the end of the last century,
the Allotment instead of the Allowance system had been generally adopted
in England, it would equally have broken down at that time did really
exist; population would have started forward exactly as in fact it did;
and in twenty years, wages plus the allotment would have been, as wages
plus the allowance actually were, no more than equal to the former wages
without any allotment. The only difference in favour of allotments would
have been, that they make the people grow their own poor-rates.

I am at the same time quite ready to allow, that in some circumstances,
the possession of land at a fair rent, even without ownership, by the
generality of labourers for hire, operates as a cause not of low, but of
high wages. This, however, is when their land renders them, to the
extent of actual necessaries, independent of the market for labour.
There is the greatest difference between the position of people who live
by wages, with land as an extra resource, and of people who can, in case
of necessity, subsist entirely on their land, and only work for hire to
add to their comforts. Wages are likely to be high where none are
compelled by necessity to sell their labour. “People who have at home
some kind of property to apply their labour to, will not sell their
labour for wages that do not afford them a better diet than potatoes and
maize, although in saving for Edition: current; Page: [371] themselves,
they may live very much on potatoes and maize. We are often surprised in
travelling on the Continent, to hear of a rate of day' wages very high,
considering the abundance and cheapness of food. It is want of the
necessity or the inclination to take work, that makes day-labour scarce,
and, considering the price of provisions, dear, in many parts of the
Continent, where property in land is widely diffused among the
people.”∗. There are parts of the Continent, where, even of the
inhabitants of the towns, scarcely one seems to be exclusively dependent
on his ostensible employment; and nothing else can explain the high
price they put on their services, and the carelessness they evince as to
whether they are employed at all. But the effect would be far different
if their land or other resources gave them only a fraction of a
subsistence, leaving them under an undiminished necessity of selling
their labour for wages in an overstocked market. Their land would then
merely enable them to exist on smaller wages, and to carry their
multiplication so much the further before reaching the point below which
they either could not, or would not descend.

To the view I have taken of the effect of allotments, I see no argument
which can be opposed, but that employed by Mr. Thornton,†. with whom on
this subject I am at issue. His defence of allotments is grounded on the
general doctrine, that it is only the very poor who multiply without
regard to consequences, and that if the condition of the existing
generation could be greatly improved, which he thinks might be done by
the allotment system, their successors would grow up with an increased
standard of requirements, and would not have families until they could
keep them in as much comfort as that in which they had been brought up
themselves. I agree in as much of this argument as goes to prove that a
sudden and great improvement in the condition of the poor has always,
through its effect on their habits of life, a chance of becoming
permanent. What happened at the time of the French Revolution is an
example. But I cannot think that the addition of a quarter or even half
an acre to every labourer' cottage, and that too at a rack rent, would
(after the fall of wages which would be necessary to absorb the already
existing mass of pauper labour) make so great a difference in the
comforts of the family for a generation to come, as to raise up from
childhood a labouring population with a really higher permanent standard
of requirements and habits. So small a portion Edition: current; Page:
[372] of land could only be made a permanent benefit, by holding out
encouragement to acquire by industry and saving, the means of buying it
outright: a permission which, if extensively made use of, would be a
kind of education in forethought and frugality to the entire class, the
effects of which might not cease with the occasion. The benefit would
however arise, not from what was given them, but from what they were
stimulated to acquire.

No remedies for low wages have the smallest chance of being efficacious,
which do not operate on and through the minds and habits of the people.
While these are unaffected, any contrivance, even if successful, for
temporarily improving the condition of the very poor, would but let slip
the reins by which population was previously curbed; and could only,
therefore, continue to produce its effect, if, by the whip and spur of
taxation, capital were compelled to follow at an equally accelerated
pace. But this process could not possibly continue for long together,
and whenever it stopped, it would leave the country with an increased
number of the poorest class, and a diminished proportion of all except
the poorest, or, if it continued long enough, with none at all. For “to
this complexion must come at last” all social arrangements, which remove
the natural checks to population without substituting any others.

Edition: current; Page: [373]


CHAPTER XIII.: the remedies for low wages further considered

§ 1. By what means, then, is poverty to be contended against? How is the
evil of low wages to be remedied? If the expedients usually recommended
for the purpose are not adapted to it, can no others be thought of? Is
the problem incapable of solution? Can political economy do nothing, but
only object to everything, and demonstrate that nothing can be done?

If this were so, political economy might have a needful, but would have
a melancholy, and a thankless task. If the bulk of the human race are
always to remain as at present, slaves to toil in which they have no
interest, and therefore feel no interest—drudging from early morning
till late at night for bare necessaries, and with all the intellectual
and moral deficiencies which that implies—without resources either in
mind or feelings—untaught, for they cannot be better taught than fed;
selfish, for all their thoughts are required for themselves; without
interests or sentiments as citizens and members of society, and with a
sense of injustice rankling in their minds, equally for what they have
not, and for what others have; I know not what there is which should
make a person with any capacity of reason, concern himself about the
destinies of the human race. There would be no wisdom for any one but in
extracting from life, with Epicurean indifference, as much personal
satisfaction to himself and those with whom he sympathises, as it can
yield without injury to any one, and letting the unmeaning bustle of
so-called civilized existence roll by unheeded. But there is no ground
for such a view of human affairs. Poverty, like most social evils,
exists because men follow their brute instincts without due
consideration. But society is possible, precisely because man is not
necessarily a brute. Civilization in every one of its aspects is a
struggle against the animal instincts. Over some even of the strongest
of them, it has shown itself capable of acquiring Edition: current;
Page: [374] abundant control. It has artificialized large portions of
mankind to such an extent, that of many of their most natural
inclinations they have scarcely a vestige or a remembrance left. If it
has not brought the instinct of population under as much restraint as is
needful, we must remember that it has never seriously tried. What
efforts it has made, have mostly been in the contrary direction.
Religion, morality, and statesmanship have vied with one another in
incitements to marriage, and to the multiplication of the species, so it
be but in wedlock. Religion has not even yet discontinued its
encouragements. The Roman Catholic clergy (of any other clergy it is
unnecessary to speak, since no other have any considerable influence
over the poorer classes) everywhere think it their duty to promote
marriage, in order to prevent fornication. There is still in many minds
a strong religious prejudice against the true doctrine. The rich,
provided the consequences do not touch themselves, think it impugns the
wisdom of Providence to suppose that misery can result from the
operation of a natural propensity: the poor think that “God never sends
mouths but he sends meat.” No one would guess from the language of
either, that man had any voice or choice in the matter. So complete is
the confusion of ideas on the whole subject; owing in a great degree to
the mystery in which it is shrouded by a spurious delicacy, which prefer
that right and wrong should be mismeasured and confounded on one of the
subjects most momentous to human welfare, rather than that the subject
be freely spoken of and discussed. People are little aware of the cost
to mankind of this scrupulosity of speech. The diseases of society can,
no more than corporal maladies, be prevented or cured without being
spoken about in plain language. All experience shows that the mass of
mankind never judge of moral questions for themselves, never see
anything to be right or wrong until they have been frequently told it;
and who tells them that they have any duties in the matter in question,
while they keep within matrimonial limits? Who meets with the smallest
condemnation, or rather, who does not meet with sympathy and
benevolence, for any amount of evil which he may have brought upon
himself and those dependent on him, by this species of incontinence?
While a man who is intemperate in drink, is discountenanced and despised
by all who profess to be moral people,1. it is one of the chief grounds
Edition: current; Page: [375] made use of in appeals to the benevolent,
that the applicant has a large family and is unable to maintain them.∗.

One cannot wonder that silence on this great department of human duty
should produce unconsciousness of moral obligations, when it produces
oblivion of physical facts. That it is possible to delay marriage, and
to live in abstinence while unmarried, most people are willing to allow;
but when persons are once married, the idea, in this country, never
seems to enter any one' mind that having or not having a family, or the
number of which it shall consist, is amenable to their own control. One
would imagine that children were rained down upon married people, direct
from heaven, without their being art or part in the matter; that it was
really, as the common phrases have it, God' will, and not their own,
which decided the numbers of their offspring. Let us see what is a
Continental philosopher' opinion on this point; a man among the most
benevolent of his time, and the happiness of whose married life has been
celebrated.

“When dangerous prejudices,” says Sismondi,†. “have not become
accredited, when a morality contrary to our true duties towards others,
and especially towards those to whom we have given life, is not
inculcated in the name of the most sacred authority; no prudent man
contracts matrimony before he is in a condition which gives him an
assured means of living, and no married man has a greater number of
children than he can properly bring up. The head of a family thinks,
with reason, that his children may be contented with the condition in
which he himself has lived; and his desire will be that the rising
generation should represent exactly the departing one: that one son and
one daughter arrived at the marriageable age should replace his own
father and mother; that the children of his children should in their
turn replace himself and his wife; that his daughter should find in
another family the precise equivalent of the lot which will be given in
his own family to the daughter of another, and that the income which
sufficed for the parents will suffice for the children.” In a country
increasing in Edition: current; Page: [376] wealth, some increase of
numbers would be admissible, but that is a question of detail, not of
principle. “Whenever this family has been formed, justice and humanity
require that he should impose on himself the same restraint which is
submitted to by the unmarried. When we consider how small, in every
country, is the number of natural children, we must admit that this
restraint is on the whole sufficiently effectual. In a country where
population has no room to increase, or in which its progress must be so
slow as to be hardly perceptible, when there are no places vacant for
new establishments, a father who has eight children must expect, either
that six of them will die in childhood, or that three men and three
women among his cotemporaries, and in the next generation three of his
sons and three of his daughters, will remain unmarried on his account.”

§ 2. Those who think it hopeless that the labouring classes should be
induced to practise a sufficient degree of prudence in regard to the
increase of their families, because they have hitherto stopt short of
that point, show an inability to estimate the ordinary principles of
human action. Nothing more would probably be necessary to secure that
result, than an opinion generally diffused that it was desirable. As a
moral principle, such an opinion has never yet existed in any country:
it is curious that it does not so exist in countries in which, from the
spontaneous operation of individual forethought, population is,
comparatively speaking, efficiently repressed. What is practised as
prudence is still not recognised as duty; the talkers and writers are
mostly on the other side, even in France, where a sentimental horror of
Malthus is almost as rife as in this country. Many causes may be
assigned, besides the modern date of the doctrine, for its not having
yet gained possession of the general mind. Its truth has, in some
respects, been its detriment. One may be permitted to doubt whether,
except among the poor themselves (for whose prejudices on this subject
there is no difficulty in accounting) there has ever yet been, in any
class of society, a sincere and earnest desire that wages should be
high. There has been plenty of desire to keep down the poor-rate; but,
that done, people have been very willing that the working classes should
be ill off. Nearly all who are not labourers themselves, are employers
of labour, and are not sorry to get the commodity cheap. It is a fact,
that even Boards of Guardians, who are supposed to be official apostles
of anti-population doctrines, will seldom hear patiently of anything
which they are pleased to designate as Edition: current; Page: [377]
Malthusianism. Boards of Guardians in rural districts, principally
consist of farmers, and farmers, it is well known, in general dislike
even allotments, as making the labourers “too independent.” From the
gentry, who are in less immediate contact and collision of interest with
the labourers, better things might be expected, and the gentry of
England are usually charitable. But charitable people have human
infirmities, and would, very often, be secretly not a little
dissatisfied if no one needed their charity: it is from them one
oftenest hears the base doctrine, that God has decreed there shall
always be poor. When one adds to this, that nearly every person who has
had in him any active spring of exertion for a social object, has had
some favourite reform to effect which he thought the admission of this
great principle would throw into the shade; has had corn laws to repeal,
or taxation to reduce, or small notes to issue, or the charter to carry,
or the church to revive or abolish, or the aristocracy to pull down, and
looked upon every one as an enemy who thought anything important except
his object; it is scarcely wonderful that since the population doctrine
was first promulgated, nine-tenths of the talk has always been against
it, and the remaining tenth only audible at intervals; and that it has
not yet penetrated far among those who might be expected to be the least
willing recipients of it, the labourers themselves.

But let us try to imagine what would happen if the idea became general
among the labouring class, that the competition of too great numbers was
the special cause of their poverty; so that every labourer looked (with
Sismondi) upon every other who had more than the number of children
which the circumstances of society allowed to each, as doing him a
wrong—as filling up the place which he was entitled to share. Any one
who supposes that this state of opinion would not have a great effect on
conduct, must be profoundly ignorant of human nature; can never have
considered how large a portion of the motives which induce the
generality of men to take care even of their own interest, is derived
from regard for opinion—from the expectation of being disliked or
despised for not doing it. In the particular case in question, it is not
too much to say that over-indulgence is as much caused by the stimulus
of opinion as by the mere animal propensity; since opinion universally,
and especially among the most uneducated classes, has connected ideas of
spirit and power with the strength of the instinct, and of inferiority
with its moderation or absence; a perversion of sentiment caused by its
being the means, and the stamp, of a dominion Edition: current; Page:
[378] exercised over other human beings. The effect would be great of
merely removing this factitious stimulus; and when once opinion shall
have turned itself into an adverse direction, a revolution will soon
take place in this department of human conduct. We are often told that
the most thorough perception of the dependence of wages on population
will not influence the conduct of a labouring man, because it is not the
children he himself can have that will produce any effect in generally
depressing the labour market. True: and it is also true, that one
soldier' running away will not lose the battle; accordingly it is not
that consideration which keeps each soldier in his rank: it is the
disgrace which naturally and inevitably attends on conduct by any one
individual, which if pursued by a majority, everybody can see would be
fatal. Men are seldom found to brave the general opinion of their class,
unless supported either by some principle higher than regard for
opinion, or by some strong body of opinion elsewhere.

It must be borne in mind also, that the opinion here in question, as
soon as it attained any prevalence, would have powerful auxiliaries in
the great majority of women. It is seldom by the choice of the wife that
families are too numerous; on her devolves (along with all the physical
suffering and at least a full share of the privations) the whole of the
intolerable domestic drudgery resulting from the excess. To be relieved
from it would be hailed as a blessing by multitudes of women who now
never venture to urge such a claim, but who would urge it, if supported
by the moral feelings of the community. Among the barbarisms which law
and morals have not yet ceased to sanction, the most disgusting surely
is, that any human being should be permitted to consider himself as
having a right to the person of another.

If the opinion were once generally established among the labouring class
that their welfare required a due regulation of the numbers of families,
the respectable and well-conducted of the body would conform to the
prescription, and only those would exempt themselves from it, who were
in the habit of making light of social obligations generally; and there
would be then an evident justification for converting the moral
obligation against bringing children into the world who are a burthen to
the community, into a legal one; just as in many other cases of the
progress of opinion, the law ends by enforcing against recalcitrant
minorities, obligations which to be useful must be general, and which,
from a sense of their utility, a large majority have voluntarily
consented to take upon themselves. Edition: current; Page: [379] There
would be no need, however, of legal sanctions, if women were admitted,
as on all other grounds they have the clearest title to be, to the same
rights of citizenship with men. Let them cease to be confined by custom
to one physical function as their means of living and their source of
influence, and they would have for the first time an equal voice with
men in what concerns that function: and of all the improvements in
reserve for mankind which it is now possible to foresee, none might be
expected to be so fertile as this in almost every kind of moral and
social benefit.1.

It remains to consider what chance there is that opinions and feelings,
grounded on the law of the dependence of wages on population, will arise
among the labouring classes; and by what means such opinions and
feelings can be called forth. Before considering the grounds of hope on
this subject, a hope which many persons, no doubt, will be ready,
without consideration, to pronounce chimerical, I will remark, that
unless a satisfactory answer can be made to these two questions, the
industrial system prevailing in this country, and regarded by many
writers as the ne plus ultra of civilization—the dependence of the whole
labouring class of the community on the wages of hired labour, is
irrevocably condemned. The question we are considering is, whether, of
this state of things, overpopulation and a degraded condition of the
labouring class are the inevitable consequence. If a prudent regulation
of population be not reconcilable with the system of hired labour, the
system is a nuisance, and the grand object of economical statesmanship
should be (by whatever arrangements of property, and alterations in the
modes of applying industry), to bring the labouring people under the
influence of stronger and more obvious inducements to this kind of
prudence, than the relation of workmen and employers can afford.

But there exists no such incompatibility. The causes of poverty are not
so obvious at first sight to a population of hired labourers, as they
are to one of proprietors, or as they would be to a socialist community.
They are, however, in no way mysterious. The dependence of wages on the
number of the competitors for employment, is so far from hard of
comprehension, or unintelligible to the labouring classes, that by great
bodies of them it is already recognised and habitually acted on. It is
familiar to all Trades Unions: every successful combination to keep up
wages, owes its Edition: current; Page: [380] success to contrivances
for restricting the number of the competitors; all skilled trades are
anxious to keep down their own numbers, and many impose, or endeavour to
impose, as a condition upon employers, that they shall not take more
than a prescribed number of apprentices. There is, of course, a great
difference between limiting their numbers by excluding other people, and
doing the same thing by a restraint imposed on themselves: but the one
as much as the other shows a clear perception of the relation between
their numbers and their remuneration. The principle is understood in its
application to any one employment, but not to the general mass of
employment. For this there are several reasons: first, the operation of
causes is more easily and distinctly seen in the more circumscribed
field; secondly, skilled artizans are a more intelligent class than
ordinary manual labourers: and the habit of concert, and of passing in
review their general condition as a trade, keeps up a better
understanding of their collective interests: thirdly and lastly, they
are the most provident, because they are the best off, and have the most
to preserve. What, however, is clearly perceived and admitted in
particular instances, it cannot be hopeless to see understood and
acknowledged as a general truth. Its recognition, at least in theory,
seems a thing which must necessarily and immediately come to pass, when
the minds of the labouring classes become capable of taking any rational
view of their own aggregate condition. Of this the great majority of
them have until now been incapable, either from the uncultivated state
of their intelligence, or from poverty, which leaving them neither the
fear of worse, nor the smallest hope of better, makes them careless of
the consequences of their actions, and without thought for the future.

§ 3. For the purpose therefore of altering the habits of the labouring
people, there is need of a twofold action, directed simultaneously upon
their intelligence and their poverty. An effective national education of
the children of the labouring class, is the first thing needful: and,
coincidently with this, a system of measures which shall (as the
Revolution did in France) extinguish extreme poverty for one whole
generation.

This is not the place for discussing, even in the most general manner,
either the principles or the machinery of national education. But it is
to be hoped that opinion on the subject is advancing, and that an
education of mere words would not now be deemed sufficient, slow as our
progress is towards providing anything better even for Edition: current;
Page: [381] the classes to whom society professes to give the very best
education it can devise. Without entering into disputable points, it may
be asserted without scruple, that the aim of all intellectual training
for the mass of the people, should be to cultivate common sense; to
qualify them for forming a sound practical judgment of the circumstances
by which they are surrounded. Whatever, in the intellectual department,
can be superadded to this, is chiefly ornamental; while this is the
indispensable groundwork on which education must rest. Let this object
be acknowledged and kept in view as the thing to be first aimed at, and
there will be little difficulty in deciding either what to teach, or in
what manner to teach it.

An education directed to diffuse good sense among the people, with such
knowledge as would qualify them to judge of the tendencies of their
actions, would be certain, even without any direct inculcation, to raise
up a public opinion by which intemperance and improvidence of every kind
would be held discreditable, and the improvidence which overstocks the
labour market would be severely condemned, as an offence against the
common weal. But though the sufficiency of such a state of opinion,
supposing it formed, to keep the increase of population within proper
limits, cannot, I think, be doubted; yet, for the formation of the
opinion, it would not do to trust to education alone. Education is not
compatible with extreme poverty. It is impossible effectually to teach
an indigent population. And it is difficult to make those feel the value
of comfort who have never enjoyed it, or those appreciate the
wretchedness of a precarious subsistence, who have been made reckless by
always living from hand to mouth. Individuals often struggle upwards
into a condition of ease; but the utmost that can be expected from a
whole people is to maintain themselves in it; and improvement in the
habits and requirements of the mass of unskilled day-labourers will be
difficult and tardy, unless means can be contrived of raising the entire
body to a state of tolerable comfort, and maintaining them in it until a
new generation grows up.

Towards effecting this object there are two resources available, without
wrong to any one, without any of the liabilities of mischief attendant
on voluntary or legal charity, and not only without weakening, but on
the contrary strengthening, every incentive to industry, and every
motive to forethought.

§ 4. The first is, a great national measure of colonization. I mean, a
grant of public money, sufficient to remove at once, and Edition:
current; Page: [382] establish in the colonies, a considerable fraction
of the youthful agricultural population. By giving the preference, as
Mr. Wakefield proposes, to young couples, or when these cannot be
obtained, to families with children nearly grown up, the expenditure
would be made to go the farthest possible towards accomplishing the end,
while the colonies would be supplied with the greatest amount of what is
there in deficiency and here in superfluity, present and prospective
labour. It has been shown by others, and the grounds of the opinion will
be exhibited in a subsequent part of the present work, that colonization
on an adequate scale might be so conducted as to cost the country
nothing, or nothing that would not be certainly repaid; and that the
funds required, even by way of advance, would not be drawn from the
capital employed in maintaining labour, but from that surplus which
cannot find employment at such profit as constitutes an adequate
remuneration for the abstinence of the possessor, and which is therefore
sent abroad for investment, or wasted at home in reckless speculations.
That portion of the income of the country which is habitually
ineffective for any purpose of benefit to the labouring class, would
bear any draught which it could be necessary to make on it for the
amount of emigration which is here in view.

1. The second resource would be, to devote all common land, hereafter
brought into cultivation, to raising a class of small proprietors. It
has long enough been the practice to take these lands from public use
for the mere purpose of adding to the domains of the rich. It is time
that what is left of them should be retained as an estate sacred to the
benefit of the poor. The machinery for administering it already exists,
having been created by the General Inclosure Act. What I would propose
(though, Edition: current; Page: [383] I confess, with small hope of its
being soon adopted) is, that in all future cases in which common land is
permitted to be enclosed, such portion should first be sold or assigned
as is sufficient to compensate the owners of manorial or common rights,
and that the remainder should be divided into sections of five acres or
thereabouts, to be conferred in absolute property on individuals of the
labouring class who would reclaim and bring them into cultivation by
their own labour. The preference should he given to such labourers, and
there are many of them, as had saved enough to maintain them until their
first crop was got in, or whose character was such as to induce some
responsible person to advance to them the requisite amount on their
personal security. The tools, the manure, and in some cases the
subsistence also might be supplied by the parish, or by the state;
interest for the advance, at the rate yielded by the public funds, being
laid on as a perpetual quit-rent, with power to the peasant to redeem it
at any time for a moderate number of years' purchase. These little
landed estates might, if it were thought necessary, be made indivisible
by law; though, if the plan worked in the manner designed, I should not
apprehend any objectionable degree of subdivision. In case of intestacy,
and in default of amicable arrangement among the heirs, they might be
bought by government at their value, and recanted to some other labourer
who would give security for the price. The desire to possess one of
these small properties would probably become, as on the Continent, an
inducement to prudence and economy pervading the whole labouring
population; and that great desideratum among a people of hired labourers
would be provided, an intermediate class between them and their
employers; affording them the double advantage, of an object for their
hopes, and, as there would be good reason to anticipate, an example for
their imitation.

It would, however, be of little avail that either or both of these
measures of relief should be adopted, unless on such a scale, as would
enable the whole body of hired labourers remaining on the soil to obtain
not merely employment, but a large addition to the present wages—such an
addition as would enable them to live and bring up their children in a
degree of comfort and independence to which they have hitherto been
strangers. When the object is to raise the permanent condition of a
people, small means do not merely produce small effects, they produce no
effect at all. Unless comfort can be made as habitual to a whole
generation as indigence is now, Edition: current; Page: [384] nothing is
accomplished; and feeble half-measures do but fritter away resources,
far better reserved until the improvement of public opinion and of
education shall raise up politicians who will not think that merely
because a scheme promises much, the part of statesmanship is to have
nothing to do with it.

I 1. have left the preceding paragraphs as they were written, since they
remain true in principle, though it is no longer urgent to apply these
specific recommendations to the present state of this country. The
extraordinary cheapening of the means of transport, which is one of the
great scientific achievements of the age, and the knowledge which nearly
all classes of the people have now acquired, or are in the way of
acquiring, of the condition of the labour market in remote parts of the
world, have opened up a spontaneous emigration from these islands to the
new countries beyond the ocean, which does not tend to diminish, but to
increase; and which, without any national measure of systematic
colonization, may prove sufficient to effect a material rise of wages in
Great Britain, as it has already done in Ireland, and to maintain that
rise unimpaired for one or more generations. Emigration, instead of an
occasional vent, is becoming a steady outlet for superfluous numbers;
and this new fact in modern history, together with the flush of
prosperity occasioned by free trade, have granted to this overcrowded
country a temporary breathing-time, capable of being employed in
accomplishing those moral and intellectual improvements in all classes
of the people, the very poorest included, which would render improbable
any relapse into the over-peopled state. Whether this golden opportunity
will be properly used, depends on the wisdom of our councils; and
whatever depends on that, is always in a high degree precarious. The
grounds of hope are, that there has been no time in our history when
mental progress has depended so little on governments, and so much on
the general disposition of the people; none in which the spirit of
improvement has extended to so many branches of human affairs at once,
nor in which all kinds of suggestions tending to the public good in
every department, from the humblest physical to the highest moral or
intellectual, were heard with so little prejudice, and had so good a
chance of becoming known and being fairly considered.

Edition: current; Page: [385]


CHAPTER XIV.: of the differences of wages in different employments

§ 1. In treating of wages, we have hitherto confined ourselves to the
causes which operate on them generally, and en masse; the laws which
govern the remuneration of ordinary or average labour: without reference
to the existence of different kinds of work which are habitually paid at
different rates, depending in some degree on different laws. We will now
take into consideration these differences, and examine in what manner
they affect or are affected by the conclusions already established.

A well-known and very popular chapter of Adam Smith∗. contains the best
exposition yet given of this portion of the subject. I cannot indeed
think his treatment so complete and exhaustive as it has sometimes been
considered; but as far as it goes, his analysis is tolerably successful.

The differences, he says, arise partly from the policy of Europe, which
nowhere leaves things at perfect liberty, and partly “from certain
circumstances in the employments themselves, which either really, or at
least in the imaginations of men, make up for a small pecuniary gain in
some, and counterbalance a great one in others.” These circumstances he
considers to be: “First, the agreeableness or disagreeableness of the
employments themselves; secondly, the easiness and cheapness, or the
difficulty and expense of learning them; thirdly, the constancy or
inconstancy of employment in them; fourthly, the small or great trust
which must be reposed in those who exercise them; and fifthly, the
probability or improbability of success in them.”

Several of these points he has very copiously illustrated: though his
examples are sometimes drawn from a state of facts now no longer
existing. “The wages of labour vary with the ease or Edition: current;
Page: [386] hardship, the cleanliness or dirtiness, the honourableness
or dishonourableness of the employment. Thus, in most places, take the
year round, a journeyman tailor earns less than a journeyman weaver. His
work is much easier.” Things have much altered, as to a weaver'
remuneration, since Adam Smith' time; and the artizan whose work was
more difficult than that of a tailor, can never, I think, have been the
common weaver. “A journeyman weaver earns less than a journeyman smith.
His work is not always easier, but it is much cleanlier.” A more
probable explanation is, that it requires less bodily strength. “A
journeyman blacksmith, though an artificer, seldom earns so much in
twelve hours as a collier, who is only a labourer, does in eight. His
work is not quite so dirty, is less dangerous, and is carried on in
daylight, and above ground. Honour makes a great part of the reward of
all honourable professions. In point of pecuniary gain, all things
considered,” their recompense is, in his opinion, below the average.
“Disgrace has the contrary effect. The trade of a butcher is a brutal
and an odious business; but it is in most places more profitable than
the greater part of common trades. The most detestable of all
employments, that of public executioner, is, in proportion to the
quantity of work done, better paid than any common trade whatever.”

One of the causes which make hand-loom weavers cling [1848] to their
occupation in spite of the scanty remuneration which it now yields, is
said to be a peculiar attractiveness arising from the freedom of action
which it allows to the workman. “He can play or idle,” says a recent
authority,∗. “as feeling or inclination lead him; rise early or late,
apply himself assiduously or carelessly, as he pleases, and work up at
any time by increased exertion, hours previously sacrificed to
indulgence or recreation. There is scarcely another condition of any
portion of our working population thus free from external control. The
factory operative is not only mulcted of his wages for absence, but, if
of frequent occurrence, discharged altogether from his employment. The
bricklayer, the carpenter, the painter, the joiner, the stonemason, the
outdoor labourer, have each their appointed daily hours of labour, a
disregard of which would lead to the same result.” Accordingly, “the
weaver will stand by his loom while it will enable him to exist, however
miserably; and many, induced temporarily to quit it, have returned to it
again, when work was to be had.”

“Employment is much more constant,” continues Adam Edition: current;
Page: [387] Smith, “in some trades than in others. In the greater part
of manufactures, a journeyman may be pretty sure of employment almost
every day in the year that he is able to work” (the interruptions of
business arising from overstocked markets, or from a suspension of
demand, or from a commercial crisis, must be excepted). “A mason or
bricklayer, On the contrary, can work neither in hard frost nor in foul
weather, and his employment at all other times depends upon the
occasional calls of his customers. He is liable, in consequence, to be
frequently without any. What he earns, therefore, while he is employed,
must not only maintain him while he is idle, but make him some
compensation for those anxious and desponding moments which the thought
of so precarious a situation must sometimes occasion. When the computed
earnings of the greater part of manufacturers, accordingly, are nearly
upon a level with the day wages of common labourers, those of masons and
bricklayers are generally from one-half more to double those wages. No
species of skilled labour, however, seems more easy to learn than that
of masons and bricklayers. The high wages of those workmen, therefore,
are not so much the recompense of their skill, as the compensation for
the inconstancy of their employment.

“When the inconstancy of the employment is combined with the hardship,
disagreeableness, and dirtiness of the work, it sometimes raises the
wages of the most common labour above those of the most skilled
artificers. A collier working by the piece, is supposed, at Newcastle,
to earn commonly about double, and in many parts of Scotland about three
times, the wages of common labour. His high wages arise altogether from
the hardship, disagreeableness, and dirtiness of his work. His
employment may, upon most occasions, be as constant as he pleases. The
coal-heavers in London exercise a trade which in hardship, dirtiness,
and disagreeableness, almost equals that of colliers; and from the
unavoidable irregularity in the arrival of coal-ships, the employment of
the greater part of them is necessarily very inconstant. If colliers,
therefore, commonly earn double and triple the wages of common labour,
it ought not to seem unreasonable that coal-heavers should sometimes
earn four or five times those wages. In the inquiry made into their
condition a few years ago, it was found that at the rate at which they
were then paid, they could earn about four times the wages of common
labour in London. How extravagant soever these earnings may appear, if
they were more than sufficient to compensate all the disagreeable
circumstances of the business, there would soon be so Edition: current;
Page: [388] great a number of competitors as, in a trade which has no
exclusive privilege, would quickly reduce them to a lower rate.”

These inequalities of remuneration, which are supposed to compensate for
the disagreeable circumstances of particular employments, would, under
certain conditions, be natural consequences of perfectly free
competition: and as between employments of about the same grade, and
filled by nearly the same description of people, they are, no doubt, for
the most part, realized in practice. But it is altogether a false view
of the state of facts, to present this as the relation which generally
exists between agreeable and disagreeable employments. The really
exhausting and the really repulsive labours, instead of being better
paid than others, are almost invariably paid the worst of all, because
performed by those who have no choice. It would be otherwise in a
favourable state of the general labour market. If the labourers in the
aggregate, instead of exceeding, fell short of the amount of employment,
work which was generally disliked would not be undertaken, except for
more than ordinary wages. But when the supply of labour so far exceeds
the demand that to find employment at all is an uncertainty, and to be
offered it on any terms a favour, the case is totally the reverse.
Desirable labourers, those whom every one is anxious to have, can still
exercise a choice. The undesirable must take what they can get. The more
revolting the occupation, the more certain it is to receive the minimum
of remuneration, because it devolves on the most helpless and degraded,
on those who from squalid poverty, or from want of skill and education,
are rejected from all other employments. Partly from this cause, and
partly from the natural and artificial monopolies which will be spoken
of presently, the inequalities of wages are generally in an opposite
direction to the equitable principle of compensation erroneously
represented by Adam Smith as the general law of the remuneration of
labour. The hardships and the earnings, instead of being directly
proportional, as in any just arrangements of society they would be, are
generally in an inverse ratio to one another.1.

Edition: current; Page: [389]
One of the points best illustrated by Adam Smith is the influence
exercised on the remuneration of an employment by the uncertainty of
success in it. If the chances are great of total failure, the reward in
case of success must be sufficient to make up, in the general
estimation, for those adverse chances. But, owing to another principle
of human nature, if the reward comes in the shape of a few great prizes,
it usually attracts competitors in such numbers, that the average
remuneration may be reduced not only to zero, but even to a negative
quantity. The success of lotteries proves that this is possible: since
the aggregate body of adventurers in lotteries necessarily lose,
otherwise the undertakers could not gain. The case of certain
professions is considered by Adam Smith to be similar. “The probability
that any particular person shall ever be qualified for the employment to
which he is educated, is very different in different occupations. In the
greater part of mechanic trades, success is almost certain, but very
uncertain in the liberal professions. Put your son apprentice to a
shoemaker, there is little doubt of his learning to make a pair of
shoes; but send him to study the law, it is at least twenty to one if
ever he makes such proficiency as will enable him to live by the
business. In a perfectly fair lottery, those who draw the prizes ought
to gain all that is lost by those who draw the blanks. In a profession
where twenty fail for one that succeeds, that one ought to gain all that
should have been gained by the unsuccessful twenty. The
counsellor-at-law, who, perhaps, at near forty years of age, begins to
make something by his profession, ought to receive the retribution, not
only of his own so tedious and expensive education, but of that of more
than twenty others who are never likely to make anything by it. How
extravagant soever the fees of counsellors-at-law may sometimes appear,
their real retribution is never equal to this. Compute in any particular
place, what is likely to be annually gained, and what is likely to be
annually spent, by all the different workmen in any common trade, such
as that of shoemakers or weavers, and you will find that the former sum
will generally exceed the latter. But make the same computation with
regard to all the counsellors and students of law, in all the different
inns of court, and you will find that their annual gains bear but a
small proportion to their annual expense, even though you rate the
former as high, and the latter as low, as can well be done.”

Edition: current; Page: [390]
Whether this is true in our own day, when the gains of the few are
incomparably greater than in the time of Adam Smith, but also the
unsuccessful aspirants much more numerous, those who have the
appropriate information must decide. It does not, however, seem to be
sufficiently considered by Adam Smith, that the prizes which he speaks
of comprise not the fees of counsel only, but the places of emolument
and honour to which their profession gives access, together with the
coveted distinction of a conspicuous position in the public eye.

Even where there are no great prizes, the mere love of excitement is
sometimes enough to cause an adventurous employment to be overstocked.
This is apparent “in the readiness of the common people to enlist as
soldiers, or to go to sea.... The dangers and hair-breadth escapes of a
life of adventures, instead of disheartening young people, seem
frequently to recommend a trade to them. A tender mother, among the
inferior ranks of people, is often afraid to send her son to school at a
sea-port town, lest the sight of the ships and the conversation and
adventures of the sailors should entice him to go to sea. The distant
prospect of hazards from which we can hope to extricate ourselves by
courage and address, is not disagreeable to us, and does not raise the
wages of labour in any employment. It is otherwise with those in which
courage and address can be of no avail. In trades which are known to be
very unwholesome, the wages of labour are always remarkably high.
Unwholesomeness is a species of disagreeableness, and its effects upon
the wages of labour are to be ranked under that general head.”

§ 2. The preceding are cases in which inequality of remuneration is
necessary to produce equality of attractiveness, and are examples of the
equalizing effect of free competition. The following are cases of real
inequality, and arise from a different principle. “The wages of labour
vary according to the small or great trust which must be reposed in the
workmen. The wages of goldsmiths and jewellers are everywhere superior
to those of many other workmen, not only of equal, but of much superior
ingenuity; on account of the precious materials with which they are
intrusted. We trust our health to the physician, our fortune and
sometimes our life and reputation to the lawyer and attorney. Such
confidence could not safely be reposed in people of a very mean or low
condition. Their reward must be such, therefore, as may give them that
rank in society which so important a trust requires.”

Edition: current; Page: [391]
The superiority of reward is not here the consequence of competition,
but of its absence: not a compensation for disadvantages inherent in the
employment, but an extra advantage; a kind of monopoly price, the effect
not of a legal, but of what has been termed a natural monopoly. If all
labourers were trustworthy, it would not be necessary to give extra pay
to working goldsmiths on account of the trust. The degree of integrity
required being supposed to be uncommon, those who can make it appear
that they possess it are able to take advantage of the peculiarity, and
obtain higher pay in proportion to its rarity. This opens a class of
considerations which Adam Smith, and most other political economists,
have taken into far too little account, and from inattention to which,
he has given a most imperfect exposition of the wide difference between
the remuneration of common labour and that of skilled employments.

Some employments require a much longer time to learn, and a much more
expensive course of instruction than others; and to this extent there
is, as explained by Adam Smith, an inherent reason for their being more
highly remunerated. If an artizan must work several years at learning
his trade before he can earn anything, and several years more before
becoming sufficiently skilful for its finer operations, he must have a
prospect of at last earning enough to pay the wages of all this past
labour, with compensation for the delay of payment, and an indemnity for
the expenses of his education. His wages, consequently, must yield, over
and above the ordinary amount, an annuity sufficient to repay these
sums, with the common rate of profit, within the number of years he can
expect to live and to be in working condition. This, which is necessary
to place the skilled employments, all circumstances taken together, on
the same level of advantage with the unskilled, is the smallest
difference which can exist for any length of time between the two
remunerations, since otherwise no one would learn the skilled
employments. And this amount of difference is all which Adam Smith'
principles account for. When the disparity is greater, he seems to think
that it must be explained by apprentice laws, and the rules of
corporations which restrict admission into many of the skilled
employments. But, independently of these or any other artificial
monopolies, there is a natural monopoly in favour of skilled labourers
against the unskilled, which makes the difference of reward exceed,
sometimes in a manifold proportion, what is sufficient merely to
equalize their advantages. If unskilled labourers had it in their power
to compete with skilled, by merely taking the trouble of learning the
Edition: current; Page: [392] trade, the difference of wages might not
exceed what would compensate them for that trouble, at the ordinary rate
at which labour is remunerated. But the fact that a course of
instruction is required, of even a low degree of costliness, or that the
labourer must be maintained for a considerable time from other sources,
suffices everywhere to exclude the great body of the labouring people
from the possibility of any such competition. Until lately,1. all
employments which required even the humble education of reading and
writing, could be recruited only from a select class, the majority
having had no opportunity of acquiring those attainments. All such
employments, accordingly, were immensely overpaid, as measured by the
ordinary remuneration of labour. Since reading and writing have been
brought within the reach of a multitude, the monopoly price of the lower
grade of educated employments has greatly fallen, the competition for
them having increased in an almost incredible degree. There is still,
however, a much greater disparity than can be accounted for on the
principle of competition. A clerk from whom nothing is required but the
mechanical labour of copying, gains more than an equivalent for his mere
exertion if he receives the wages of a bricklayer' labourer. His work is
not a tenth part as hard, it is quite as easy to learn, and his
condition is less precarious, a clerk' place being generally a place for
life. The higher rate of his remuneration, therefore, must be partly
ascribed to monopoly, the small degree of education required being not
even yet so generally diffused as to call forth the natural number of
competitors; and partly to the remaining influence of an ancient custom,
which requires that clerks should maintain the dress and appearance of a
more highly paid class. In some manual employments, requiring a nicety
of hand which can only be acquired by long practice, it is difficult to
obtain at any cost workmen in sufficient numbers, who are capable of the
most delicate kind of work; and the wages paid to them are only limited
by the price which purchasers are willing to give for the commodity they
produce. This is the case with some working watchmakers, and with the
makers of some astronomical and optical instruments. If workmen
competent to such employments were ten times as numerous as they are,
there would be purchasers for all which they could make, not indeed at
the present prices, but at those lower prices which would be the natural
consequence of lower wages. Similar considerations apply in a still
greater degree to employments Edition: current; Page: [393] which it is
attempted to confine to persons of a certain social rank, such as what
are called the liberal professions; into which a person of what is
considered too low a class of society, is not easily admitted, and if
admitted, does not easily succeed.

So complete, indeed, has hitherto been the separation, so strongly
marked the line of demarcation, between the different grades of
labourers, as to be almost equivalent to an hereditary distinction of
caste; each employment being chiefly recruited from the children of
those already employed in it, or in employments of the same rank with it
in social estimation, or from the children of persons who, if originally
of a lower rank, have succeeded in raising themselves by their
exertions. The liberal professions are mostly supplied by the sons of
either the professional, or the idle classes: the more highly skilled
manual employments are filled up from the sons of skilled artizans, or
the class of tradesmen who rank with them: the lower classes of skilled
employments are in a similar case; and unskilled labourers, with
occasional exceptions, remain from father to son in their pristine
condition. Consequently the wages of each class have hitherto been
regulated by the increase of its own population, rather than of the
general population of the country. If the professions are overstocked,
it is because the class of society from which they have always mainly
been supplied, has greatly increased in number, and because most of that
class have numerous families, and bring up some at least of their sons
to professions. If the wages of artizans remain so much higher than
those of common labourers, it is because artizans are a more prudent
class, and do not marry so early or so inconsiderately. The changes,
however, now so rapidly taking place in usages and ideas, are
undermining all these distinctions; the habits or disabilities which
chained people to their hereditary condition are fast wearing away, and
every class is exposed to increased and increasing competition from at
least the class immediately below it. The general relaxation of
conventional barriers, and the increased facilities of education which
already are, and will be in a much greater degree, brought within the
reach of all, tend to produce, among many excellent effects, one which
is the reverse; they tend to bring down the wages of skilled labour. The
inequality of remuneration between the skilled and the unskilled is,
without doubt, very much greater than is justifiable; but it is
desirable that this should be corrected by raising the unskilled, not by
lowering the skilled. If, however, the other changes taking place in
society are not accompanied by a Edition: current; Page: [394]
strengthening of the checks to population on the part of labourers
generally, there will be a tendency to bring the lower grades of skilled
labourers under the influence of a rate of increase regulated by a lower
standard of living than their own, and thus to deteriorate their
condition without raising that of the general mass; the stimulus given
to the multiplication of the lowest class being sufficient to fill up
without difficulty the additional space gained by them from those
immediately above.

§ 3. A modifying circumstance still remains to be noticed, which
interferes to some extent with the operation of the principles thus far
brought to view. While it is true, as a general rule, that the earnings
of skilled labour, and especially of any labour which requires school
education, are at a monopoly rate, from the impossibility, to the mass
of the people, of obtaining that education; it is also true that the
policy of nations, or the bounty of individuals, formerly did much to
counteract the effect of this limitation of competition, by offering
eleemosynary instruction to a much larger class of persons than could
have obtained the same advantages by paying their price. Adam Smith has
pointed out the operation of this cause in keeping down the remuneration
of scholarly or bookish occupations generally, and in particular of
clergymen, literary men, and schoolmasters, or other teachers of youth.
I cannot better set forth this part of the subject than in his words.

“It has been considered as of so much importance that a proper number of
young people should he educated for certain professions, that sometimes
the public, and sometimes the piety of private founders, have
established many pensions, scholarships, exhibitions, bursaries, &c. for
this purpose, which draw many more people into those trades than could
otherwise pretend to follow them. In all Christian countries, I believe,
the education of the greater part of churchmen is paid for in this
manner. Very few of them are educated altogether at their own expense.
The long, tedious, and expensive education, therefore, of those who are,
will not always procure them a suitable reward, the church being crowded
with people who, in order to get employment, are willing to accept of a
much smaller recompense than what such an education would otherwise have
entitled them to; and in this manner the competition of the poor takes
away the reward of the rich. It would be indecent, no doubt, to compare
either a curate or a chaplain with a journeyman in any common trade. The
pay of a curate or a Edition: current; Page: [395] chaplain, however,
may very properly be considered as of the same nature with the wages of
a journeyman. They are, all three, paid for their work according to the
contract which they may happen to make with their respective superiors.
Till after the middle of the fourteenth century, five marks, containing
as much silver as ten pounds of our present money, was in England the
usual pay of a curate or a stipendiary parish priest, as we find it
regulated by the decrees of several different national councils. At the
same period fourpence a day, containing the same quantity of silver as a
shilling of our present money, was declared to be the pay of a
master-mason, and threepence a day, equal to ninepence of our present
money, that of a journeyman mason.∗. The wages of both these labourers,
therefore, supposing them to have been constantly employed, were much
superior to those of the curate. The wages of the master-mason,
supposing him to have been without employment one-third of the year,
would have fully equalled them. By the 12th of Queen Anne, c. 12, it is
declared, ‘That whereas for want of sufficient maintenance and
encouragement to curates, the cures have in several places been meanly
supplied, the bishop is therefore empowered to appoint by writing under
his hand and seal a sufficient certain stipend or allowance, not
exceeding fifty, and not less than twenty pounds a year.’ Forty pounds a
year is reckoned at present very good pay for a curate, and
notwithstanding this act of parliament, there are many curacies under
twenty pounds a year. This last sum does not exceed what is frequently
earned by common labourers in many country parishes. Whenever the law
has attempted to regulate the wages of workmen, it has always been
rather to lower them than to raise them. But the law has upon many
occasions attempted to raise the wages of curates, and for the dignity
of the Church, to oblige the rectors of parishes to give them more than
the wretched maintenance which they themselves might be willing to
accept of. And in both cases the law seems to have been equally
ineffectual, and has never been either able to raise the wages of
curates or to sink those of labourers to the degree that was intended,
because it has never been able to hinder either the one from being
willing to accept of less than the legal allowance, on account of the
indigence of their situation and the multitude of their competitors; or
the other from receiving more, on account of the contrary competition of
those who expected to derive either profit or pleasure from employing
them.”

Edition: current; Page: [396]
“In professions in which there are no benefices, such as law (?) and
physic, if an equal proportion of people were educated at the public
expense, the competition would soon be so great as to sink very much
their pecuniary reward. It might then not be worth any man' while to
educate his son to either of those professions at his own expense. They
would be entirely abandoned to such as had been educated by those public
charities; whose numbers and necessities would oblige them in general to
content themselves with a very miserable recompense.

“That unprosperous race of men, commonly called men of letters, are
pretty much in the situation which lawyers and physicians probably would
be in upon the foregoing supposition. In every part of Europe, the
greater part of them have been educated for the Church, but have been
hindered by different reasons from entering into holy orders. They have
generally, therefore, been educated at the public expense, and their
numbers are everywhere so great as to reduce the price of their labour
to a very paltry recompense.

“Before the invention of the art of printing the only employment by
which a man of letters could make anything of his talents, was that of a
public or private teacher, or by communicating to other people the
curious and useful knowledge which he had acquired himself: and this is
still surely a more honourable, a more useful, and in general even a
more profitable employment than that other of writing for a bookseller,
to which the art of printing has given occasion. The time and study, the
genius, knowledge, and application requisite to qualify an eminent
teacher of the sciences, are at least equal to what is necessary for the
greatest practitioners in law and physic. But the usual reward of the
eminent teacher bears no proportion to that of the lawyer or physician;
because the trade of the one is crowded with indigent people who have
been brought up to it at the public expense, where those of the other
two are encumbered with very few who have not been educated at their
own. The usual recompense, however, of public and private teachers,
small as it may appear, would undoubtedly be less than it is, if the
competition of those yet more indigent men of letters who write for
bread was not taken out of the market. Before the invention of the art
of printing, a scholar and a beggar seem to have been terms very nearly
synonymous. The different governors of the universities before that time
appear to have often granted licences to their scholars to beg.”

Edition: current; Page: [397]
§ 4. The demand for literary labour has so greatly increased since Adam
Smith wrote, while the provisions for eleemosynary education have
nowhere been much added to, and in the countries which have undergone
revolutions have been much diminished, that little effect in keeping
down the recompense of literary labour can now be ascribed to the
influence of those institutions. But an effect nearly equivalent is now
produced by a cause somewhat similar—the competition of persons who, by
analogy with other arts, may be called amateurs. Literary occupation is
one of those pursuits in which success may be attained by persons the
greater part of whose time is taken up by other employments; and the
education necessary for it, is the common education of all cultivated
persons. The inducements to it, independently of money, in the present
state of the world, to all who have either vanity to gratify, or
personal or public objects to promote, are strong. These motives now
attract into this career a great and increasing number of persons who do
not need its pecuniary fruits, and who would equally resort to it if it
afforded no remuneration at all. In our own country (to cite known
examples), the most influential, and on the whole most eminent
philosophical writer of recent times (Bentham), the greatest political
economist (Ricardo), the most ephemerally celebrated, and the really
greatest poets (Byron and Shelley), and the most successful writer of
prose (Scott), were none of them authors by profession; and only two of
the five, Scott and Byron, could have supported themselves by the works
which they wrote. Nearly all the higher departments of authorship are,
to a great extent, similarly filled. In consequence, although the
highest pecuniary prizes of successful authorship are incomparably
greater than at any former period, yet on any rational calculation of
the chances, in the existing competition, scarcely any writer can hope
to gain a living by books, and to do so by magazines and reviews becomes
[1848] daily more difficult. It is only the more troublesome and
disagreeable kinds of literary labour, and those which confer no
personal celebrity, such as most of those connected with newspapers, or
with the smaller periodicals, on which an educated person can now rely
for subsistence. Of these, the remuneration is, on the whole, decidedly
high; because, though exposed to the competition of what used to be
called “poor scholars” (persons who have received a learned education
from some public or private charity), they are exempt from that of
amateurs, those who have other means of support being seldom candidates
for such employments. Whether these considerations Edition: current;
Page: [398] are not connected with something radically amiss in the idea
of authorship as a profession, and whether any social arrangement under
which the teachers of mankind consist of persons giving out doctrines
for bread, is suited to be, or can possibly be, a permanent thing—would
be a subject well worthy of the attention of thinkers.

The clerical, like the literary profession, is frequently adopted by
persons of independent means, either from religious zeal, or for the
sake of the honour or usefulness which may belong to it, or for a chance
of the high prizes which it holds out: and it is now principally for
this reason that the salaries of curates are so low; those salaries,
though considerably raised by the influence of public opinion, being
still generally insufficient as the sole means of support for one who
has to maintain the externals expected from a clergyman of the
established church.

When an occupation is carried on chiefly by persons who derive the main
portion of their subsistence from other sources, its remuneration may be
lower almost to any extent, than the wages of equally severe labour in
other employments. The principal example of the kind is domestic
manufactures. When spinning and knitting were carried on in every
cottage, by families deriving their principal support from agriculture,
the price at which their produce was sold (which constituted the
remuneration of the labour) was often so low, that there would have been
required great perfection of machinery to undersell it. The amount of
the remuneration in such a case, depends chiefly upon whether the
quantity of the commodity, produced by this description of labour,
suffices to supply the whole of the demand. If it does not, and there is
consequently a necessity for some labourers who devote themselves
entirely to the employment, the price of the article must be sufficient
to pay those labourers at the ordinary rate, and to reward therefore
very handsomely the domestic producers. But if the demand is so limited
that the domestic manufacture can do more than satisfy it, the price is
naturally kept down to the lowest rate at which peasant families think
it worth while to continue the production. It is, no doubt, because the
Swiss artizans do not depend for the whole of their subsistence upon
their looms, that Zurich is able to maintain a competition in the
European market with English capital, and English fuel and machinery.∗.
Thus far, as to the remuneration of Edition: current; Page: [399] the
subsidiary employment; but the effect to the labourers of having this
additional resource, is almost certain to be (unless peculiar
counteracting causes intervene) a proportional dilution of the wages of
their main occupation. The habits of the people (as has already been so
often remarked) everywhere require some particular scale of living, and
no more, as the condition without which they will not bring up a family.
Whether the income which maintains them in this condition comes from one
source or from two, makes no difference: if there is a second source of
income, they require less from the first; and multiply (at least this
has always hitherto been the case) to a point which leaves them no more
from both employments, than they would probably have had from either if
it had been their sole occupation.

For the same reason it is found that, caeteris paribus, those trades are
generally the worst paid, in which the wife and children of the artizan
aid in the work. The income which the habits of the class demand, and
down to which they are almost sure to multiply, is made up, in those
trades, by the earnings of the whole family, while in others the same
income must be obtained by the labour of the man alone. It is even
probable that their collective earnings will amount to a smaller sum
than those of the man alone in other trades; because the prudential
restraint on marriage is unusually weak when the only consequence
immediately felt is an improvement of circumstances, the joint earnings
of the two going further in their domestic economy after marriage than
before. Such accordingly is the fact, in the case of handloom weavers.
In most kinds of weaving, women can and do earn as much as men, and
children are employed at a very early age; but the aggregate earnings of
a family are lower than in almost any other kind of industry, and the
marriages earlier. It is noticeable also that there are certain branches
of handloom weaving in which wages are much above the rate common in the
trade, and that these are the branches in which neither women nor young
persons are employed. These facts were authenticated by the inquiries of
the Handloom Weavers Commission, which made its report in 1841. 1. No
argument can be hence derived for the exclusion of women from the
liberty of competing in the labour market: since, even when no more is
earned Edition: current; Page: [400] by the labour of a man and a woman
than would have been earned by the man alone, the advantage to the woman
of not depending on a master for subsistence may be more than an
equivalent. It cannot, however, be considered desirable as a permanent
element in the condition of a labouring class, that the mother of the
family (the case of a single woman is totally different) should be under
the necessity of working for subsistence, at least elsewhere than in
their place of abode. In the case of children, who are necessarily
dependent, the influence of their competition in depressing the labour
market is an important element in the question of limiting their labour,
in order to provide better for their education.

§ 5. It deserves consideration, why the wages of women are generally
lower, and very much lower, than those of men. They are not universally
so. Where men and women work at the same employment, if it be one for
which they are equally fitted in point of physical power, they are not
always unequally paid.1. Women, in factories, sometimes2. earn as much
as men; and so they do in handloom weaving, which, being paid by the
piece, brings their efficiency to a sure test. When the efficiency is
equal, but the pay unequal, the only explanation that can be given is
custom; grounded either in a prejudice, or in the present constitution
of society, which, making almost every woman, socially speaking, an
appendage of some man, enables men to take systematically the lion'
share of whatever belongs to both.3. But the principal question relates
to the peculiar employments of women. The remuneration of these is
always, I believe, greatly below that of employments of equal skill and
equal disagreeableness, carried on by men. In some of these cases the
explanation is evidently that already given: as in the case of domestic
servants, whose wages, speaking generally, are not determined by
competition, but are greatly in excess of the market value of the
labour, and in this excess, as in almost all things which are regulated
by custom, the male sex obtains by far the largest share. In the
occupations in which employers take full Edition: current; Page: [401]
advantage of competition, the low wages of women as compared with the
ordinary earnings of men, are a proof that the employments are
overstocked; that although so much smaller a number of women, than of
men, support themselves by wages, the occupations which law and usage
make accessible to them are comparatively so few, that the field of
their employment is still more overcrowded. It must be observed, that as
matters now stand, a sufficient degree of overcrowding may depress the
wages of women to a much lower minimum than those of men. The wages, at
least of single women, must be equal to their support, but need not be
more than equal to it; the minimum, in their case, is the pittance
absolutely requisite for the sustenance of one human being. Now the
lowest point to which the most superabundant competition can permanently
depress the wages of a man is always somewhat more than this. Where the
wife of a labouring man does not by general custom contribute to his
earnings, the man' wages must be at least sufficient to support himself,
a wife, and a number of children adequate to keep up the population,
since if it were less the population would not be kept up. And even if
the wife earns something, their joint wages must be sufficient to
support not only themselves, but (at least for some years) their
children also. The ne plus ultra of low wages, therefore (except during
some transitory crisis, or in some decaying employment), can hardly
occur in any occupation which the person employed has to live by, except
the occupations of women.

§ 6. Thus far, we have, throughout this discussion, proceeded on the
supposition that competition is free, so far as regards human
interference; being limited only by natural causes, or by the unintended
effect of general social circumstances. But law or custom may interfere
to limit competition. If apprentice laws, or the regulations of
corporate bodies, make the access to a particular employment slow,
costly, or difficult, the wages of that employment may be kept much
above their natural proportion to the wages of common labour. They might
be so kept without any assignable limit, were it not that wages which
exceed the usual rate require corresponding prices, and that there is a
limit to the price at which even a restricted number of producers can
dispose of all they produce. In most civilized countries, the
restrictions of this kind which once existed have been either abolished
or very much relaxed, and will, no doubt, soon disappear entirely. In
some trades, however, and Edition: current; Page: [402] to some extent,
the combinations of workmen produce a similar effect. Those combinations
always fail to uphold wages at an artificial rate, unless they also
limit the number of competitors. But they do occasionally succeed in
accomplishing this. In several trades the workmen have been able to make
it almost impracticable for strangers to obtain admission either as
journeymen or as apprentices, except in limited numbers, and under such
restrictions as they choose to impose. It was given in evidence to the
Handloom Weavers Commission, that this is one of the hardships which
aggravate the grievous condition of that depressed class. Their own
employment is overstocked and almost ruined; but there are many other
trades which it would not be difficult for them to learn: to this,
however, the combinations of workmen in those other trades are said to
interpose an obstacle hitherto insurmountable.

Notwithstanding, however, the cruel manner in which the exclusive
principle of these combinations operates in a case of this peculiar
nature, the question, whether they are on the whole more useful or
mischievous, requires to be decided on an enlarged consideration of
consequences, among which such a fact as this is not one of the most
important items. Putting aside the atrocities sometimes committed by
workmen in the way of personal outrage or intimidation, which cannot be
too rigidly repressed; if the present state of the general habits of the
people were to remain for ever unimproved, these partial combinations,
in so far as they do succeed in keeping up the wages of any trade by
limiting its numbers, might be looked upon as simply intrenching around
a particular spot against the inroads of over-population, and making the
wages of the class depend upon their own rate of increase, instead of
depending on that of a more reckless and improvident class than
themselves. What at first sight seems the injustice of excluding the
more numerous body from sharing the gains of a comparatively few,
disappears when we consider that by being admitted they would not be
made better off, for more than a short time; the only permanent effect
which their admission would produce, would be to lower the others to
their own level. To what extent the force of this consideration is
annulled when a tendency commences towards diminished over-crowding in
the labouring classes generally, and what grounds of a different nature
there may be for regarding the existence of trade combinations as rather
to be desired than deprecated, will be considered in Edition: current;
Page: [403] a subsequent chapter of this work, with the subject of
Combination Laws.1.

§ 7. To conclude this subject, I must repeat an observation already
made, that there are kinds of labour of which the wages are fixed by
custom, and not by competition. Such are the fees or Edition: current;
Page: [404] charges of professional persons: of physicians, surgeons,
barristers, and even attorneys. These, as a general rule, do not vary,
and though competition operates upon those classes as much as upon any
others, it is by dividing the business, not, in general, by diminishing
the rate at which it is paid. The cause of this, perhaps, has been the
prevalence of an opinion that such persons are more trustworthy if paid
highly in proportion to the work they perform; insomuch that if a lawyer
or a physician offered his services at less than the ordinary rate,
instead of gaining more practice, he would probably lose that which he
already had. For analogous reasons it is usual to pay greatly beyond the
market price of their labour, all persons in whom the employer wishes to
place peculiar trust, or from whom he requires something besides their
mere services. For example, most persons who can afford it, pay to their
domestic servants higher wages than would purchase in the market the
labour of persons fully as competent to the work required. They do this,
not merely from ostentation, but also from more reasonable motives;
either because they desire that those they employ should serve them
cheerfully, and be anxious to remain in their service; or because they
do not like to drive a hard bargain with people whom they are in
constant intercourse with; or because they dislike to have near their
persons, and continuallity in their sight, people with the appearance
and habits which are the usual accompaniments of a mean remuneration.
Similar feelings operate in the minds of persons in business, with
respect to their clerks, and other employés. Liberality, generosity, and
the credit of the employer, are motives which, to whatever extent they
operate, preclude taking the utmost advantage of competition: and
doubtless such motives might, and even now do, operate on employers of
labour in all the great departments of industry; and most desirable is
it that they should. But they can never raise the average wages of
labour beyond the ratio of population to capital. By giving more to each
person employed, they limit the power of giving employment to numbers;
and however excellent their moral effect, they do little good
economically, unless the pauperism of those who are shut out, leads
indirectly to a readjustment by means of an increased restraint on
population.

Edition: current; Page: [405]


CHAPTER XV.: of Profits

§ 1. Having treated of the labourer' share of the produce, we next
proceed to the share of the capitalist; the profits of capital or stock;
the gains of the person who advances the expenses of production—who,
from funds in his possession, pays the wages of the labourers, or
supports them during the work; who supplies the requisite buildings,
materials, and tools or machinery; and to whom, by the usual terms of
the contract, the produce belongs, to be disposed of at his pleasure.
After indemnifying him for his outlay, there commonly remains a surplus,
which is his profit; the net income from his capital: the amount which
he can afford to spend in necessaries or pleasures, or from which by
further saving he can add to his wealth.

As the wages of the labourer are the remuneration of labour, so the
profits of the capitalist are properly, according to Mr. Senior'
well-chosen expression, the remuneration of abstinence. They are what he
gains by forbearing to consume his capital for his own uses, and
allowing it to be consumed by productive labourers for their uses. For
this forbearance he requires a recompense. Very often in personal
enjoyment he would be a gainer by squandering his capital, the capital
amounting to more than the sum of the profits which it will yield during
the years he can expect to live. But while he retains it undiminished,
he has always the power of consuming it if he wishes or needs; he can
bestow it upon others at his death; and in the meantime he derives from
it an income, which he can without impoverishment apply to the
satisfaction of his own wants or inclinations.

Of the gains, however, which the possession of a capital enables a
person to make, a part only is properly an equivalent for the use of the
capital itself; namely, as much as a solvent person would be willing to
pay for the loan of it. This, which as everybody Edition: current; Page:
[406] knows is called interest, is all that a person is enabled to get
by merely abstaining from the immediate consumption of his capital, and
allowing it to be used for productive purposes by others. The
remuneration which is obtained in any country for mere abstinence, is
measured by the current rate of interest on the best security: such
security as precludes any appreciable chance of losing the principal.
What a person expects to gain, who superintends the employment of his
own capital, is always more, and generally much more, than this. The
rate of profit greatly exceeds the rate of interest. The surplus is
partly compensation for risk. By lending his capital, on unexceptionable
security, he runs little or no risk. But if he embarks in business on
his own account, he always exposes his capital to some, and in many
cases to very great, danger of partial or total loss. For this danger he
must be compensated, otherwise he will not incur it. He must likewise be
remunerated for the devotion of his time and labour. The control of the
operations of industry usually belongs to the person who supplies the
whole or the greatest part of the funds by which they are carried on,
and who, according to the ordinary arrangement, is either alone
interested, or is the person most interested (at least directly), in the
result. To exercise this control with efficiency, if the concern is
large and complicated, requires great assiduity, and often, no ordinary
skill. This assiduity and skill must be remunerated.

The gross profits from capital, the gains returned to those who supply
the funds for production, must suffice for these three purposes. They
must afford a sufficient equivalent for abstinence, indemnity for risk,
and remuneration for the labour and skill required for superintendence.
These different compensations may be either paid to the same, or to
different persons. The capital, or some part of it, may be borrowed: may
belong to some one who does not undertake the risks or the trouble of
business. In that case, the lender, or owner, is the person who
practises the abstinence; and is remunerated for it by the interest paid
to him, while the difference between the interest and the gross profits
remunerates the exertions and risks of the undertaker.∗. Sometimes,
again, the capital, or a part of it, is supplied by what is called a
sleeping partner; who shares the risks of the employment, but not the
trouble, and who, in consideration of those risks, receives not a mere
interest, Edition: current; Page: [407] but a stipulated share of the
gross profits. Sometimes the capital is supplied and the risk incurred
by one person, and the business carried on exclusively in his name,
while the trouble of management is made over to another, who is engaged
for that purpose at a fixed salary. Management, however, by hired
servants, who have no interest in the result but that of preserving
their salaries, is proverbially inefficient, unless they act under the
inspecting eye, if not the controlling hand, of the person chiefly
interested: and prudence almost always recommends giving to a manager
not thus controlled, a remuneration partly dependent on the profits;
which virtually reduces the case to that of a sleeping partner. Or
finally, the same person may own the capital, and conduct the business;
adding, if he will and can, to the management of his own capital, that
of as much more as the owners may be willing to trust him with. But
under any or all of these arrangements, the same three things require
their remuneration, and must obtain it from the gross profit:
abstinence, risk, exertion. And the three parts into which profit may be
considered as resolving itself, may be described respectively as
interest, insurance, and wages of superintendence.

§ 2. The lowest rate of profit which can permanently exist, is that
which is barely adequate, at the given place and time, to afford an
equivalent for the abstinence, risk, and exertion implied in the
employment of capital. From the gross profit, has first to be deducted
as much as will form a fund sufficient on the average to cover all
losses incident to the employment. Next, it must afford such an
equivalent to the owner of the capital for forbearing to consume it, as
is then and there a sufficient motive to him to persist in his
abstinence. How much will be required to form this equivalent depends on
the comparative value placed, in the given society, upon the present and
the future: (in the words formerly used) on the strength of the
effective desire of accumulation. Further, after covering all losses,
and remunerating the owner for forbearing to consume,1. there must be
something left to recompense the labour and skill of the person who
devotes his time to the business. This recompense too must be sufficient
to enable at least the owners of the larger capitals to receive for
their trouble, or to pay to some manager for his, what to them or him
will be a sufficient inducement for undergoing it. If the surplus is no
more than this, none but Edition: current; Page: [408] large masses of
capital will be employed productively; and if it did not even amount to
this, capital would be withdrawn from production, and unproductively
consumed, until, by an indirect consequence of its diminished amount, to
be explained hereafter, the rate of profit was raised.

Such, then, is the minimum of profits: but that minimum is exceedingly
variable, and at some times and places extremely low; on account of the
great variableness of two out of its three elements. That the rate of
necessary remuneration for abstinence, or in other words the effective
desire of accumulation, differs widely in different states of society
and civilization, has been seen in a former chapter. There is a still
wider difference in the element which consists in compensation for risk.
I am not now speaking of the differences in point of risk between
different employments of capital in the same society, but of the very
different degrees of security of property in different states of
society. Where, as in many of the governments of Asia, property is in
perpetual danger of spoliation from a tyrannical government, or from its
rapacious and ill-controlled officers; where to possess or to be
suspected of possessing wealth, is to be a mark not only for plunder,
but perhaps for personal ill-treatment to extort the disclosure and
surrender of hidden valuables; or where, as in the European Middle Ages,
the weakness of the government, even when not itself inclined to
oppress, leaves its subjects exposed without protection or redress to
active spoliation, or audacious withholding of just rights, by any power
individual; the rate of profit which persons of average dispositions
will require, to make them forego the immediate enjoyment of what they
happen to possess, for the purpose of exposing it and themselves to
these perils, must be something very considerable. And these
contingencies affect those who live on the mere interest of their
capital, in common with those who personally engage in production. In a
generally secure state of society, the risks which may be attendant on
the nature of particular employments seldom fall on the person who lends
his capital, if he lends on good security; but in a state of society
like that of many parts of Asia, no security (except perhaps the actual
pledge of gold or jewels) is good: and the mere possession of a hoard,
when known or suspected, exposes it and the possessor to risks, for
which scarcely any profit he could expect to obtain would be an
equivalent; so that there would be still less accumulation than there
is, if a state of insecurity did not also multiply the occasions on
which the possession of a treasure may be the means Edition: current;
Page: [409] of saving life or averting serious calamities. Those who
lend under these wretched governments, do it at the utmost peril of
never being paid. In most of the native states of India, the lowest
terms on which any one will lend money, even to the government, are
such, that if the interest is paid only for a few years, and the
principal not at all, the lender is tolerably well indemnified. If the
accumulation of principal and compound interest is ultimately
compromised at a few shil1ings in the pound, he has generally made an
advantageous bargain.

§ 3. The remuneration of capital in different employments, much more
than1. the remuneration of labour, varies according to the circumstances
which render one employment more attractive, or more repulsive, than
another. The profits, for example, of retail trade, in proportion to the
capital employed, exceed those of wholesale dealers or manufacturers,
for this reason among others, that there is less consideration attached
to the employment. The greatest, however, of these differences, is that
caused by difference of risk. The profits of a gunpowder manufacturer
must be considerably greater than the average, to make up for the
peculiar risks to which he and his property are constantly exposed.
When, however, as in the case of marine adventure, the peculiar risks
are capable of being, and commonly are, commuted for a fixed payment,
the premium of insurance takes its regular place among the charges of
production, and the compensation which the owner of the ship or cargo
receives for that payment, does not appear in the estimate of his
profits, but is included in the replacement of his capital.

The portion, too, of the gross profit, which forms the remuneration for
the labour and skill of the dealer or producer, is very different in
different employments. This is the explanation always given of the
extraordinary rate of apothecaries' profit; the greatest part, as Adam
Smith observes, being frequently no more than the reasonable wages of
professional attendance; for which, until a late alteration of the law,
the apothecary could not demand any remuneration, except in the prices
of his drugs. Some occupations require a considerable amount of
scientific or technical education, and can [1848] only be carried on by
persons who combine with that education a considerable capital. Such is
the business of an engineer, both in the original sense of the term, a
machine-maker, Edition: current; Page: [410] and in its popular or
derivative sense, an undertaker of public works. These are always the
most profitable employments. There are cases, again, in which a
considerable amount of labour and skill is required to conduct a
business necessity of limited extent. In such cases, a higher than
common rate of profit is necessary to yield only the common rate of
remuneration. “In a small seaport-town,” says Adam Smith, “a little
grocer will make forty or fifty per cent upon a stock of a single
hundred pounds, while a considerable wholesale merchant in the same
place will scarce make eight or ten per cent upon a stock of ten
thousand. The trade of the grocer may be necessary for the conveniency
of the inhabitants, and the narrowness of the market may not admit the
employment of a larger capital in the business. The man, however, must
not only live by his trade, but live by it suitably to the
qualifications which it requires. Besides possessing a little capital,
he must be able to read, write, and account, and must be a tolerable
judge, too, of perhaps fifty or sixty different sorts of goods, their
prices, qualities, and the markets where they are to be had cheapest.
Thirty or forty pounds a year cannot be considered as too great a
recompense for the labour of a person so accomplished. Deduct this from
the seemingly great profits of his capital, and little more will remain,
perhaps, than the ordinary profits of stock. The greater part of the
apparent profit is, in this case, too, real wages.”

All the natural monopolies (meaning thereby those which are created by
circumstances, and not by law) which produce or aggravate the
disparities in the remuneration of different kinds of labour, operate
similarly between different employments of capital. If a business can
only be advantageously carried on by a large capital, this in most
countries limits so narrowly the class of persons who can enter into the
employment, that they are enabled to keep their rate of profit above the
general level. A trade may also, from the nature of the case, be
confined to so few hands, that profits may admit of being kept up by a
combination among the dealers. It is well known that even among so
numerous a body as the London booksellers, this sort of combination long
continued to exist.1. I have already mentioned the case of the gas and
water companies.

4. After due allowance is made for these various causes Edition:
current; Page: [411] of inequality, namely, differences in the risk or
agreeableness of different employments, and natural or artificial
monopolies; the rate of profit on capital in all employments tends to an
equality. Such is the proposition usually laid down by political
economists, and under proper explanations it is true.

That portion of profit which is properly interest, and which forms the
real remuneration for abstinence, is strictly the same, at the same time
and place, whatever be the employment. The rate of interest, on equally
good security, does not vary according to the destination of the
principal, though it does vary from time to time very much according to
the circumstances of the market. There is no employment in which, in the
present state of industry, competition is so active and incessant as in
the lending and borrowing of money. All persons in business are
occasionally, and most of them constantly, borrowers: while all persons
not in business, who possess monied property, are lenders. Between these
two great bodies there is a numerous, keen, and intelligent class of
middlemen, composed of bankers, stockbrokers, discount brokers, and
others, alive to the slightest breath of probable gain. The smallest
circumstance, or the most transient impression on the public mind, which
tends to an increase or diminution of the demand for loans either at the
time or prospectively, operates immediately on the rate of interest: and
circumstances in the general state of trade, really tending to cause
this difference of demand, are continually occurring, sometimes to such
an extent, that the rate of interest on the best mercantile bills has
been known to vary in little more than a year (even without the
occurrence of the great derangement called a commercial crisis) from
four, or less, to eight or nine per cent. But, at the same time and
place, the rate of interest is the same, to all who can give equally
good security. The market rate of interest is at all times a known and
definite thing.

It is far otherwise with gross profit; which, though (as will presently
be seen) it does not vary much from employment to employment, varies
very greatly from individual to individual, and can scarcely be in any
two cases the same. It depends on the knowledge, talents, economy, and
energy of the capitalist himself, or of the agents whom he employs; on
the accidents of personal connexion; and even on chance. Hardly any two
dealers in the same trade, even if their commodities are equally good
and equally cheap, carry on their business at the same expense, or turn
over their capital in the same time. That equal capitals give equal
Edition: current; Page: [412] profits, as a general maxim of trade,
would be as false as that equal age or size gives equal bodily strength,
or that equal reading or experience gives equal knowledge. The effect
depends as much upon twenty other things, as upon the single cause
specified.

But though profits thus vary, the parity on the whole, of different
modes of employing capital (in the absence of any natural or artificial
monopoly) is, in a certain and a very important sense, maintained. On an
average (whatever may be the occasional fluctuations) the various
employments of capital are on such a footing as to hold out not equal
profits, but equal expectations1. of profit, to persons of average
abilities and advantages. By equal, I mean after making compensation for
any inferiority in the agreeableness or safety of an employment. If the
case were not so; if there were, evidently, and to common experience,
more favourable chances of pecuniary success in one business than in
others, more persons would engage their capital in the business, or
would bring up their sons to it; which in fact always happens when a
business, like that of an engineer at present [1848], or like any newly
established and prosperous manufacture, is seen to be a growing and
thriving one. If, on the contrary, a business is not considered
thriving; if the chances of profit in it are thought to be inferior to
those in other employments; capital gradually leaves it, or at least new
capital is not attracted to it; and by this change in the distribution
of capital between the less profitable and the more profitable
employments, a sort of balance is restored. The expectations of profit,
therefore, in different employments, cannot long continue very
different: they tend to a common average, though they are generally
oscillating from one side to the other side of the medium.

This equalizing process, commonly described as the transfer of capital
from one employment to another, is not necessarily the onerous, slow,
and almost impracticable operation which it is very often represented to
be. In the first place, it does not always imply the actual removal of
capital already embarked in an employment. In a rapidly progressive
state of capital, the adjustment often takes place by means of the new
accumulations of each year, which direct themselves in preference
towards the more thriving trades. Even when a real transfer of capital
is necessary, it is by no means implied that any of those who are
engaged in the unprofitable employment relinquish business and Edition:
current; Page: [413] break up their establishments. The numerous and
multifarious channels of credit, through which, in commercial nations,
unemployed capital diffuses itself over the field of employment, flowing
over in greater abundance to the lower levels, are the means by which
the equalization is accomplished. The process consists in a limitation
by one class of dealers or producers, and an extension by the other, of
that portion of their business which is carried on with borrowed
capital. There is scarcely any dealer or producer on a considerable
scale, who confines his business to what can be carried on by his own
funds. When trade is good, he not only uses to the utmost his own
capital, but employs, in addition, much of the credit which that capital
obtains for him. When, either from over-supply or from some slackening
in the demand for his commodity, he finds that it sells more slowly or
obtains a lower price, he contracts his operations, and does not apply
to bankers or other money dealers for a renewal of their advances to the
same extent as before. A business which is increasing holds out, on the
contrary, a prospect of profitable employment for a larger amount of
this floating capital than previously, and those engaged in it become
applicants to the money dealers for larger advances, which, from their
improving circumstances, they have no difficulty in obtaining. A
different distribution of floating capital between two employments has
as much effect in restoring their profits to an equilibrium, as if the
owners of an equal amount of capital were to abandon the one trade and
carry their capital into the other. This easy, and as it were
spontaneous, method of accommodating production to demand, is quite
sufficient to correct any inequalities arising from the fluctuations of
trade, or other causes of ordinary occurrence. In the case of an
altogether declining trade, in which it is necessary that the production
should be, not occasionally varied, but greatly and permanently
diminished, or perhaps stopped altogether, the process of extricating
the capital is, no doubt, tardy and difficult, and almost always
attended with considerable loss; much of the capital fixed in machinery,
buildings, permanent works, &c. being either not applicable to any other
purpose, or only applicable after expensive alterations; and time being
seldom given for effecting the change in the mode in which it would be
effected with least loss, namely, by not replacing the fixed capital as
it wears out. There is besides, in totally changing the destination of a
capital, so great a sacrifice of established connexion, and of acquired
skill and experience, that people are always very slow in Edition:
current; Page: [414] resolving upon it, and hardly ever do so until long
after a change of fortune has become hopeless. These, however, are
distinctly exceptional cases, and even in these the equalization is at
last effected. It may also happen that the return to equilibrium is
considerably protracted, when, before one inequality has been corrected,
another cause of inequality arises; which is said to have been
continually the case, during a long series of years, with the production
of cotton in the Southern States of North America; the commodity having
been upheld at what was virtually a monopoly price, because the increase
of demand, from successive improvements in the manufacture, went on with
a rapidity so much beyond expectation that for many years the supply
never completely overtook it. But it is not often that a succession of
disturbing causes, all acting in the same direction, are known to follow
one another with hardly any interval. Where there is no monopoly, the
profits of a trade are likely to range sometimes above and sometimes
below the general level, but tending always to return to it; like the
oscillations of the pendulum.

In general, then, although profits are very different to different
individuals, and to the same individual in different years, there cannot
be much diversity at the same time and place in the average profits of
different employments, (other than the standing differences necessary to
compensate for difference of attractiveness,) except for short periods,
or when some great permanent revulsion has overtaken a particular trade.
If any popular impression exists that some trades are more profitable
than others, independently of monopoly, or of such rare accidents as
have been noticed in regard to the cotton trade, the impression is in
all probability fallacious, since if it were shared by those who have
greatest means of knowledge and motives to accurate examination, there
would take place such an influx of capital as would soon lower the
profits to the common level. It is true that, to persons with the same
amount of original means, there is more chance of making a large fortune
in some employments than in others. But it would be found that in those
same employments, bankruptcies also are more frequent, and that the
chance of greater success is balanced by a greater probability of
complete failure. Very often it is more than balanced: for, as was
remarked in another case, the chance of great prizes operates with a
greater degree of strength than arithmetic will warrant, in attracting
competitors; and I doubt not that the average gains, in a trade in which
large fortunes may be made, are lower than in those in which Edition:
current; Page: [415] gains are slow, though comparatively sure, and in
which nothing is to be ultimately hoped for beyond a competency. The
timber trade of Canada is [1848] one example of an employment of capital
partaking so much of the nature of a lottery, as to make it an
accredited opinion that, taking the adventurers in the aggregate, there
is more money lost by the trade than gained by it; in other words, that
the average rate of profit is less than nothing. In such points as this,
much depends on the characters of nations, according as they partake
more or less of the adventurous, or, as it is called when the intention
is to blame it, the gambling spirit. This spirit is much stronger in the
United States than in Great Britain; and in Great Britain than in any
country of the Continent. In some Continental countries the tendency is
so much the reverse, that safe and quiet employments probably yield a
less average profit to the capital engaged in them, than those which
offer greater gains at the price of greater hazards.

It must not however be forgotten, that even in the countries of most
active competition, custom also has a considerable share in determining
the profits of trade. There is sometimes an idea afloat as to what the
profit of an employment should be, which though not adhered to by all
the dealers, nor perhaps rigidly by any, still exercises a certain
influence over their operations. There has been in England a kind of
notion, how widely prevailing I know not, that fifty per cent is a
proper and suitable rate of profit in retail transactions: understand,
not fifty per cent on the whole capital, but an advance of fifty per
cent on the wholesale prices; from which have to be defrayed bad debts,
shop rent, the pay of clerks, shopmen, and agents of all descriptions,
in short all the expenses of the retail business. If this custom were
universal, and strictly adhered to, competition indeed would still
operate, but the consumer would not derive any benefit from it, at least
as to price; the way in which it would diminish the advantages of those
engaged in the retail trade, would be by a greater subdivision of the
business. In some parts of the Continent the standard is as high as a
hundred per cent. The increase of competition however, in England at
least, is rapidly tending to break down customs of this description. In
the majority of trades (at least in the great emporia of trade), there
are now numerous dealers whose motto is, “small gains and frequent” —a
great business at low prices, rather than high prices and few
transactions; and by turning over their capital more rapidly, and adding
to it by borrowed capital when needed, Edition: current; Page: [416] the
dealers often obtain individually higher profits; though they
necessarily lower the profits of those among their competitors, who do
not adopt the same principle.1;. Nevertheless, competition, as
remarked∗. in a previous chapter, has, as yet, but a limited dominion
over retail prices; and consequently the share of the whole produce of
land and labour which is absorbed in the remuneration of mere
distributors, continues exorbitant; and there is no function in the
economy of society which supports a number of persons so disproportioned
to the amount of work to be performed.

§ 5. The preceding remarks have, I hope, sufficiently elucidated what is
meant by the common phrase, “the ordinary rate of profit;” and the sense
in which, and the limitations under which, this ordinary rate has a real
existence. It now remains to consider, what causes determine its amount.

2. To popular apprehension it seems as if the profits of business
depended upon prices. A producer or dealer seems to obtain his profits
by selling his commodity for more than it cost him. Profit altogether,
people are apt to think, is a consequence of purchase and sale. It is
only (they suppose) because there are purchasers for a commodity, that
the producer of it is able to make any profit. Demand—customers—a market
for the commodity, are the cause of the gains of capitalists. It is by
the sale of their goods, that they replace their capital, and add to its
amount.

This, however, is looking only at the outside surface of the economical
machinery of society. In no case, we find, is the mere money which
passes from one person to another, the fundamental matter in any
economical phenomenon. If we look more narrowly into the operations of
the producer, we shall perceive that the money he obtains for his
commodity is not the cause of his having a profit, but only the mode in
which his profit is paid to him.

The cause of profit is, that labour produces more than is required for
its support. The reason why agricultural capital yields a profit, is
because human beings can grow more food, than is necessary to feed them
while it is being grown, including the time occupied in constructing the
tools, and making all other needful preparations: from which it is a
consequence, that if a capitalist undertakes to feed the labourers on
condition of receiving the produce, he has Edition: current; Page: [417]
some of it remaining for himself after replacing his advances. To vary
the form of the theorem: the reason why capital yields a profit, is
because food, clothing, materials, and tools, last longer than the time
which was required to produce them; so that if a capitalist supplies a
party of labourers with these things, on condition of receiving all they
produce, they will, in addition to reproducing their own necessaries and
instruments, have a portion of their time remaining, to work for the
capitalist. We thus see that profit arises, not from the incident of
exchange, but from the productive power of labour; and the general
profit of the country is always what the productive power of labour
makes it, whether any exchange takes place or not. If there were no
division of employments, there would be no buying or selling, but there
would still be profit. If the labourers of the country collectively
produce twenty per cent more than their wages, profits will be twenty
per cent, whatever prices may or may not be. The accidents of price may
for a time make one set of producers get more than the twenty per cent,
and another less, the one commodity being rated above its natural value
in relation to other commodities, and the other below, until prices have
again adjusted themselves; but there will always be just twenty per cent
divided among them all.

I proceed, in expansion of the considerations thus briefly indicated, to
exhibit more minutely the mode in which the rate of profit is
determined.

§ 6. I assume, throughout, the state of things, which, where the
labourers and capitalists are separate classes, prevails, with few
exceptions, universally; namely, that the capitalist advances the whole
expenses, including the entire remuneration of the labourer. That he
should do so, is not a matter of inherent necessity; the labourer might
wait until the production is complete, for all that part of his wages
which exceeds mere necessaries; and even for the whole, if he has funds
in hand, sufficient for his temporary support. But in the latter case,
the labourer is to that extent really a capitalist, investing capital in
the concern, by supplying a portion of the funds necessary for carrying
it on; and even in the former case he may be looked upon in the same
light, since, contributing his labour at less than the market price, he
may be regarded as lending the difference to his employer, and receiving
it back with interest (on whatever principle computed) from the proceeds
of the enterprise.

The capitalist, then, may be assumed to make all the advances, Edition:
current; Page: [418] and receive all the produce. His profit consists of
the excess of the produce above the advances; his rate of profit is the
ratio which that excess bears to the amount advanced. But what do the
advances consist of?

It is, for the present, necessary to suppose, that the capitalist does
not pay any rent; has not to purchase the use of any appropriated
natural agent. This indeed is scarcely ever the exact truth. The
agricultural capitalist, except when he is the owner of the soil he
cultivates, always, or almost always, pays rent: and even in
manufactures, (not to mention ground-rent,) the materials of the
manufacture have generally paid rent, in some stage of their production.
The nature of rent, however, we have not yet taken into consideration;
and it will hereafter appear, that no practical error, on the question
we are now examining, is produced by disregarding it.

If, then, leaving rent out of the question, we inquire in what it is
that the advances of the capitalist, for purposes of production,
consist, we shall find that they consist of wages of labour.

A large portion of the expenditure of every capitalist consists in the
direct payment of wages. What does not consist of this, is composed of
materials and implements, including buildings. But materials and
implements are produced by labour; and as our supposed capitalist is not
meant to represent a single employment, but to be a type of the
productive industry of the whole country, we may suppose that he makes
his own tools, and raises his own materials. He does this by means of
previous advances, which, again, consist wholly of wages. If we suppose
him to buy the materials and tools instead of producing them, the case
is not altered: he then repays to a previous producer the wages which
that previous producer has paid. It is true, he repays it to him with a
profit; and if he had produced the things himself, he himself must have
had that profit, on this part of his outlay, as well as on every other
part. The fact, however, remains, that in the whole process of
production, beginning with the materials and tools, and ending with the
finished product, all the advances have consisted of nothing but wages;
except that certain of the capitalists concerned have, for the sake of
general convenience, had their share of profit paid to them before the
operation was completed. Whatever, of the ultimate product, is not
profit, is repayment of wages.

§ 7. It thus appears that the two elements on which, and which alone,
the gains of the capitalists depend, are, first, the magnitude Edition:
current; Page: [419] of the produce, in other words, the productive
power of labour; and secondly, the proportion of that produce obtained
by the labourers themselves; the ratio, which the remuneration of the
labourers bears to the amount they produce. These two things form the
data for determining the gross amount divided as profit among all the
capitalists of the country; but the rate of profit, the percentage on
the capital, depends only on the second of the two elements, the
labourer' proportional share, and not on the amount to be shared. If the
produce of labour were doubled, and the labourers obtained the same
proportional share as before, that is, if their remuneration was also
doubled, the capitalists, it is true, would gain twice as much; but as
they would also have had to advance twice as much, the rate of their
profit would be only the same as before.

We thus arrive at the conclusion of Ricardo and others, that the rate of
profits depends on wages; rising as wages fall, and falling as wages
rise. In adopting, however, this doctrine, I must insist upon making a
most necessary alteration in its wording. Instead of saying that profits
depend on wages, let us say (what Ricardo really meant) that they depend
on the cost of labour.

Wages, and the cost of labour; what labour brings in to the labourer,
and what it costs to the capitalist; are ideas quite distinct, and which
it is of the utmost importance to keep so. For this purpose it is
essential not to designate them, as is almost always done, by the same
name. Wages, in public discussions, both oral and printed, being looked
upon from the point of view of the payers, much oftener than from that
of the receivers, nothing is more common than to say that wages are high
or low, meaning only that the cost of labour is high or low. The reverse
of this would be oftener the truth: the cost of labour is frequently at
its highest where wages are lowest. This may arise from two causes. In
the first place, the labour, though cheap, may be inefficient. In no
European country are wages so low as they are (or at least were1.) in
Ireland: the remuneration of an agricultural labourer in the west of
Ireland not being more than half the wages of even the lowest-paid
Englishman, the Dorsetshire labourer. But if, from inferior skill and
industry, two days' labour of an Irishman accomplished no more work than
an English labourer performed in one, the Irishman' labour cost as much
as the Englishman' , though it brought in so much less to himself. The
capitalist' profit is determined by the former of these Edition:
current; Page: [420] two things, not by the latter. That a difference to
this extent really existed in the efficiency of the labour, is proved
not only by abundant testimony, but by the fact, that notwithstanding
the lowness of wages, profits of capital are not understood to have been
higher in Ireland than in England.

The other cause which renders wages, and the cost of labour, no real
criteria of one another, is the varying costliness of the articles which
the labourer consumes. If these are cheap, wages, in the sense which is
of importance to the labourer, may be high, and yet the cost of labour
may be low; if dear, the labourer may be wretchedly off, though his
labour may cost much to the capitalist. This last is the condition of a
country over-peopled in relation to its land; in which, food being dear,
the poorness of the labourer' real reward does not prevent labour from
costing much to the purchaser, and low wages and low profits co-exist.
The opposite case is exemplified in the United States of America. The
labourer there enjoys a greater abundance of comforts than in any other
country of the world, except some of the newest colonies; but owing to
the cheap price at which these comforts can be obtained (combined with
the great efficiency of the labour), the cost of labour to the
capitalist is at least not higher, nor the rate of profit lower, than in
Europe.1.

The cost of labour, then, is, in the language of mathematics, a function
of three variables: the efficiency of labour; the wages of labour
(meaning thereby the real reward of the labourer); and the greater or
less cost at which the articles composing that real reward can be
produced or procured. It is plain that the cost of labour to the
capitalist must be influenced by each of these three circumstances, and
by no others. These, therefore, are also the circumstances which
determine the rate of profit; and it cannot be in any way affected
except through one or other of them. If labour generally became more
efficient, without being more highly rewarded; if, without its becoming
less efficient, its remuneration fell, no increase taking place in the
cost of the articles composing that remuneration; or if those articles
became less costly, without the labourer' obtaining more of them; in any
one of these three cases, profits would rise. If, on the contrary,
labour became less efficient (as it might Edition: current; Page: [421]
do from diminished bodily vigour in the people, destruction of fixed
capital, or deteriorated education); or if the labourer obtained a
higher remuneration, without any increased cheapness in the things
composing it; or if, without his obtaining more, that which he did
obtain became more costly; profits, in all these cases, would suffer a
diminution. And there is no other combination of circumstances, in which
the general rate of profit of a country, in all employments
indifferently, can either fall or rise.

The evidence of these propositions can only be stated generally, though,
it is hoped, conclusively, in this stage of our subject. It will come
out in greater fulness and force when, having taken into consideration
the theory of Value and Price, we shall be enabled to exhibit the law of
profits in the concrete—in the complex entanglement of circumstances in
which it actually works. This can only be done in the ensuing Book. One
topic still remains to be discussed in the present one, so far as it
admits of being treated independently of considerations of Value; the
subject of Rent; to which we now proceed.1.

Edition: current; Page: [422]


CHAPTER XVI.: of Rent

§ 1. The requisites of production being labour, capital, and natural
agents; the only person, besides the labourer and the capitalist, whose
consent is necessary to production, and who can claim a share of the
produce as the price of that consent, is the person who, by the
arrangements of society, possesses exclusive power over some natural
agent. The land is the principal of the natural agents which are capable
of being appropriated, and the consideration paid for its use is called
rent. Landed proprietors are the only class, of any number or
importance, who have a claim to a share in the distribution of the
produce, through their ownership of something which neither they nor any
one else have produced. If there be any other cases of a similar nature,
they will be easily understood, when the nature and laws of rent are
comprehended.

It is at once evident, that rent is the effect of a monopoly; though the
monopoly is a natural one, which may be regulated, which may even be
held as a trust for the community generally, but which cannot be
prevented from existing. The reason why landowners are able to require
rent for their land, is that it is a commodity which many want, and
which no one can obtain but from them. If all the land of the country
belonged to one person, he could fix the rent at his pleasure. The whole
people would be dependent on his will for the necessaries of life, and
he might make what conditions he chose. This is the actual state of
things in those Oriental kingdoms in which the land is considered the
property of the state. Rent is then confounded with taxation, and the
despot may exact the utmost which the unfortunate cultivators have to
give. Indeed, the exclusive possessor of the land of a country could not
well be other than despot of it. The effect would be much the same if
the land belonged to so few people, that they could, and did, act
together as one man, and fix the rent by agreement among themselves.
This case, however, is nowhere known to exist: and the only Edition:
current; Page: [423] remaining supposition is that of free competition;
the landowners being supposed to be, as in fact they are, too numerous
to combine.

§ 2. A thing which is limited in quantity, even though its possessors do
not act in concert, is still a monopolized article. But even when
monopolized, a thing which is the gift of nature, and requires no labour
or outlay as the condition of its existence, will, if there be
competition among the holders of it, command a price, only if it exists
in less quantity than the demand. If the whole land of a country were
required for cultivation, all of it might yield a rent. But in no
country of any extent do the wants of the population require that all
the land, which is capable of cultivation, should be cultivated. The
food and other agricultural produce which the people need, and which
they are willing and able to pay for at a price which remunerates the
grower, may always be obtained without cultivating all the land;
sometimes without cultivating more than a small part of it; the lands
most easily cultivated being preferred in a very early stage of
society;1. the most fertile, or those in the most convenient situations,
in a more advanced state. There is always, therefore, some land which
cannot, in existing circumstances, pay any rent; and no land ever pays
rent, unless, in point of fertility or situation, it belongs to those
superior kinds which exist in less quantity than the demand—which cannot
be made to yield all the produce required for the community, unless on
terms still less advantageous than the resort to less favoured soils.

There is land, such as the deserts of Arabia, which will yield nothing
to any amount of labour; and there is land, like some of our hard sandy
heaths, which would produce something, but, in the present state of the
soil, not enough to defray the expenses of production. Such lands,
unless by some application of chemistry to agriculture still remaining
to be invented, cannot be cultivated for profit, unless some one
actually creates a soil, by spreading new ingredients over the surface,
or mixing them with the existing materials. If ingredients fitted for
this purpose exist in the subsoil, or close at hand, the improvement
even of the most unpromising spots may answer as a speculation: but if
those ingredients are costly, and must be brought from a distance, it
will seldom answer to do this for the sake of profit, though the “magic
of property” will sometimes effect it. Land which cannot possibly yield
a profit, is sometimes cultivated at a loss, the cultivators having
their wants Edition: current; Page: [424] partially supplied from other
sources; as in the case of paupers, and some monasteries or charitable
institutions, among which may be reckoned the Poor Colonies of Belgium.
The worse land which can be cultivated as a means of subsistence, is
that which will just replace the seed, and the food of the labourers
employed on it, together with what Dr. Chalmers calls their secondaries;
that is, the labourers required for supplying them with tools, and with
the remaining necessaries of life. Whether any given land is capable of
doing more than this, is not a question of political economy, but of
physical fact. The supposition leaves nothing for profits, nor anything
for the labourers except necessaries: the land, therefore, can only be
cultivated by the labourers themselves, or else at a pecuniary loss: and
à fortiori, cannot in any contingency afford a rent. The worst land
which can be cultivated as an investment for capital, is that which,
after replacing the seed, not only feeds the agricultural labourers and
their secondaries, but affords them the current rate of wages, which may
extend to much more than mere necessaries; and leaves for those who have
advanced the wages of these two classes of labourers, a surplus equal to
the profit they could have expected from any other employment of their
capital. Whether any given land can do more than this, is not merely a
physical question, but depends partly on the market value of
agricultural produce. What the land can do for the labourers and for the
capitalist, beyond feeding all whom it directly or indirectly employs,
of course depends upon what the remainder of the produce can be sold
for. The higher the market value of produce, the lower are the soils to
which cultivation can descend, consistently with affording to the
capital employed, the ordinary rate of profit.

As, however, differences of fertility slide into one another by
insensible gradations; and differences of accessibility, that is, of
distance from markets, do the same; and since there is land so barren
that it could not pay for its cultivation at any price; it is evident
that, whatever the price may be, there must in any extensive region be
some land which at that price will just pay the wages of the
cultivators, and yield to the capital employed the ordinary profit, and
no more. Until, therefore, the price rises higher, or until some
improvement raises that particular land to a higher place in the scale
of fertility, it cannot pay any rent. It is evident, however, that the
community needs the produce of this quality of land; since if the lands
more fertile or better situated than it, could have sufficed to supply
the wants of society, the price would not have Edition: current; Page:
[425] risen so high as to render its cultivation profitable. This land,
therefore, will be cultivated; and we may lay it down as a principle
that so long as any of the land of a country which is fit for
cultivation, and not withheld from it by legal or other factitious
obstacles, is not cultivated, the worst land in actual cultivation (in
point of fertility and situation together) pays no rent.

§ 3. If, then, of the land in cultivation, the part which yields least
return to the labour and capital employed on it gives only the ordinary
profit of capital, without leaving anything for rent; a standard is
afforded for estimating the amount of rent which will be yielded by all
other land. Any land yields just as much more than the ordinary profits
of stock, as it yields more than what is returned by the worst land in
cultivation. The surplus is what the farmer can afford to pay as rent to
the landlord; and since, if he did not so pay it, he would receive more
than the ordinary rate of profit, the competition of other capitalists,
that competition which equalizes the profits of different capitals, will
enable the landlord to appropriate it. The rent, therefore, which any
land will yield, is the excess of its produce beyond what would be
returned to the same capital if employed on the worst land in
cultivation. This is not, and never was pretended to be, the limit of
metayer rents, or of cottier rents; but it is the limit of farmers'
rents. No land rented to a capitalist farmer will permanently yield more
than this; and when it yields less, it is because the landlord foregoes
a part of what, if he chose, he could obtain.

This is the theory of rent, first propounded at the end of the last
century by Dr. Anderson, and which, neglected at the time, was almost
simultaneously rediscovered, twenty years later, by Sir Edward West, Mr.
Malthus, and Mr. Ricardo. It is one of the cardinal doctrines of
political economy; and until it was understood, no consistent
explanation could be given of many of the more complicated industrial
phenomena. The evidence of its truth will be manifested with a great
increase of clearness, when we come to trace the laws of the phenomena
of Value and Price. Until that is done, it is not possible to free the
doctrine from every difficulty which may present itself, nor perhaps to
convey, to those previously unacquainted with the subject, more than a
general apprehension of the reasoning by which the theorem is arrived
at. Some, however, of the objections commonly made to it, admit of a
complete answer even in the present stage of our inquiries.

Edition: current; Page: [426]
It has been denied that there can be any land in cultivation which pays
no rent; because landlords (it is contended) would not allow their land
to be occupied without payment. Those who lay any stress on this as an
objection, must think that land of the quality which can but just pay
for its cultivation, lies together in large masses, detached from any
land of better quality. If an estate consisted wholly of this land, or
of this and still worse, it is likely enough that the owner would not
give the use of it for nothing; he would probably (if a rich man) prefer
keeping it for other purposes, as for exercise, or ornament, or perhaps
as a game preserve. No farmer could afford to offer him anything for it,
for purposes of culture; though something would probably be obtained for
the use of its natural pasture, or other spontaneous produce. Even such
land, however, would not necessarily remain uncultivated. It might be
farmed by the proprietor; no unfrequent case even in England. Portions
of it might be granted as temporary allotments to labouring families,
either from philanthropic motives, or to save the poor-rate; or
occupation might be allowed to squatters, free of rent, in the hope that
their labour might give it value at some future period. Both these cases
are of quite ordinary occurrence. So that even if an estate were wholly
composed of the worst land capable of profitable cultivation, it would
not necessarily lie uncultivated because it could pay no rent. Inferior
land, however, does not usually occupy, without interruption, many
square miles of ground; it is dispersed here and there, with patches of
better land intermixed, and the same person who rents the better land,
obtains along with it inferior soils which alternate with it. He pays a
rent, nominally for the whole farm, but calculated on the produce of
these parts alone (however small a portion of the whole) which are
capable of returning more than the common rate of profit. It is thus
scientifically true, that the remaining parts pay no rent.

§ 4. Let us, however, suppose that there were a validity in this
objection, which can by no means be conceded to it; that when the demand
of the community had forced up food to such a price as would remunerate
the expense of producing it from a certain quality of soil, it happened
nevertheless that all the soil of that quality was withheld from
cultivation, by the obstinacy of the owners in demanding a rent for it,
not nominal, nor trifling, but sufficiently onerous to be a material
item in the calculations of a farmer. What would then happen? Merely
that the increase of Edition: current; Page: [427] produce, which the
wants of society required, would for the time be obtained wholly (as it
always is partially), not by an extension of cultivation, but by an
increased application of labour and capital to land already cultivated.

Now we have already seen that this increased application of capital,
other things being unaltered, is always attended with a smaller
proportional return. We are not to suppose some new agricultural
invention made precisely at this juncture; nor a sudden extension of
agricultural skill and knowledge, bringing into more general practice,
just then, inventions already in partial use. We are to suppose no
change, except a demand for more corn, and a consequent rise of its
price. The rise of price enables measures to be taken for increasing the
produce, which could not have been taken with profit at the previous
price. The farmer uses more expensive manures; or manures land which he
formerly left to nature; or procures lime or marl from a distance, as a
dressing for the soil; or pulverizes or weeds it more thoroughly; or
drains, irrigates, or subsoils portions of it, which at former prices
would not have paid the cost of the operation; and so forth. These
things, or some of them, are done, when, more food being wanted,
cultivation has no means of expanding itself upon new lands. And when
the impulse is given to extract an increased amount of produce from the
soil, the farmer or improver will only consider whether the outlay he
makes for the purpose will be returned to him with the ordinary profit,
and not whether any surplus will remain for rent. Even, therefore, if it
were the fact, that there is never any land taken into cultivation, for
which rent, and that too of an amount worth taking into consideration,
was not paid; it would be true, nevertheless, that there is always some
agricultural capital which pays no rent, because it returns nothing
beyond the ordinary rate of profit: this capital being the portion of
capital last applied—that to which the last addition to the produce was
due: or (to express the essentials of the case in one phrase), that
which is applied in the least favourable circumstances. But the same
amount of demand, and the same price, which enable this least productive
portion of capital barely to replace itself with the ordinary profit,
enable every other portion to yield a surplus proportioned to the
advantage it possesses. And this surplus it is, which competition
enables the landlord to appropriate. The rent of all land is measured by
the excess of the return to the whole capital employed on it, above what
is necessary to replace the capital with the ordinary Edition: current;
Page: [428] rate of profit, or in other words, above what the same
capital would yield if it were all employed in as disadvantageous
circumstances as the least productive portion of it; whether that least
productive portion of capital is rendered so by being employed on the
worst soil, or by being expended in extorting more produce from land
which already yielded as much as it could be made to part with on easier
terms.

It is not pretended that the facts of any concrete case conform with
absolute precision to this or any other scientific principle. We must
never forget that the truths of political economy are truths only in the
rough: they have the certainty, but not the precision, of exact
science.1. It is not, for example, strictly true that a farmer will
cultivate no land, and apply no capital, which returns less than the
ordinary profit. He will expect the ordinary profit on the bulk of his
capital. But when he has cast in his lot with his farm, and bartered his
skill and exertions, once for all, against what the farm will yield to
him, he will probably be willing to expend capital on it (for an
immediate return) in any manner which will afford him a surplus profit,
however small, beyond the value of the risk, and the interest which he
must pay for the capital if borrowed, or can get for it elsewhere if it
is his own. But a new farmer, entering on the land, would make his
calculations differently, and would not commence unless he could expect
the full rate of ordinary profit on all the capital which he intended
embarking in the enterprise. Again, prices may range higher or lower
during the currency of a lease, than was expected when the contract was
made, and the land, therefore, may be over or under-rented: and even
when the lease expires, the landlord may be unwilling to grant a
necessary diminution of rent, and the farmer, rather than relinquish his
occupation, or seek a farm elsewhere when all are occupied, may consent
to go on paying too high a rent. Irregularities like these we must
always expect; it is impossible in political economy to obtain general
theorems embracing the complications of circumstances which may affect
the result in an individual case. When, too,2. the farmer class, having
but little capital, cultivate for subsistence rather than for profit,
and do not think of quitting their farm while they are able to live by
it, their rents approximate to the character of cottier rents, and may
be forced up by competition (if the number of competitors exceeds the
number of farms) beyond Edition: current; Page: [429] the amount which
will leave to the farmer the ordinary rate of profit. The laws which we
are enabled to lay down respecting rents, profits, wages, prices, are
only true in so far as the persons concerned are free from the influence
of any other motives than those arising from the general circumstances
of the case, and are guided, as to those, by the ordinary mercantile
estimate of profit and loss. Applying this twofold supposition to the
case of farmers and landlords, it will be true that the farmer requires
the ordinary rate of profit on the whole of his capital; that whatever
it returns to him beyond this he is obliged to pay to the landlord, but
will not consent to pay more; that there is a portion of capital applied
to agriculture in such circumstances of productiveness as to yield only
the ordinary profits; and that the difference between the produce of
this, and any other capital of similar amount, is the measure of the
tribute which that other capital can and will pay, under the name of
rent, to the landlord. This constitutes a law of rent, as near the truth
as such a law can possibly be: though of course modified or disturbed in
individual cases, by pending contracts, individual miscalculations, the
influence of habit, and even the particular feelings and dispositions of
the persons concerned.

§ 5. A remark is often made, which must not here be omitted, though, I
think, more importance has been attached to it than it merits. Under the
name of rent, many payments are commonly included which are not a
remuneration for the original powers of the land itself, but for capital
expended on it. The additional rent which land yields in consequence of
this outlay of capital, should, in the opinion of some writers, be
regarded as profit, not rent. But before this can be admitted, a
distinction must be made. The annual payment by a tenant almost always
includes a consideration for the use of the buildings on the farm; not
only barns, stables, and other outhouses, but a house to live in, not to
speak of fences and the like. The landlord will ask, and the tenant
give, for these, whatever is considered sufficient to yield the ordinary
profit, or rather (risk and trouble being here out of the question) the
ordinary interest, on the value of the buildings: that is, not on what
it has cost to erect them, but on what it would now cost to erect others
as good: the tenant being bound, in addition, to leave them in as good
repair as he found them, for otherwise a much larger payment than simple
interest would of course be required from him. These buildings are as
distinct a thing from the farm as the stock or the Edition: current;
Page: [430] timber on it; and what is paid for them can no more be
called rent of land, than a payment for cattle would be, if it were the
custom that the landlord should stock the farm for the tenant. The
buildings, like the cattle, are not land, but capital, regularly
consumed and reproduced; and all payments made in consideration for them
are properly interest.

But with regard to capital actually sunk in improvements, and not
requiring periodical renewal, but spent once for all in giving the land
a permanent increase of productiveness, it appears to me that the return
made to such capital loses altogether the character of profits, and is
governed by the principles of rent. It is true that a landlord will not
expend capital in improving his estate, unless he expects from the
improvement an increase of income surpassing the interest of his outlay.
Prospectively, this increase of income may be regarded as profit; but
when the expense has been incurred, and the improvement made, the rent
of the improved land is governed by the same rules as that of the
unimproved. Equally fertile land commands an equal rent, whether its
fertility is natural or acquired; and I cannot think that the incomes of
those who own the Bedford Level or the Lincolnshire Wolds ought to be
called profit and not rent because those lands would have been worth
next to nothing unless capital had been expended on them. The owners are
not capitalists, but landlords; they have parted with their capital; it
is consumed, destroyed; and neither is, nor is to be, returned to them,
like the capital of a farmer or manufacturer, from what it produces. In
lieu of it they now have land of a certain richness, which yields the
same rent, and by the operation of the same causes, as if it had
possessed from the beginning the degree of fertility which has been
artificially given to it.

Some writers, in particular Mr. H. C. Carey, take away, still more
completely than I have attempted to do, the distinction between these
two sources of rent, by rejecting one of them altogether, and
considering all rent as the effect of capital expended. In proof of
this, Mr. Carey contends that the whole pecuniary value of all the land
in any country, in England for instance, or in the United States, does
not amount to anything approaching to the sum which has been laid out,
or which it would even now be necessary to lay out, in order to bring
the country to its present condition from a state of primaeval forest.
This startling statement has been seized on by M. Bastiat1. and others,
as a means of making out a Edition: current; Page: [431] stronger case
than could otherwise be made in defence of property in land. Mr. Carey'
proposition, in its most obvious meaning, is equivalent to saying, that
if there were suddenly added to the lands of England an unreclaimed
territory of equal natural fertility, it would not be worth the while of
the inhabitants of England to reclaim it: because the profits of the
operation would not be equal to the ordinary interest on the capital
expended. To which assertion if any answer could be supposed to be
required, it would suffice to remark, that land not of equal but of
greatly inferior quality to that previously cultivated, is continually
reclaimed in England, at an expense which the subsequently accruing rent
is sufficient to replace completely in a small number of years. The
doctrine, moreover, is totally opposed to Mr. Carey' own economical
opinions. No one maintains more strenuously than Mr. Carey the undoubted
truth, that as society advances in population, wealth, and combination
of labour, land constantly rises in value and price. This, however,
could not possibly be true, if the present value of land were less than
the expense of clearing it and making it fit for cultivation; for it
must have been worth this immediately after it was cleared; and
according to Mr. Carey it has been rising in value ever since.

When, however, Mr. Carey asserts that the whole land of any country is
not now worth the capital which has been expended on it, he does not
mean that each particular estate is worth less than what has been laid
out in improving it, and that, to the proprietors, the improvement of
the land has been, in the final result, a miscalculation. He means, not
that the land of Great Britain would not now sell for what has been laid
out upon it, but that it would not sell for that amount plus the expense
of making all the roads, canals, and railways. This is probably true,
but is no more to the purpose, and no more important in political
economy, than if the statement had been, that it would not sell for the
sums laid out on it plus the national debt, or plus the cost of the
French Revolutionary war, or any other expense incurred for a real or
imaginary public advantage. The roads, railways, and canals were not
constructed to give value to land: on the contrary, their natural effect
was to lower its value, by rendering other and rival lands accessible:
and the landlords of the southern counties actually petitioned
Parliament against the turnpike roads on this very account.

Edition: current; Page: [432]
The tendency of improved communications is to lower existing rents, by
trenching on the monopoly of the land nearest to the places where large
numbers of consumers are assembled. Roads and canals are not intended to
raise the value of the land which already supplies the markets, but
(among other purposes) to cheapen the supply, by letting in the produce
of other and more distant lands; and the more effectually this purpose
is attained, the lower rent will be. If we could imagine that the
railways and canals of the United States, instead of only cheapening
communication, did their business so effectually as to annihilate cost
of carriage altogether, and enable the produce of Michigan to reach the
market of New York as quickly and as cheaply as the produce of Long
Island—the whole value of all the land of the United States (except such
as lies convenient for building) would be annihilated; or rather, the
best would only sell for the expense of clearing, and the government tax
of a dollar and a quarter per acre; since land in Michigan, equal to the
best in the United States, may be had in unlimited abundance by that
amount of outlay. But it is strange that Mr. Carey should think this
fact inconsistent with the Ricardo theory of rent. Admitting all that he
asserts, it is still true that as long as there is land which yields no
rent, the land which does yield rent, does so in consequence of some
advantage which it enjoys, in fertility or vicinity to markets, over the
other; and the measure of its advantage is also the measure of its rent.
And the cause of its yielding rent is that it possesses a natural
monopoly; the quantity of land, as favourably circumstanced as itself,
not being sufficient to supply the market. These propositions constitute
the theory of rent laid down by Ricardo; and if they are true, I cannot
see that it signifies much whether the rent which the land yields at the
present time, is greater or less than the interest of the capital which
has been laid out to raise its value, together with the interest of the
capital which has been laid out to lower its value.

Mr. Carey' objection, however, has somewhat more of ingenuity than the
arguments commonly met with against the theory of rent; a theorem which
may be called the pons asinorum of political economy, for there are, I
am inclined to think, few persons who have refused their assent to it
except from not having thoroughly understood it. The loose and
inaccurate way in which it is often apprehended by those who affect to
refute it, is very remarkable. Many, for instance, have imputed
absurdity to Mr. Ricardo' theory, because it is absurd to say that the
cultivation of inferior Edition: current; Page: [433] land is the cause
of rent on the superior. Mr. Ricardo does not say that it is the
cultivation of inferior land, but the necessity of cultivating it, from
the insufficiency of the superior land to feed a growing population:
between which and the proposition imputed to him there is no less a
difference than that between demand and supply. Others again allege as
an objection against Ricardo, that if all land were of equal fertility,
it might still yield a rent. But Ricardo says precisely the same. He
says that if all lands were equally fertile, those which are nearer to
their market than others, and are therefore less burthened with cost of
carriage, would yield a rent equivalent to the advantage; and that the
land yielding no rent would then be, not the least fertile, but the
least advantageously situated, which the wants of the community required
to be brought into cultivation. It is also distinctly a portion of
Ricardo' doctrine, that even apart from differences of situation, the
land of a country supposed to be of uniform fertility would, all of it,
on a certain supposition, pay rent: namely, if the demand of the
community required that it should all be cultivated, and cultivated
beyond the point at which a further application of capital begins to be
attended with a smaller proportional return. It would be impossible to
show that, except by forcible exaction, the whole land of a country can
yield a rent on any other supposition.1.

§ 6. After this view of the nature and causes of rent, let us turn back
to the subject of profits, and bring up for reconsideration one of the
propositions laid down in the last chapter. We there stated, that the
advances of the capitalist, or in other words, the expenses of
production, consist solely in wages of labour; that whatever portion of
the outlay is not wages, is previous profit, and whatever is not
previous profit, is wages. Rent, however, being an element which it is
impossible to resolve into either profits or wages, we were obliged, for
the moment, to assume that the capitalist is not required to pay rent—to
give an equivalent for the use of an appropriated natural agent: and I
undertook to show in the proper place, that this is an allowable
supposition, and that rent does not really form any part of the expenses
of production, or of the advances of the capitalist. The grounds on
which this assertion was made are now apparent. It is true that all
tenant farmers, and many Edition: current; Page: [434] other classes of
producers, pay rent. But we have now seen, that whoever cultivates land,
paying a rent for it, gets in return for his rent an instrument of
superior power to other instruments of the same kind for which no rent
is paid. The superiority of the instrument is in exact proportion to the
rent paid for it. If a few persons had steam-engines of superior power
to all others in existence, but limited by physical laws to a number
short of the demand, the rent which a manufacturer would be willing to
pay for one of these steam-engines could not be looked upon as an
addition to his outlay, because by the use of it he would save in his
other expenses the equivalent of what it cost him: without it he could
not do the same quantity of work, unless at an additional expense equal
to the rent. The same thing is true of land. The real expenses of
production are those incurred on the worst land, or by the capital
employed in the least favourable circumstances. This land or capital
pays, as we have seen, no rent; but the expenses to which it is subject,
cause all other land or agricultural capital to be subjected to an
equivalent expense in the form of rent. Whoever does pay rent gets back
its full value in extra advantages, and the rent which he pays does not
place him in a worse position than, but only in the same position as,
his fellow-producer who pays no rent, but whose instrument is one of
inferior efficiency.

We have now completed the exposition of the laws which regulate the
distribution of the produce of land, labour, and capital, as far as it
is possible to discuss those laws independently of the instrumentality
by which in a civilized society the distribution is effected; the
machinery of Exchange and Price. The more complete elucidation and final
confirmation of the laws which we have laid down, and the deduction of
their most important consequences, must be preceded by an explanation of
the nature and working of that machinery—a subject so extensive and
complicated as to require a separate Book.1.

Edition: current; Page: [435]


Book III: EXCHANGE


CHAPTER I: OF VALUE

§ 1. The subject on which we are now about to enter fills so important
and conspicuous a position in political economy, that in the
apprehension of some thinkers its boundaries confound themselves with
those of the science itself. One eminent writer has proposed as a name
for Political Economy, “Catallactics,” or the science of exchanges: by
others it has been called the Science of Values. If these denominations
had appeared to me logically correct, I must have placed the discussion
of the elementary laws of value at the commencement of our inquiry,
instead of postponing it to the Third Part; and the possibility of so
long deferring it is alone a sufficient proof that this view of the
nature of Political Economy is too confined. It is true that in the
preceding Books we have not escaped the necessity of anticipating some
small portion of the theory of Value, especially as to the value of
labour and of land. It is nevertheless evident, that of the two great
departments of Political Economy, the production of wealth and its
distribution, the consideration of Value has to do with the latter
alone; and with that, only so far as competition, and not usage or
custom, is the distributing agency. The conditions and laws of
Production would be the same as they are, if the arrangements of society
did not depend on Exchange, or did not admit of it. Even in the present
system of industrial life, in which employments are minutely subdivided,
and all concerned in production depend for their remuneration on the
price of a particular commodity, exchange is not the Edition: current;
Page: [436] fundamental law of the distribution of the produce, no more
than roads and carriages are the essential laws of motion, but merely a
part of the machinery for effecting it. To confound these ideas, seems
to me, not only a logical, but a practical blunder. It is a case of the
error too common in political economy, of not distinguishing between
necessities arising from the nature of things, and those created by
social arrangements: an error which appears to me to be at all times
producing two opposite mischiefs; on the one hand, causing political
economists to class the merely temporary truths of their subject among
its permanent and universal laws; and on the other, leading many persons
to mistake the permanent laws of Production (such as those on which the
necessity is grounded of restraining population) for temporary accidents
arising from the existing constitution of society—which those who would
frame a new system of social arrangements are at liberty to disregard.

In a state of society, however, in which the industrial system is
entirely founded on purchase and sale, each individual, for the most
part, living not on things in the production of which he himself bears a
part, but on things obtained by a double exchange, a sale followed by a
purchase—the question of Value is fundamental. Almost every speculation
respecting the economical interests of a society thus constituted
implies some theory of Value: the smallest error on that subject infects
with corresponding error all our other conclusions; and anything vague
or misty in our conception of it creates confusion and uncertainty in
everything else. Happily, there is nothing in the laws of value which
remains [1848] for the present or any future writer to clear up; the
theory of the subject is complete: the only difficulty to be overcome is
that of so stating it as to solve by anticipation the chief perplexities
which occur in applying it: and to do this, some minuteness of
exposition, and considerable demands on the patience of the reader, are
unavoidable. He will be amply repaid, however (if a stranger to these
inquiries), by the ease and rapidity with which a thorough understanding
of this subject will enable him to fathom most of the remaining
questions of political economy.

§ 2. We must begin by settling our phraseology. Adam Smith, in a passage
often quoted, has touched upon the most obvious ambiguity of the word
value; which, in one of its senses, signifies usefulness, in another,
power of purchasing; in his own language, value in use and value in
exchange. But (as Mr. De Quincey has Edition: current; Page: [437]
remarked) in illustrating this double meaning Adam Smith has himself
fallen into another ambiguity. Things (he says) which have the greatest
value in use have often little or no value in exchange; which is true,
since that which can be obtained without labour or sacrifice will
command no price, however useful or needful it may be. But he proceeds
to add, that things which have the greatest value in exchange, as a
diamond for example, may have little or no value in use. This is
employing the word use, not in the sense in which political economy is
concerned with it, but in that other sense in which use is opposed to
pleasure. Political economy has nothing to do with the comparative
estimation of different uses in the judgment of a philosopher or of a
moralist. The use of a thing, in political economy, means its capacity
to satisfy a desire, or serve a purpose. Diamonds have this capacity in
a high degree, and unless they had it, would not bear any price. Value
in use, or as Mr. De Quincey calls it, teleologic value, is the extreme
limit of value in exchange. The exchange value of a thing may fall
short, to any amount, of its value in use; but that it can ever exceed
the value in use implies a contradiction; it supposes that persons will
give, to possess a thing, more than the utmost value which they
themselves put upon it as a means of gratifying their inclinations.

The word Value, when used without adjunct, always means, in political
economy, value in exchange; or as it has been called by Adam Smith and
his successors, exchangeable value, a phrase which no amount of
authority that can be quoted for it can make other than bad English. Mr.
De Quincey substitutes the term Exchange Value, which is
unexceptionable.

Exchange value requires to be distinguished from Price. The words Value
and Price were used as synonymous by the early political economists, and
are not always discriminated even by Ricardo. But the most accurate
modern writers, to avoid the wasteful expenditure of two good scientific
terms on a single idea, have employed Price to express the value of a
thing in relation to money; the quantity of money for which it will
exchange. By the price of a thing, therefore, we shall henceforth
understand its value in money; by the value, or exchange value of a
thing, its general power of purchasing; the command which its possession
gives over purchaseable commodities in general.

§ 3. But here a fresh demand for explanation presents itself. What is
meant by command over commodities in general? The Edition: current;
Page: [438] same thing exchanges for a great quantity of some
commodities, and for a very small quantity of others. A suit of clothes
exchanges for a great quantity of bread, and for a very small quantity
of precious stones. The value of a thing in exchange for some
commodities may be rising, for others falling. A coat may exchange for
less bread this year than last, if the harvest has been bad, but for
more glass or iron, if a tax has been taken off those commodities, or an
improvement made in their manufacture. Has the value of the coat, under
these circumstances, fallen or risen? It is impossible to say: all that
can be said is, that it has fallen in relation to one thing, and risen
in respect to another. But there is another case, in which no one would
have any hesitation in saying what sort of change had taken place in the
value of the coat: namely, if the cause in which the disturbance of
exchange values originated was something directly affecting the coat
itself, and not the bread or the glass. Suppose, for example, that an
invention had been made in machinery by which broadcloth could be woven
at half the former cost. The effect of this would be to lower the value
of a coat, and if lowered by this cause, it would be lowered not in
relation to bread only or to glass only, but to all purchaseable things,
except such as happened to be affected at the very time by a similar
depressing cause. We should therefore say that there had been a fall in
the exchange value or general purchasing power of a coat. The idea of
general exchange value originates in the fact, that there really are
causes which tend to alter the value of a thing in exchange for things
generally, that is, for all things which are not themselves acted upon
by causes of similar tendency.

In considering exchange value scientifically, it is expedient to
abstract from it all causes except those which originate in the very
commodity under consideration. Those which originate in the commodities
with which we compare it, affect its value in relation to those
commodities; but those which originate in itself affect its value in
relation to all commodities. In order the more completely to confine our
attention to these last, it is convenient to assume that all commodities
but the one in question remain invariable in their relative values. When
we are considering the causes which raise or lower the value of corn, we
suppose that woollens, silks, cutlery, sugar, timber, &c., while varying
in their power of purchasing corn, remain constant in the proportions in
which they exchange for one another. On this assumption, any one of them
may be taken as a representative of all the rest; since in whatever
manner corn varies Edition: current; Page: [439] in value with respect
to any one commodity, it varies in the same manner and degree with
respect to every other; and the upward or downward movement of its value
estimated in some one thing is all that need be considered. Its money
value, therefore, or price, will represent as well as anything else its
general exchange value, or purchasing power; and from an obvious
convenience will often be employed by us in that representative
character; with the proviso that money itself do not vary in its general
purchasing power, but that the prices of all things, other than that
which we happen to be considering, remain unaltered.

§ 4. The distinction between Value and Price, as we have now defined
them, is so obvious, as scarcely to seem in need of any illustration.
But in political economy the greatest errors arise from overlooking the
most obvious truths. Simple as this distinction is, it has consequences
with which a reader unacquainted with the subject would do well to begin
early by making himself thoroughly familiar. The following is one of the
principal. There is such a thing as a general rise of prices. All
commodities may rise in their money price. But there cannot be a general
rise of values. It is a contradiction in terms. A can only rise in value
by exchanging for a greater quantity of B and C; in which case these
must exchange for a smaller quantity of A. All things cannot rise
relatively to one another. If one-half of the commodities in the market
rise in exchange value, the very terms imply a fall of the other half;
and reciprocally, the fall implies a rise. Things which are exchanged
for one another can no more all fall, or all rise, than a dozen runners
can each outrun all the rest, or a hundred trees all overtop one
another. Simple as this truth is, we shall presently see that it is lost
sight of in some of the most accredited doctrines both of theorists and
of what are called practical men. And as a first specimen we may
instance the great importance attached in the imagination of most people
to a rise or fall of general prices. Because when the price of any one
commodity rises, the circumstance usually indicates a rise of its value,
people have an indistinct feeling when all prices rise, as if all things
simultaneously had risen in value, and all the possessors had become
enriched. That the money prices of all things should rise or fall,
provided they all rise or fall equally, is in itself, and apart from
existing contracts, of no consequence. It affects nobody’s wages,
profits, or rent. Every one gets more money in the one case and less in
the other; but of all that is to be bought Edition: current; Page: [440]
with money they get neither more nor less than before. It makes no other
difference than that of using more or fewer counters to reckon by. The
only thing which in this case is really altered in value is money; and
the only persons who either gain or lose are the holders of money, or
those who have to receive or to pay fixed sums of it. There is a
difference to annuitants and to creditors the one way, and to those who
are burthened with annuities, or with debts, the contrary way. There is
a disturbance, in short, of fixed money contracts; and this is an evil,
whether it takes place in the debtor’s favour or in the creditor’s. But
as to future transactions there is no difference to any one. Let it
therefore be remembered (and occasions will often arise for calling it
to mind) that a general rise or a general fall of values is a
contradiction; and that a general rise or a general fall of prices is
merely tantamount to an alteration in the value of money, and is a
matter of complete indifference, save in so far as it affects existing
contracts for receiving and paying fixed pecuniary amounts, 1 and (it
must be added) as it affects the interests of the producers of money.

§ 5. Before commencing the inquiry into the laws of value and price, I
have one further observation to make. I must give warning, once for all,
that the cases I contemplate are those in which values and prices are
determined by competition alone. In so far only as they are thus
determined, can they be reduced to any assignable law. The buyers must
be supposed as studious to buy cheap, as the sellers to sell dear. The
values and prices, therefore, to which our conclusions apply, are
mercantile values and prices; such prices as are quoted in
price-currents; prices in the wholesale markets, in which buying as well
as selling is a matter of business; in which the buyers take pains to
know, and generally do know, the lowest price at which an article of a
given quality can be obtained; and in which, therefore, the axiom is
true, that there cannot be for the same article, of the same quality,
two prices in the same market. Our propositions will be true in a much
more qualified sense of retail prices; the prices paid in shops for
articles of personal consumption. For such things there often are not
merely two, but many prices, in different shops, or even in the same
shop; habit and accident having as much to do in the matter as general
causes. Purchases for private use, even by people in business, are not
Edition: current; Page: [441] always made on business principles: the
feelings which come into play in the operation of getting, and in that
of spending their income, are often extremely different. Either from
indolence, or carelessness, or because people think it fine to pay and
ask no questions, three-fourths of those who can afford it give much
higher prices than necessary for the things they consume; while the poor
often do the same from ignorance and defect of judgment, want of time
for searching and making inquiry, and not unfrequently from coercion,
open or disguised. For these reasons, retail prices do not follow with
all the regularity which might be expected the action of the causes
which determine wholesale prices. The influence of those causes is
ultimately felt in the retail markets, and is the real source of such
variations in retail prices as are of a general and permanent character.
But there is no regular or exact correspondence. Shoes of equally good
quality are sold in different shops at prices which differ considerably;
and the price of leather may fall without causing the richer class of
buyers to pay less for shoes. Nevertheless, shoes do sometimes fall in
price; and when they do, the cause is always some such general
circumstance as the cheapening of leather: and when leather is
cheapened, even if no difference shows itself in shops frequented by
rich people, the artizan and the labourer generally get their shoes
cheaper, and there is a visible diminution in the contract prices at
which shoes are delivered for the supply of a workhouse or of a
regiment. In all reasoning about prices, the proviso must be understood,
“supposing all parties to take care of their own interest.” Inattention
to these distinctions has led to improper applications of the abstract
principles of political economy, and still oftener to an undue
discrediting of those principles, through their being compared with a
different sort of facts from those which they contemplate, or which can
fairly be expected to accord with them.

Edition: current; Page: [442]


CHAPTER II: of demand and supply in their relation to value

§ 1. That a thing may have any value in exchange, two conditions are
necessary. It must be of some use; that is (as already explained), it
must conduce to some purpose, satisfy some desire. No one will pay a
price, or part with anything which serves some of his purposes, to
obtain a thing which serves none of them. But, secondly, the thing must
not only have some utility, there must also be some difficulty in its
attainment. “Any article whatever,” says Mr. De Quincey,∗ “to obtain
that artificial sort of value which is meant by exchange value, must
begin by offering itself as a means to some desirable purpose; and
secondly, even though possessing incontestably this preliminary
advantage, it will never ascend to an exchange value in cases where it
can be obtained gratuitously and without effort; of which last terms
both are necessary as limitations. For often it will happen that some
desirable object may be obtained gratuitously; stoop, and you gather it
at your feet; but still, because the continued iteration of this
stooping exacts a laborious effort, very soon it is found that to gather
for yourself virtually is not gratuitous. In the vast forests of the
Canadas, at intervals, wild strawberries may be gratuitously gathered by
shiploads: yet such is the exhaustion of a stooping posture, and of a
labour so monotonous, that everybody is soon glad to resign the service
into mercenary hands.”

As was pointed out in the last chapter, the utility of a thing in the
estimation of the purchaser is the extreme limit of its exchange value:
higher the value cannot ascend; peculiar circumstances are required to
raise it so high. This topic is happily illustrated by Mr. De Quincey.
“Walk into almost any possible shop, buy the Edition: current; Page:
[443] first article you see; what will determine its price? In the
ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, simply the element D—difficulty of
attainment. The other element U, or intrinsic utility, will be perfectly
inoperative. Let the thing (measured by its uses) be, for your purposes,
worth ten guineas, so that you would rather give ten guineas than lose
it; yet, if the difficulty of producing it be only worth one guinea, one
guinea is the price which it will bear. But still not the less, though U
is inoperative, can U be supposed absent? By no possibility; for, if it
had been absent, assuredly you would not have bought the article even at
the lowest price. U acts upon you, though it does not act upon the
price. On the other hand, in the hundredth case, we will suppose the
circumstances reversed: you are on Lake Superior in a steam-boat, making
your way to an unsettled region 800 miles a-head of civilization, and
consciously with no chance at all of purchasing any luxury whatsoever,
little luxury or big luxury, for the space of ten years to come. One
fellow-passenger, whom you will part with before sunset, has a powerful
musical snuff-box; knowing by experience the power of such a toy over
your own feelings, the magic with which at times it lulls your
agitations of mind, you are vehemently desirous to purchase it. In the
hour of leaving London you had forgot to do so; here is a final chance.
But the owner, aware of your situation not less than yourself, is
determined to operate by a strain pushed to the very uttermost upon U,
upon the intrinsic worth of the article in your individual estimate for
your individual purposes. He will not hear of D as any controlling power
or mitigating agency in the case; and finally, although at six guineas
a-piece in London or Paris you might have loaded a waggon with such
boxes, you pay sixty rather than lose it when the last knell of the
clock has sounded, which summons you to buy now or to forfeit for ever.
Here, as before, only one element is operative; before it was D, now it
is U. But after all, D was not absent, though inoperative. The inertness
of D allowed U to put forth its total effect. The practical compression
of D being withdrawn, U springs up like water in a pump when released
from the pressure of air. Yet still that D was present to your thoughts,
though the price was otherwise regulated, is evident; both because U and
D must coexist in order to found any case of exchange value whatever,
and because undeniably you take into very particular consideration this
D, the extreme difficulty of attainment (which here is the greatest
possible, viz. an impossibility) before you consent to have the price
racked up to U. The special Edition: current; Page: [444] D has
vanished; but it is replaced in your thoughts by an unlimited D.
Undoubtedly you have submitted to U in extremity as the regulating force
of the price; but it was under a sense of D’s latent presence. Yet D is
so far from exerting any positive force, that the retirement of D from
all agency whatever on the price—this it is which creates as it were a
perfect vacuum, and through that vacuum U rushes up to its highest and
ultimate gradation.”

This case, in which the value is wholly related by the necessities or
desires of the purchaser, is the case of strict and absolute monopoly;
in which, the article desired being only obtainable from one person, he
can exact any equivalent, short of the point at which no purchaser could
be found. But it is not a necessary consequence, even of complete
monopoly, that the value should be forced up to this ultimate limit; as
will be seen when we have considered the law of value in so far as
depending on the other element, difficulty of attainment.

§ 2. The difficulty of attainment which determines value is not always
the same kind of difficulty. It sometimes consists in an absolute
limitation of the supply. There are things of which it is physically
impossible to increase the quantity beyond certain narrow limits. Such
are those wines which can be grown only in peculiar circumstances of
soil, climate, and exposure. Such also are ancient sculptures; pictures
by old masters; rare books or coins, or other articles of antiquarian
curiosity. Among such may also be reckoned houses and building-ground,
in a town of definite extent (such as Venice, or any fortified town
where fortifications are necessary to security); the most desirable
sites in any town whatever; houses and parks peculiarly favoured by
natural beauty, in places where that advantage is uncommon. Potentially,
all land whatever is a commodity of this class; and might be practically
so in countries fully occupied and cultivated.

But there is another category (embracing the majority of all things that
are bought and sold), in which the obstacle to attainment consists only
in the labour and expense requisite to produce the commodity. Without a
certain labour and expense it cannot be had: but when any one is willing
to incur these, there needs be no limit to the multiplication of the
product. If there were labourers enough and machinery enough, cottons,
woollens, or linens might be produced by thousands of yards for every
single yard now manufactured. There would be a point, no doubt, where
further increase Edition: current; Page: [445] would be stopped by the
incapacity of the earth to afford more of the material. But there is no
need, for any purpose of political economy, to contemplate a time when
this ideal limit could become a practical one.

There is a third case, intermediate between the two preceding, and
rather more complex, which I shall at present merely indicate, but the
importance of which in political economy is extremely great. There are
commodities which can be multiplied to an indefinite extent by labour
and expenditure, but not by a fixed amount of labour and expenditure.
Only a limited quantity can be produced at a given cost: if more is
wanted, it must be produced at a greater cost. To this class, as has
been often repeated, agricultural produce belongs; and generally all the
rude produce of the earth; and this peculiarity is a source of very
important consequences; one of which is the necessity of a limit to
population; and another, the payment of rent.

§ 3. These being the three classes, in one or other of which all things
that are bought and sold must take their place, we shall consider them
in their order. And first, of things absolutely limited in quantity,
such as ancient sculptures or pictures.

Of such things it is commonly said, that their value depends upon their
scarcity: but the expression is not sufficiently definite to serve our
purpose. Others say, with somewhat greater precision, that the value
depends on the demand and the supply. But even this statement requires
much explanation, to make it a clear exponent of the relation between
the value of a thing, and the causes of which that value is an effect.

The supply of a commodity is an intelligible expression: it means the
quantity offered for sale; the quantity that is to be had, at a given
time and place, by those who wish to purchase it. But what is meant by
the demand? Not the mere desire for the commodity. A beggar may desire a
diamond; but his desire, however great, will have no influence on the
price. Writers have therefore given a more limited sense to demand, and
have defined it, the wish to possess, combined with the power of
purchasing. To distinguish demand in this technical sense, from the
demand which is synonymous with desire, they call the former effectual
demand.∗ After this Edition: current; Page: [446] explanation, it is
usually supposed that there remains no further difficulty, and that the
value depends upon the ratio between the effectual demand, as thus
defined, and the supply.

These phrases, however, fail to satisfy any one who requires clear
ideas, and a perfectly precise expression of them. Some confusion must
always attach to a phrase so inappropriate as that of a ratio between
two things not of the same denomination. What ratio can there be between
a quantity and a desire, or even a desire combined with a power? A ratio
between demand and supply is only intelligible if by demand we mean the
quantity demanded, and if the ratio intended is that between the
quantity demanded and the quantity supplied. But again, the quantity
demanded is not a fixed quantity, even at the same time and place; it
varies according to the value; if the thing is cheap, there is usually a
demand for more of it than when it is dear. The demand, therefore,
partly depends on the value. But it was before laid down that the value
depends on the demand. From this contradiction how shall we extricate
ourselves? How solve the paradox, of two things, each depending upon the
other?

Though the solution of these difficulties is obvious enough, the
difficulties themselves are not fanciful; and I bring them forward thus
prominently, because I am certain that they obscurely haunt every
inquirer into the subject who has not openly faced and distinctly
realized them. Undoubtedly the true solution must have been frequently
given, though I cannot call to mind any one who had given it before
myself, except the eminently clear thinker and skilful expositor, J. B.
Say. I should have imagined, however, that it must be familiar to all
political economists, if the writings of several did not give evidence
of some want of clearness on the point, and if the instance of Mr. De
Quincey did not prove that the complete non-recognition and implied
denial of it are compatible with great intellectual ingenuity, and close
intimacy with the subject matter.

§ 4. Meaning, by the word demand, the quantity demanded, and remembering
that this is not a fixed quantity, but in general varies according to
the value, let us suppose that the demand at some particular time
exceeds the supply, that is, there are persons ready to buy, at the
market value, a greater quantity than is offered for sale. Edition:
current; Page: [447] Competition takes place on the side of the buyers,
and the value rises: but how much? In the ratio (some may suppose) of
the deficiency: if the demand exceeds the supply by one-third, the value
rises one-third. By no means: for when the value has risen one-third,
the demand may still exceed the supply; there may, even at that higher
value, be a greater quantity wanted than is to be had; and the
competition of buyers may still continue. If the article is a necessary
of life, which, rather than resign, people are willing to pay for at any
price, a deficiency of one-third may raise the price to double, triple,
or quadruple.∗ Or, on the contrary, the competition may cease before the
value has risen in even the proportion of the deficiency. A rise, short
of one-third, may place the article beyond the means, or beyond the
inclinations, of purchasers to the full amount. At what point, then,
will the rise be arrested? At the point, whatever it be, which equalizes
the demand and the supply: at the price which cuts off the extra third
from the demand, or brings forward additional sellers sufficient to
supply it. When, in either of these ways, or by a combination of both,
the demand becomes equal and no more than equal to the supply, the rise
of value will stop.

The converse case is equally simple. Instead of a demand beyond the
supply, let us suppose a supply exceeding the demand. The competition
will now be on the side of the sellers: the extra quantity can only find
a market by calling forth an additional demand equal to itself. This is
accomplished by means of cheapness; the value falls, and brings the
article within the reach of more numerous customers, or induces those
who were already consumers to make increased purchases. The fall of
value required to re-establish equality is different in different cases.
The kinds of things in which it is commonly greatest are at the two
extremities of the scale; absolute necessaries, or those peculiar
luxuries, the taste for which is confined to a small class. In the case
of food, as those who have already enough do not require more on account
of its cheapness, but rather expend in other things what they save in
food, the increased consumption occasioned by cheapness carries off, as
experience Edition: current; Page: [448] shows, only a small part of the
extra supply caused by an abundant harvest;∗ and the fall is practically
arrested only when the farmers withdraw their corn, and hold it back in
hopes of a higher price; or by the operations of speculators who buy
corn when it is cheap, and store it up to be brought out when more
urgently wanted. Whether the demand and supply are equalized by an
increased demand, the result of cheapness, or by withdrawing a part of
the supply, equalized they are in either case.

Thus we see that the idea of a ratio, as between demand and supply, is
out of place, and has no concern in the matter: the proper mathematical
analogy is that of an equation. Demand and supply, the quantity demanded
and the quantity supplied, will be made equal. If unequal at any moment,
competition equalizes them, and the manner in which this is done is by
an adjustment of the value. If the demand increases, the value rises; if
the demand diminishes, the value falls: again, if the supply falls off,
the value rises; and falls if the supply is increased. The rise or the
fall continues until the demand and supply are again equal to one
another: and the value which a commodity will bring in any market is no
other than the value which, in that market, gives a demand just
sufficient to carry off the existing or expected supply.

This, then, is the Law of Value, with respect to all commodities not
susceptible of being multiplied at pleasure. Such commodities, no doubt,
are exceptions. There is another law for that much larger class of
things, which admit of indefinite multiplication. But it is not the less
necessary to conceive distinctly and grasp firmly the theory of this
exceptional case. In the first place, it will be found to be of great
assistance in rendering the more common case intelligible. And in the
next place, the principle of the exception stretches wider, and embraces
more cases, than might at first be supposed.

§ 5. There are but few commodities which are naturally and necessarily
limited in supply. But any commodity whatever may be artificially so.
Any commodity may be the subject of a monopoly: like tea, in this
country, up to 1834; tobacco in France, opium in British India, at
present [1848]. The price of a monopolized commodity is commonly
supposed to be arbitrary; depending on the will of the monopolist, and
limited only (as in Mr. De Quincey’s Edition: current; Page: [449] case
of the musical box in the wilds of America) by the buyer’s extreme
estimate of its worth to himself. This is in one sense true, but forms
no exception, nevertheless, to the dependence of the value on supply and
demand. The monopolist can fix the value as high as he pleases, short of
what the consumer either could not or would not pay; but he can only do
so by limiting the supply. The Dutch East India Company obtained a
monopoly price for the produce of the Spice Islands, but to do so they
were obliged, in good seasons, to destroy a portion of the crop. Had
they persisted in selling all that they produced, they must have forced
a market by reducing the price, so low, perhaps, that they would have
received for the larger quantity a less total return than for the
smaller: at least they showed that such was their opinion by destroying
the surplus. Even on Lake Superior, Mr. De Quincey’s huckster could not
have sold his box for sixty guineas, if he had possessed two musical
boxes and desired to sell them both. Supposing the cost price of each to
be six guineas, he would have taken seventy for the two in preference to
sixty for one; that is, although his monopoly was the closest possible,
he would have sold the boxes at thirty-five guineas each,
notwithstanding that sixty was not beyond the buyer’s estimate of the
article for his purposes. Monopoly value, therefore, does not depend on
any peculiar principle, but is a mere variety of the ordinary case of
demand and supply.

Again, though there are few commodities which are at all times and for
ever unsusceptible of increase of supply, any commodity whatever may be
temporarily so; and with some commodities this is habitually the case.
Agricultural produce, for example, cannot be increased in quantity
before the next harvest; the quantity of corn already existing in the
world, is all that can be had for sometimes a year to come. During that
interval, corn is practically assimilated to things of which the
quantity cannot be increased. In the case of most commodities, it
requires a certain time to increase their quantity; and if the demand
increases, then, until a corresponding supply can be brought forward,
that is, until the supply can accommodate itself to the demand, the
value will so rise as to accommodate the demand to the supply.

There is another case, the exact converse of this. There are some
articles of which the supply may be indefinitely increased, but cannot
be rapidly diminished. There are things so durable that the quantity in
existence is at all times very great in comparison with the annual
produce. Gold, and the more durable Edition: current; Page: [450]
metals, are things of this sort; and also houses. The supply of such
things might be at once diminished by destroying them; but to do this
could only be the interest of the possessor if he had a monopoly of the
article, and could repay himself for the destruction of a part by the
increased value of the remainder. The value, therefore, of such things
may continue for a long time so low, either from excess of supply or
falling off in the demand, as to put a complete stop to further
production; the diminution of supply by wearing out being so slow a
process, that a long time is requisite, even under a total suspension of
production, to restore the original value. During that interval the
value will be regulated solely by supply and demand, and will rise very
gradually as the existing stock wears out, until there is again a
remunerating value, and production resumes its course.

Finally, there are commodities of which, though capable of being
increased or diminished to a great, and even an unlimited extent, the
value never depends upon anything but demand and supply. This is the
case, in particular, with the commodity Labour; of the value of which we
have treated copiously in the preceding Book: and there are many cases
besides, in which we shall find it necessary to call in this principle
to solve difficult questions of exchange value. This will be
particularly exemplified when we treat of International Values; that is,
of the terms of interchange between things produced in different
countries, or, to speak more generally, in distant places. But into
these questions we cannot enter, until we shall have examined the case
of commodities which can be increased in quantity indefinitely and at
pleasure; and shall have determined by what law, other than that of
Demand and Supply, the permanent or average values of such commodities
are regulated. This we shall do in the next chapter.

Edition: current; Page: [451]


CHAPTER III: of cost of production, in its relation to value

§ 1. When the production of a commodity is the effect of labour and
expenditure, whether the commodity is susceptible of unlimited
multiplication or not, there is a minimum value which is the essential
condition of its being permanently produced. The value at any particular
time is the result of supply and demand; and is always that which is
necessary to create a market for the existing supply. But unless that
value is sufficient to repay the Cost of Production, and to afford,
besides, the ordinary expectation of profit, the commodity will not
continue to be produced. Capitalists will not go on permanently
producing at a loss. They will not even go on producing at a profit less
than they can live on. Persons whose capital is already embarked, and
cannot be easily extricated, will persevere for a considerable time
without profit, and have been known to persevere even at a loss, in hope
of better times. But they will not do so indefinitely, or when there is
nothing to indicate that times are likely to improve. No new capital
will be invested in an employment, unless there be an expectation not
only of some profit, but of a profit as great (regard being had to the
degree of eligibility of the employment in other respects) as can be
hoped for in any other occupation at that time and place. When such
profit is evidently not to be had, if people do not actually withdraw
their capital, they at least abstain from replacing it when consumed.
The cost of production, together with the ordinary profit, may therefore
be called the necessary price, or value, of all things made by labour
and capital. Nobody willingly produces in the prospect of loss. Whoever
does so, does it under a miscalculation, which he corrects as fast as he
is able.

When a commodity is not only made by labour and capital, but can be made
by them in indefinite quantity, this Necessary Value, the minimum with
which the producers will be content, is Edition: current; Page: [452]
also, if competition is free and active, the maximum which they can
expect. If the value of a commodity is such that it repays the cost of
production not only with the customary, but with a higher rate of
profit, capital rushes to share in this extra gain, and by increasing
the supply of the article, reduces its value. This is not a mere
supposition or surmise, but a fact familiar to those conversant with
commercial operations. Whenever a new line of business presents itself,
offering a hope of unusual profits, and whenever any established trade
or manufacture is believed to be yielding a greater profit than
customary, there is sure to be in a short time so large a production or
importation of the commodity, as not only destroys the extra profit, but
generally goes beyond the mark, and sinks the value as much too low as
it had before been raised too high; until the over-supply is corrected
by a total or partial suspension of further production. As already
intimated,∗ these variations in the quantity produced do not presuppose
or require that any person should change his employment. Those whose
business is thriving, increase their produce by availing themselves more
largely of their credit, while those who are not making the ordinary
profit, restrict their operations, and (in manufacturing phrase) work
short time. In this mode is surely and speedily effected the
equalization, not of profits perhaps, but of the expectations of profit,
in different occupations.

As a general rule, then, things tend to exchange for one another at such
values as will enable each producer to be repaid the cost of production
with the ordinary profit; in other words, such as will give to all
producers the same rate of profit on their outlay. But in order that the
profit may be equal where the outlay, that is, the cost of production,
is equal, things must on the average exchange for one another in the
ratio of their cost of production: things of which the cost of
production is the same, must be of the same value. For only thus will an
equal outlay yield an equal return. If a farmer with a capital equal to
1000 quarters of corn, can produce 1200 quarters, yielding him a profit
of 20 per cent; whatever else can be produced in the same time by a
capital of 1000 quarters, must be worth, that is, must exchange for,
1200 quarters, otherwise the producer would gain either more or less
than 20 per cent.

Adam Smith and Ricardo have called that value of a thing which is
proportional to its cost of production, its Natural Value Edition:
current; Page: [453] (or its Natural Price). They meant by this, the
point about which the value oscillates, and to which it always tends to
return; the centre value, towards which, as Adam Smith expresses it, the
market value of a thing is constantly gravitating; and any deviation
from which is but a temporary irregularity, which, the moment it exists,
sets forces in motion tending to correct it. On an average of years
sufficient to enable the oscillations on one side of the central line to
be compensated by those on the other, the market value agrees with the
natural value; but it very seldom coincides exactly with it at any
particular time. The sea everywhere tends to a level; but it never is at
an exact level; its surface is always ruffled by waves, and often
agitated by storms. It is enough that no point, at least in the open
sea, is permanently higher than another. Each place is alternately
elevated and depressed; but the ocean preserves its level.

§ 2. The latent influence by which the values of things are made to
conform in the long run to the cost of production is the variation that
would otherwise take place in the supply of the commodity. The supply
would be increased if the thing continued to sell above the ratio of its
cost of production, and would be diminished if it fell below that ratio.
But we must not therefore suppose it to be necessary that the supply
should actually be either diminished or increased. Suppose that the cost
of production of a thing is cheapened by some mechanical invention, or
increased by a tax. The value of the thing would in a little time, if
not immediately, fall in the one case, and rise in the other; and it
would do so, because if it did not, the supply would in the one case be
increased, until the price fell, in the other diminished, until it rose.
For this reason, and from the erroneous notion that value depends on the
proportion between the demand and the supply, many persons suppose that
this proportion must be altered whenever there is any change in the
value of the commodity; that the value cannot fall through a diminution
of the cost of production, unless the supply is permanently increased;
nor rise, unless the supply is permanently diminished. But this is not
the fact: there is no need that there should be any actual alteration of
supply; and when there is, the alteration, if permanent, is not the
cause, but the consequence of the alteration in value. If, indeed, the
supply could not be increased, no diminution in the cost of production
would lower the value: but there is by no means any necessity Edition:
current; Page: [454] that it should. The mere possibility often
suffices; the dealers are aware of what would happen, and their mutual
competition makes them anticipate the result by lowering the price.
Whether there will be a greater permanent supply of the commodity after
its production has been cheapened, depends on quite another question,
namely, on whether a greater quantity is wanted at the reduced value.
Most commonly a greater quantity is wanted, but not necessarily. “A
man,” says Mr. De Quincey,∗ “buys an article of instant applicability to
his own purposes the more readily and the more largely as it happens to
be cheaper. Silk handkerchiefs having fallen to half-price, he will buy,
perhaps, in threefold quantity; but he does not buy more steam-engines
because the price is lowered. His demand for steam-engines is almost
always predetermined by the circumstances of his situation. So far as he
considers the cost at all, it is much more the cost of working this
engine than the cost upon its purchase. But there are many articles for
which the market is absolutely and merely limited by a pre-existing
system, to which those articles are attached as subordinate parts or
members. How could we force the dials or faces of timepieces by
artificial cheapness to sell more plentifully than the inner works or
movements of such timepieces? Could the sale of wine-vaults be increased
without increasing the sale of wine? Or the tools of shipwrights find an
enlarged market whilst shipbuilding was stationary?.... Offer to a town
of 3000 inhabitants a stock of hearses, no cheapness will tempt that
town into buying more than one. Offer a stock of yachts, the chief cost
lies in manning, victualling, repairing; no diminution upon the mere
price to a purchaser will tempt into the market any man whose habits and
propensities had not already disposed him to such a purchase. So of
professional costume for bishops, lawyers, students at Oxford.” Nobody
doubts, however, that the price and value of all these things would be
eventually lowered by any diminution of their cost of production; and
lowered through the apprehension entertained of new competitors, and an
increased supply; though the great hazard to which a new competitor
would expose himself, in an article not susceptible of any considerable
extension of its market, would enable the established dealers to
maintain their original prices much longer than they could do in an
article offering more encouragement to competition.

Again, reverse the case, and suppose the cost of production Edition:
current; Page: [455] increased, as for example by laying a tax on the
commodity. The value would rise; and that, probably, immediately. Would
the supply be diminished? Only if the increase of value diminished the
demand. Whether this effect followed, would soon appear, and if it did,
the value would recede somewhat, from excess of supply, until the
production was reduced, and would then rise again. There are many
articles for which it requires a very considerable rise of price
materially to reduce the demand; in particular, articles of necessity,
such as the habitual food of the people in England, wheaten bread: of
which there is probably almost as much consumed, at the present cost
price, as there would be with the present population at a price
considerably lower. Yet it is especially in such things that dearness or
high price is popularly confounded with scarcity. Food may be dear from
scarcity, as after a bad harvest; but the dearness (for example) which
is the effect of taxation, or of corn laws, has nothing whatever to do
with insufficient supply: such causes do not much diminish the quantity
of food in a country; it is other things rather than food that are
diminished in quantity by them, since, those who pay more for food not
having so much to expend otherwise, the production of other things
contracts itself to the limits of a smaller demand.

It is, therefore, strictly correct to say, that the value of things
which can be increased in quantity at pleasure, does not depend (except
accidentally, and during the time necessary for production to adjust
itself,) upon demand and supply; on the contrary, demand and supply
depend upon it. There is a demand for a certain quantity of the
commodity at its natural Edition: current; Page: [456] or cost value,
and to that the supply in the long run endeavours to conform. When at
any time it fails of so conforming, it is either from miscalculation, or
from a change in some of the elements of the problem: either in the
natural value, that is, in the cost of production; or in the demand,
from an alteration in public taste or in the number or wealth of the
consumers. These causes of disturbance are very liable to occur, and
when any one of them does occur, the market value of the article ceases
to agree with the natural value. The real law of demand and supply, the
equation between them, still holds good: if a value different from the
natural value be necessary to make the demand equal to the supply, the
market value will deviate from the natural value; but only for a time;
for the permanent tendency of supply is to conform itself to the demand
which is found by experience to exist for the commodity when selling at
its natural value. If the supply is either more or less than this, it is
so accidentally, and affords either more or less than the ordinary rate
of profit; which, under free and active competition, cannot long
continue to be the case.

To recapitulate: demand and supply govern the value of all things which
cannot be indefinitely increased; except that even for them, when
produced by industry, there is a minimum value, determined by the cost
of production. But in all things which admit of indefinite
multiplication, demand and supply only determine the perturbations of
value, during a period which cannot exceed the length of time necessary
for altering the supply. While thus ruling the oscillations of value,
they themselves obey a superior force, which makes value gravitate
towards Cost of Production, and which would settle it and keep it there,
if fresh disturbing influences were not continually arising to make it
again deviate. To pursue the same strain of metaphor, demand and supply
always rush to an equilibrium, but the condition of stable equilibrium
is when things exchange for each other according to their cost of
production, or, in the expression we have used, when things are at their
Natural Value.

Edition: current; Page: [457]


CHAPTER IV: ultimate analysis of cost of production

§ 1. The component elements of Cost of Production have been set forth in
the First Part of this enquiry.∗ The principal of them, and so much the
principal as to be nearly the sole, we found to be Labour. What the
production of a thing costs to its producer, or its series of producers,
is the labour expended in producing it. If we consider as the producer
the capitalist who makes the advances, the word Labour may be replaced
by the word Wages: what the produce costs to him, is the wages which he
has had to pay. At the first glance indeed this seems to be only a part
of his outlay, since he has not only paid wages to labourers, but has
likewise provided them with tools, materials, and perhaps buildings.
These tools, materials, and buildings, however, were produced by labour
and capital; and their value, like that of the article to the production
of which they are subservient, depends on cost of production, which
again is resolvable into labour. The cost of production of broadcloth
does not wholly consist in the wages of weavers; which alone are
directly paid by the cloth manufacturer. It consists also of the wages
of spinners and woolcombers, and, it may be added, of shepherds, all of
which the clothier has paid for in the price of yarn. It consists too of
the wages of builders and brickmakers, which he has reimbursed in the
contract price of erecting his factory. It partly consists of the wages
of machine-makers, iron-founders, and miners. And to these must be added
the wages of the carriers who transported any of the means and
appliances of the production to the place where they were to be used,
and the product itself to the place where it is to be sold.

The value of commodities, therefore, depends principally (we shall
presently see whether it depends solely) on the quantity of Edition:
current; Page: [458] labour required for their production; including in
the idea of production, that of conveyance to the market. “In
estimating,” says Ricardo,∗ “the exchangeable value of stockings, for
example, we shall find that their value, comparatively with other
things, depends on the total quantity of labour necessary to manufacture
them and bring them to market. First, there is the labour necessary to
cultivate the land on which the raw cotton is grown; secondly, the
labour of conveying the cotton to the country where the stockings are to
be manufactured, which includes a portion of the labour bestowed in
building the ship in which it is conveyed, and which is charged in the
freight of the goods; thirdly, the labour of the spinner and weaver;
fourthly, a portion of the labour of the engineer, smith, and carpenter,
who erected the buildings and machinery by the help of which they are
made; fifthly, the labour of the retail dealer and of many others, whom
it is unnecessary further to particularize. The aggregate sum of these
various kinds of labour, determines the quantity of other things for
which these stockings will exchange, while the same consideration of the
various quantities of labour which have been bestowed on those other
things, will equally govern the portion of them which will be given for
the stockings.

“To convince ourselves that this is the real foundation of exchangeable
value, let us suppose any improvement to be made in the means of
abridging labour in any one of the various processes through which the
raw cotton must pass before the manufactured stockings come to the
market to be exchanged for other things; and observe the effects which
will follow. If fewer men were required to cultivate the raw cotton, or
if fewer sailors were employed in navigating, or shipwrights in
constructing, the ship in which it was conveyed to us; if fewer hands
were employed in raising the buildings and machinery, or if these, when
raised, were rendered more efficient; the stockings would inevitably
fall in value, and command less of other things. They would fall,
because a less quantity of labour was necessary to their production, and
would therefore exchange for a smaller quantity of those things in which
no such abridgement of labour had been made.

“Economy in the use of labour never fails to reduce the relative value
of a commodity, whether the saving be in the labour necessary to the
manufacture of the commodity itself, or in that necessary to Edition:
current; Page: [459] the formation of the capital, by the aid of which
it is produced. In either case the price of stockings would fall,
whether there were fewer men employed as bleachers, spinners, and
weavers, persons immediately necessary to their manufacture: or as
sailors, carriers, engineers, and smiths, persons more indirectly
concerned. In the one case, the whole saving of labour would fall on the
stockings, because that portion of labour was wholly confined to the
stockings; in the other, a portion only would fall on the stockings, the
remainder being applied to all those other commodities, to the
production of which the buildings, machinery, and carriage, were
subservient.”

§ 2. It will have been observed that Ricardo expresses himself as if the
quantity of labour which it costs to produce a commodity and bring it to
market, were the only thing on which its value depended. But since the
cost of production to the capitalist is not labour but wages, and since
wages may be either greater or less, the quantity of labour being the
same; it would seem that the value of the product cannot be determined
solely by the quantity of labour, but by the quantity together with the
remuneration; and that values must partly depend on wages.

In order to decide this point, it must be considered, that value is a
relative term: that the value of a commodity is not a name for an
inherent and substantive quality of the thing itself, but means the
quantity of other things which can be obtained in exchange for it. The
value of one thing must always be understood relatively to some other
thing, or to things in general. Now the relation of one thing to another
cannot be altered by any cause which affects them both alike. A rise or
fall of general wages is a fact which affects all commodities in the
same manner, and therefore affords no reason why they should exchange
for each other in one rather than in another proportion. To suppose that
high wages make high values, is to suppose that there can be such a
thing as general high values. But this is a contradiction in terms: the
high value of some things is synonymous with the low value of others.
The mistake arises from not attending to values, but only to prices.
Though there is no such thing as a general rise of values, there is such
a thing as a general rise of prices. As soon as we form distinctly the
idea of values, we see that high or low wages can have nothing to do
with them; but that high wages make high prices, is a popular and
widely-spread opinion. The whole amount of error involved in this
proposition can only be seen thoroughly Edition: current; Page: [460]
when we come to the theory of money; at present we need only say that,
if it be true, there can be no such thing as a real rise of wages; for
if wages could not rise without a proportional rise of the price of
everything, they could not, for any substantial purpose, rise at all.
This surely is a sufficient reductio ad absurdum, and shows the amazing
folly of the propositions which may and do become, and long remain,
accredited doctrines of popular political economy. It must be remembered
too that general high prices, even supposing them to exist, can be of no
use to a producer or dealer, considered as such; for if they increase
his money returns, they increase in the same degree all his expenses.
There is no mode in which capitalists can compensate themselves for a
high cost of labour, through any action on values or prices. It cannot
be prevented from taking its effect on low profits. If the labourers
really get more, that is, get the produce of more labour, a smaller
percentage must remain for profit. From this Law of Distribution,
resting as it does on a law of arithmetic, there is no escape. The
mechanism of Exchange and Price may hide it from us, but is quite
powerless to alter it.

§ 3. Although, however, general wages, whether high or low, do not
affect values, yet if wages are higher in one employment than another,
or if they rise and fall permanently in one employment without doing so
in others, these inequalities do really operate upon values. The causes
which make wages vary from one employment to another, have been
considered in a former chapter. When the wages of an employment
permanently exceed the average rate, the value of the thing produced
will, in the same degree, exceed the standard determined by mere
quantity of labour. Things, for example, which are made by skilled
labour, exchange for the produce of a much greater quantity of unskilled
labour; for no reason but because the labour is more highly paid. If,
through the extension of education, the labourers competent to skilled
employments were so increased in number as to diminish the difference
between their wages and those of common labour, all things produced by
labour of the superior kind would fall in value, compared with things
produced by common labour, and these might be said therefore to rise in
value. We have before remarked that the difficulty of passing from one
class of employments to a class greatly superior, has hitherto caused
the wages of all those classes of labourers who are separated from one
another by any very marked barrier, to depend more than might be
supposed upon the increase of the Edition: current; Page: [461]
population of each class considered separately; and that the
inequalities in the remuneration of labour are much greater than could
exist if the competition of the labouring people generally could be
brought practically to bear on each particular employment. It follows
from this that wages in different employments do not rise or fall
simultaneously, but are, for short and sometimes even for long periods,
nearly independent of one another. All such disparities evidently alter
the relative costs of production of different commodities, and will
therefore be completely represented in their natural or average value.

It thus appears that the maxim laid down by some of the best political
economists, that wages do not enter into value, is expressed with
greater latitude than the truth warrants, or than accords with their own
meaning. Wages do enter into value. The relative wages of the labour
necessary for producing different commodities, affect their value just
as much as the relative quantities of labour. It is true, the absolute
wages paid have no effect upon values; but neither has the absolute
quantity of labour. If that were to vary simultaneously and equally in
all commodities, values would not be affected. If, for instance, the
general efficiency of all labour were increased, so that all things
without exception could be produced in the same quantity as before with
a smaller amount of labour, no trace of this general diminution of cost
of production would show itself in the values of commodities. Any change
which might take place in them would only represent the unequal degrees
in which the improvement affected different things; and would consist in
cheapening those in which the saving of labour had been the greatest,
while those in which there had been some, but a less saving of labour,
would actually rise in value. In strictness, therefore, wages of labour
have as much to do with value as quantity of labour: and neither Ricardo
nor any one else has denied the fact. In considering, however, the
causes of variations in value, quantity of labour is the thing of chief
importance; for when that varies, it is generally in one or a few
commodities at a time, but the variations of wages (except passing
fluctuations) are usually general, and have no considerable effect on
value.

§ 4. Thus far of labour, or wages, as an element in cost of production.
But in our analysis, in the First Book, of the requisites of production,
we found that there is another necessary element in it besides labour.
There is also capital; and this being the result Edition: current; Page:
[462] of abstinence, the produce, or its value, must be sufficient to
remunerate, not only all the labour required, but the abstinence of all
the persons by whom the remuneration of the different classes of
labourers was advanced. The return for abstinence is Profit. And profit,
we have also seen, is not exclusively the surplus remaining to the
capitalist after he has been compensated for his outlay, but forms, in
most cases, no unimportant part of the outlay itself. The flax-spinner,
part of whose expenses consists of the purchase of flax and of
machinery, has had to pay, in their price, not only the wages of the
labour by which the flax was grown and the machinery made, but the
profits of the grower, the flax-dresser, the miner, the iron-founder,
and the machine-maker. All these profits, together with those of the
spinner himself, were again advanced by the weaver, in the price of his
material, linen yarn: and along with them the profit of a fresh set of
machine-makers, and of the miners and iron-workers who supplied them
with their metallic material. All these advances form part of the cost
of production of linen. Profits, therefore, as well as wages, enter into
the cost of production which determines the value of the produce.

Value, however, being purely relative, cannot depend upon absolute
profit, no more than upon absolute wages, but upon relative profits
only. High general profits cannot, any more than high general wages, be
a cause of high values, because high general values are an absurdity and
a contradiction. In so far as profits enter into the cost of production
of all things, they cannot affect the value of any. It is only by
entering in a greater degree into the cost of production of some things
than of others, that they can have any influence on value.

For example, we have seen that there are causes which necessitate a
permanently higher rate of profit in certain employments than in others.
There must be a compensation for superior risk, trouble, and
disagreeableness. This can only be obtained by selling the commodity at
a value above that which is due to the quantity of labour necessary for
its production. If gunpowder exchanged for other things in no higher
ratio than that of the labour required from first to last for producing
it, no one would set up a powder-mill. Butchers are certainly a more
prosperous class than bakers, and do not seem to be exposed to greater
risks, since it is not remarked that they are oftener bankrupts. They
seem, therefore, to obtain higher profits, which can only arise from the
more limited competition caused by the unpleasantness, and to a certain
degree, the Edition: current; Page: [463] unpopularity, of their trade.
But this higher profit implies that they sell their commodity at a
higher value than that due to their labour and outlay. All inequalities
of profit which are necessary and permanent, are represented in the
relative values of the commodities.

§ 5. Profits, however, may enter more largely into the conditions of
production of one commodity than of another, even though there be no
difference in the rate of profit between the two employments. The one
commodity may be called upon to yield profit during a longer period of
time than the other. The example by which this case is usually
illustrated is that of wine. Suppose a quantity of wine, and a quantity
of cloth, made by equal amounts of labour, and that labour paid at the
same rate. The cloth does not improve by keeping; the wine does. Suppose
that, to attain the desired quality, the wine requires to be kept five
years. The producer or dealer will not keep it, unless at the end of
five years he can sell it for as much more than the cloth as amounts to
five years' profit, accumulated at compound interest. The wine and the
cloth were made by the same original outlay. Here then is a case in
which the natural values, relatively to one another, of two commodities,
do not conform to their cost of production alone, but to their cost of
production plus something else. Unless, indeed, for the sake of
generality in the expression, we include the profit which the
wine-merchant foregoes during the five years, in the cost of production
of the wine: looking upon it as a kind of additional outlay, over and
above his other advances, for which outlay he must be indemnified at
last.

All commodities made by machinery are assimilated, at least
approximately, to the wine in the preceding example. In comparison with
things made wholly by immediate labour, profits enter more largely into
their cost of production. Suppose two commodities, A and B, each
requiring a year for its production, by means of a capital which we will
on this occasion denote by money, and suppose to be 1000l. A is made
wholly by immediate labour, the whole 1000l. being expended directly in
wages. B is made by means of labour which costs 500l. and a machine
which cost 500l., and the machine is worn out by one year’s use. The two
commodities will be exactly of the same value; which, if computed in
money, and if profits are 20 per cent per annum, will be 1200l. But of
this 1200l., in the case of A, only 200l., or one-sixth, is profit:
Edition: current; Page: [464] while in the case of B there is not only
the 200l., but as much of 500l. (the price of the machine) as consisted
of the profits of the machine-maker; which, if we suppose the machine
also to have taken a year for its production, is again one-sixth. So
that in the case of A only one-sixth of the entire return is profit,
whilst in B the element of profit comprises not only a sixth of the
whole, but an additional sixth of a large part.

The greater the proportion of the whole capital which consists of
machinery, or buildings, or material, or anything else which must be
provided before the immediate labour can commence, the more largely will
profits enter into the cost of production. It is equally true, though
not so obvious at first sight, that greater durability in the portion of
capital which consists of machinery or buildings, has precisely the same
effect as a greater amount of it. As we just supposed one extreme case,
of a machine entirely worn out by a year’s use, let us now suppose the
opposite and still more extreme case of a machine which lasts for ever,
and requires no repairs. In this case, which is as well suited for the
purpose of illustration as if it were a possible one, it will be
unnecessary that the manufacturer should ever be repaid the 500l. which
he gave for the machine, since he has always the machine itself, worth
500l.; but he must be paid, as before, a profit on it. The commodity B,
therefore, which in the case previously supposed was sold for 1200l. of
which sum 1000l. were to replace the capital and 200l. were profit, can
now be sold for 700l., being 500l. to replace wages, and 200l. profit on
the entire capital. Profit, therefore, enters into the value of B in the
ratio of 200l. out of 700l., being two-sevenths of the whole, or 28 4/7
per cent, while in the case of A, as before, it enters only in the ratio
of one-sixth, or 16 2/3 per cent. The case is of course purely ideal,
since no machinery or other fixed capital lasts for ever; but the more
durable it is, the nearer it approaches to this ideal case, and the more
largely does profit enter into the return. If, for instance, a machine
worth 500l. loses one-fifth of its value by each year’s use, 100l. must
be added to the return to make up this loss, and the price of the
commodity will be 800l. Profit therefore will enter into it in the ratio
of 200l. to 800l., or one-fourth, which is still a much higher
proportion than one-sixth, or 200l. in 1200l., as in case A.

From the unequal proportion in which, in different employments, profits
enter into the advances of the capitalist, and therefore into the
returns required by him, two consequences follow in regard to Edition:
current; Page: [465] value. One is, that commodities do not exchange in
the ratio simply of the quantities of labour required to produce them;
not even if we allow for the unequal rates at which different kinds of
labour are permanently remunerated. We have already illustrated this by
the example of wine: we shall now further exemplify it by the case of
commodities made by machinery. Suppose, as before, an article A made by
a thousand pounds' worth of immediate labour. But instead of B, made by
500l. worth of immediate labour and a machine worth 500l., let us
suppose C, made by 500l. worth of immediate labour with the aid of a
machine which has been produced by another 500l. worth of immediate
labour: the machine requiring a year for making, and worn out by a
year’s use; profits being as before 20 per cent. A and C are made by
equal quantities of labour, paid at the same rate: A costs 1000l. worth
of direct labour; C, only 500l. worth, which however is made up to
1000l. by the labour expended in the construction of the machine. If
labour, or its remuneration, were the sole ingredient of cost of
production, these two things would exchange for one another. But will
they do so? Certainly not. The machine having been made in a year by an
outlay of 500l., and profits being 20 per cent, the natural price of the
machine is 600l.: making an additional 100l. which must be advanced,
over and above his other expenses, by the manufacturer of C, and repaid
to him with a profit of 20 per cent. While, therefore, the commodity A
is sold for 1200l., C cannot be permanently sold for less than 1320l.

A second consequence is, that every rise or fall of general profits will
have an effect on values. Not indeed by raising or lowering them
generally, (which, as we have so often said, is a contradiction and an
impossibility): but by altering the proportion in which the values of
things are affected by the unequal lengths of time for which profit is
due. When two things, though made by equal labour, are of unequal value
because the one is called upon to yield profit for a greater number of
years or months than the other; this difference of value will be greater
when profits are greater, and less when they are less. The wine which
has to yield five years' profit more than the cloth, will surpass it in
value much more if profits are 40 per cent, than if they are only 20.
The commodities A and C, which, though made by equal quantities of
labour, were sold for 1200l. and 1320l., a difference of 10 per cent,
would, if profits had been only half as much, have been sold for 1100l.
and 1155l., a difference of only 5 per cent.

Edition: current; Page: [466]
It follows from this, that even a general rise of wages, when it
involves a real increase in the cost of labour, does in some degree
influence values. It does not affect them in the manner vulgarly
supposed, by raising them universally. But an increase in the cost of
labour, lowers profits; and therefore lowers in natural value the things
into which profits enter in a greater proportion than the average, and
raises those into which they enter in a less proportion than the
average. All commodities in the production of which machinery bears a
large part, especially if the machinery is very durable, are lowered in
their relative value when profits fall; or, what is equivalent, other
things are raised in value relatively to them. This truth is sometimes
expressed in a phraseology more plausible than sound, by saying that a
rise of wages raises the value of things made by labour, in comparison
with those made by machinery. But things made by machinery, just as much
as any other things, are made by labour, namely, the labour which made
the machinery itself: the only difference being that profits enter
somewhat more largely into the production of things for which machinery
is used, though the principal item of the outlay is still labour. It is
better, therefore, to associate the effect with fall of profits than
with rise of wages; especially as this last expression is extremely
ambiguous, suggesting the idea of an increase of the labourer’s real
remuneration, rather than of what is alone to the purpose here, namely,
the cost of labour to its employer.

§ 6. Besides the natural and necessary elements in cost of
production—labour and profits—there are others which are artificial and
casual, as for instance a tax. The tax on malt is as much a part of the
cost of production of that article as the wages of the labourers. The
expenses which the law imposes, as well as those which the nature of
things imposes, must be reimbursed with the ordinary profit from the
value of the produce, or the things will not continue to be produced.
But the influence of taxation on value is subject to the same conditions
as the influence of wages and of profits. It is not general taxation,
but differential taxation, that produces the effect. If all productions
were taxed so as to take an equal percentage from all profits, relative
values would be in no way disturbed. If only a few commodities were
taxed, their value would rise: and if only a few were left untaxed,
their value would fall. If half were taxed and the remainder untaxed,
the first half would rise and the last would fall relatively to each
other. Edition: current; Page: [467] This would be necessary in order to
equalize the expectation of profit in all employments, without which the
taxed employments would ultimately, if not immediately, be abandoned.
But general taxation, when equally imposed, and not disturbing the
relations of different productions to one another, cannot produce any
effect on values.

We have thus far supposed that all the means and appliances which enter
into the cost of production of commodities, are things whose own value
depends on their cost of production. Some of them, however, may belong
to the class of things which cannot be increased ad libitum in quantity,
and which therefore, if the demand goes beyond a certain amount, command
a scarcity value. The materials of many of the ornamental articles
manufactured in Italy are the substances called rosso, giallo, and verde
antico, which, whether truly or falsely I know not, are asserted to be
solely derived from the destruction of ancient columns and other
ornamental structures; the quarries from which the stone was originally
cut being exhausted, or their locality forgotten.∗ A material of such a
nature, if in much demand, must be at a scarcity value; and this value
enters into the cost of production, and consequently into the value, of
the finished article. The time seems to be approaching when the more
valuable furs will come under the influence of a scarcity value of the
material. Hitherto the diminishing number of the animals which produce
them, in the wildernesses of Siberia, and on the coasts of the Esquimaux
Sea, has operated on the value only through the greater labour which has
become necessary for securing any given quantity of the article, since,
without doubt, by employing labour enough, it might still be obtained in
much greater abundance for some time longer.

But the case in which scarcity value chiefly operates in adding to cost
of production, is the case of natural agents. These, when
unappropriated, and to be had for the taking, do not enter into cost of
production, save to the extent of the labour which may be necessary to
fit them for use. Even when appropriated, they do not (as we have
already seen) bear a value from the mere fact of the appropriation, but
only from scarcity, that is, from limitation of supply. But it is
equally certain that they often do bear a scarcity value. Suppose a fall
of water, in a place where there are more mills wanted than there is
water-power to supply them; the use of the fall of Edition: current;
Page: [468] water will have a scarcity value, sufficient either to bring
the demand down to the supply, or to pay for the creation of an
artificial power, by steam or otherwise, equal in efficiency to the
water-power.

A natural agent being a possession in perpetuity, and being only
serviceable by the products resulting from its continued employment, the
ordinary mode of deriving benefit from its ownership is by an annual
equivalent, paid by the person who uses it, from the proceeds of its
use. This equivalent always might be, and generally is, termed rent. The
question, therefore, respecting the influence which the appropriation of
natural agents produces on values, is often stated in this form: Does
Rent enter into Cost of Production? and the answer of the best political
economists is in the negative. The temptation is strong to the adoption
of these sweeping expressions, even by those who are aware of the
restrictions with which they must be taken; for there is no denying that
they stamp a general principle more firmly on the mind, than if it were
hedged round in theory with all its practical limitations. But they also
puzzle and mislead, and create an impression unfavourable to political
economy, as if it disregarded the evidence of facts. No one can deny
that rent sometimes enters into cost of production. If I buy or rent a
piece of ground, and build a cloth manufactory on it, the ground-rent
forms legitimately a part of my expenses of production, which must be
repaid by the product. And since all factories are built on ground, and
most of them in places where ground is peculiarly valuable, the rent
paid for it must, on the average, be compensated in the values of all
things made in factories. In what sense it is true that rent does not
enter into the cost of production or affect the value of agricultural
produce, will be shown in the succeeding chapter.

Edition: current; Page: [469]


CHAPTER V: of rent, in its relation to value

§ 1. We have investigated the laws which determine the value of two
classes of commodities: the small class which, being limited to a
definite quantity, have their value entirely determined by demand and
supply, save that their cost of production (if they have any)
constitutes a minimum below which they cannot permanently fall; and the
large class, which can be multiplied ad libitum by labour and capital,
and of which the cost of production fixes the maximum as well as the
minimum at which they can permanently exchange. But there is still a
third kind of commodities to be considered: those which have, not one,
but several costs of production: which can always be increased in
quantity by labour and capital, but not by the same amount of labour and
capital; of which so much may be produced at a given cost, but a further
quantity not without a greater cost. These commodities form an
intermediate class, partaking of the character of both the others. The
principal of them is agricultural produce. We have already made abundant
reference to the fundamental truth, that in agriculture, the state of
the art being given, doubling the labour does not double the produce;
that if an increased quantity of produce is required, the additional
supply is obtained at a greater cost than the first. Where a hundred
quarters of corn are all that is at present required from the lands of a
given village, if the growth of population made it necessary to raise a
hundred more, either by breaking up worse land now uncultivated, or by a
more elaborate cultivation of the land already under the plough, the
additional hundred, or some part of them at least, might cost double or
treble as much per quarter as the former supply.

If the first hundred quarters were all raised at the same expense (only
the best land being cultivated); and if that expense would be
remunerated with the ordinary profit by a price of 20s. the quarter;
Edition: current; Page: [470] the natural price of wheat, so long as no
more than that quantity was required, would be 20s.; and it could only
rise above, or fall below that price, from vicissitudes of seasons, or
other casual variations in supply. But if the population of the district
advanced, a time would arrive when more than a hundred quarters would be
necessary to feed it. We must suppose that there is no access to any
foreign supply. By the hypothesis, no more than a hundred quarters can
be produced in the district, unless by either bringing worse land into
cultivation, or altering the system of culture to a more expensive one.
Neither of these things will be done without a rise in price. This rise
of price will gradually be brought about by the increasing demand. So
long as the price has risen, but not risen enough to repay with the
ordinary profit the cost of producing an additional quantity, the
increased value of the limited supply partakes of the nature of a
scarcity value. Suppose that it will not answer to cultivate the second
best land, or land of the second degree of remoteness, for a less return
than 25s. the quarter; and that this price is also necessary to
remunerate the expensive operations by which an increased produce might
be raised from land of the first quality. If so, the price will rise,
through the increased demand, until it reaches 25s. That will now be the
natural price; being the price without which the quantity, for which
society has a demand at that price, will not be produced. At that price,
however, society can go on for some time longer; could go on perhaps for
ever, if population did not increase. The price, having attained that
point, will not again permanently recede (though it may fall temporarily
from accidental abundance); nor will it advance further, so long as
society can obtain the supply it requires without a second increase of
the cost of production.

I have made use of Price in this reasoning, as a convenient symbol of
Value, from the greater familiarity of the idea; and I shall continue to
do so as far as may appear to be necessary.

In the case supposed, different portions of the supply of corn have
different costs of production. Though the 20, or 50, or 150 quarters
additional have been produced at a cost proportional to 25s., the
original hundred quarters per annum are still produced at a cost only
proportional to 20s. This is self-evident, if the original and the
additional supply are produced on different qualities of land. It is
equally true if they are produced on the same land. Suppose that land of
the best quality, which produced 100 quarters at 20s., has been made to
produce 150 by an expensive process, which Edition: current; Page: [471]
it would not answer to undertake without a price of 25s. The cost which
requires 25s. is incurred for the sake of 50 quarters alone: the first
hundred might have continued for ever to be produced at the original
cost, and with the benefit, on that quantity, of the whole rise of price
caused by the increased demand: no one, therefore, will incur the
additional expense for the sake of the additional fifty, unless they
alone will pay for the whole of it. The fifty, therefore, will be
produced at their natural price, proportioned to the cost of their
production; while the other hundred will now bring in 5s. a quarter more
than their natural price—than the price corresponding to, and sufficing
to remunerate, their lower cost of production.

If the production of any, even the smallest, portion of the supply,
requires as a necessary condition a certain price, that price will be
obtained for all the rest. We are not able to buy one loaf cheaper than
another because the corn from which it was made, being grown on a richer
soil, has cost less to the grower. The value, therefore, of an article
(meaning its natural, which is the same with its average value) is
determined by the cost of that portion of the supply which is produced
and brought to market at the greatest expense. This is the Law of Value
of the third of the three classes into which all commodities are
divided.

§ 2. If the portion of produce raised in the most unfavourable
circumstances obtains a value proportioned to its cost of production;
all the portions raised in more favorable circumstances, selling as they
must do at the same value, obtain a value more than proportioned to
their cost of production. Their value is not, correctly speaking, a
scarcity value, for it is determined by the circumstances of the
production of the commodity, and not by the degree of dearness necessary
for keeping down the demand to the level of a limited supply. The
owners, however, of those portions of the produce enjoy a privilege;
they obtain a value which yields them more than the ordinary profit. If
this advantage depends upon any special exemption, such as being free
from a tax, or upon any personal advantages, physical or mental, or any
peculiar process only known to themselves, or upon the possession of a
greater capital than other people, or upon various other things which
might be enumerated, they retain it to themselves as an extra gain, over
and above the general profits of capital, of the nature, in some sort,
of a monopoly profit. But when, as in the case which we are more
Edition: current; Page: [472] particularly considering, the advantage
depends on the possession of a natural agent of peculiar quality, as for
instance of more fertile land than that which determines the general
value of the commodity; and when this natural agent is not owned by
themselves; the person who does own it, is able to exact from them, in
the form of rent, the whole extra gain derived from its use. We are thus
brought by another road to the Law of Rent, investigated in the
concluding chapter of the Second Book. Rent, we again see, is the
difference between the unequal returns to different parts of the capital
employed on the soil. Whatever surplus any portion of agricultural
capital produces, beyond what is produced by the same amount of capital
on the worst soil, or under the most expensive mode of cultivation,
which the existing demands of society compel a recourse to; that surplus
will naturally be paid as rent from that capital, to the owner of the
land on which it is employed.

It was long thought by political economists, among the rest even by Adam
Smith, that the produce of land is always at a monopoly value, because
(they said) in addition to the ordinary rate of profit, it always yields
something further for rent. This we now see to be erroneous. A thing
cannot be at a monopoly value, when its supply can be increased to an
indefinite extent if we are only willing to incur the cost. If no more
corn than the existing quantity is grown, it is because the value has
not risen high enough to remunerate any one for growing it. Any land
(not reserved for other uses, or for pleasure) which at the existing
price, and by the existing processes, will yield the ordinary profit, is
tolerably certain, unless some artificial hindrance intervenes, to be
cultivated, although nothing may be left for rent. As long as there is
any land fit for cultivation, which at the existing price cannot be
profitably cultivated at all, there must be some land a little better,
which will yield the ordinary profit, but allow nothing for rent: and
that land, if within the boundary of a farm, will be cultivated by the
farmer; if not so, probably by the proprietor, or by some other person
on sufferance. Some such land at least, under cultivation, there can
scarcely fail to be.

Rent, therefore, forms no part of the cost of production which
determines the value of agricultural produce. Circumstances no doubt may
be conceived in which it might do so, and very largely too. We can
imagine a country so fully peopled, and with all its cultivable soil so
completely occupied, that to produce any additional quantity would
require more labour than the produce would feed: Edition: current; Page:
[473] and if we suppose this to be the condition of the whole world, or
of a country debarred from foreign supply, then, if population continued
increasing, both the land and its produce would really rise to a
monopoly or scarcity price. But this state of things never can have
really existed anywhere, unless possibly in some small island cut off
from the rest of the world; nor is there any danger whatever that it
should exist. It certainly exists in no known region at present.
Monopoly, we have seen, can take effect on value, only through
limitation of supply. In all countries of any extent there is more
cultivable land than is yet cultivated; and while there is any such
surplus, it is the same thing, so far as that quality of land is
concerned, as if there were an infinite quantity. What is practically
limited in supply is only the better qualities; and even for those, so
much rent cannot be demanded as would bring in the competition of the
lands not yet in cultivation; the rent of a piece of land must be
somewhat less than the whole excess of its productiveness over that of
the best land which it is not yet profitable to cultivate; that is, it
must be about equal to the excess above the worst land which it is
profitable to cultivate. The land or the capital most unfavourably
circumstanced among those actually employed, pays no rent; and that land
or capital determines the cost of production which regulates the value
of the whole produce. Thus rent is, as we have already seen, no cause of
value, but the price of the privilege which the inequality of the
returns to different portions of agricultural produce confers on all
except the least favoured portions.

Rent, in short, merely equalizes the profits of different farming
capitals, by enabling the landlord to appropriate all extra gains
occasioned by superiority of natural advantages. If all landlords were
unanimously to forego their rent, they would but transfer it to the
farmers, without benefiting the consumer; for the existing price of corn
would still be an indispensable condition of the production of part of
the existing supply, and if a part obtained that price the whole would
obtain it. Rent, therefore, unless artificially increased by restrictive
laws, is no burthen on the consumer: it does not raise the price of
corn, and is no otherwise a detriment to the public, than inasmuch as if
the state had retained it, or imposed an equivalent in the shape of a
land-tax, it would then have been a fund applicable to general instead
of private advantage.

§ 3. Agricultural productions are not the only commodities Edition:
current; Page: [474] which have several different costs of production at
once, and which, in consequence of that difference, and in proportion to
it, afford a rent. Mines are also an instance. Almost all kinds of raw
material extracted from the interior of the earth—metal, coals, precious
stones, &c., are obtained from mines differing considerably in
fertility, that is, yielding very different quantities of the product to
the same quantity of labour and capital. This being the case, it is an
obvious question, why are not the most fertile mines so worked as to
supply the whole market? No such question can arise as to land; it being
self-evident, that the most fertile lands could not possibly be made to
supply the whole demand of a fully-peopled country; and even of what
they do yield, a part is extorted from them by a labour and outlay as
great as that required to grow the same amount on worse land. But it is
not so with mines; at least, not universally. There are, perhaps, cases
in which it is impossible to extract from a particular vein, in a given
time, more than a certain quantity of ore, because there is only a
limited surface of the vein exposed, on which more than a certain number
of labourers cannot be simultaneously employed. But this is not true of
all mines. In collieries, for example, some other cause of limitation
must be sought for. In some instances the owners limit the quantity
raised, in order not too rapidly to exhaust the mine: in others there
are said to be combinations of owners, to keep up a monopoly price by
limiting the production. Whatever be the causes, it is a fact that mines
of different degrees of richness are in operation, and since the value
of the produce must be proportional to the cost of production at the
worst mine (fertility and situation taken together), it is more than
proportional to that of the best. All mines superior in produce to the
worst actually worked, will yield, therefore, a rent equal to the
excess. They may yield more; and the worst mine may itself yield a rent.
Mines being comparatively few, their qualities do not graduate gently
into one another, as the qualities of land do; and the demand may be
such as to keep the value of the produce considerably above the cost of
production at the worst mine now worked, without being sufficient to
bring into operation a still worse. During the interval, the produce is
really at a scarcity value.

Fisheries are another example. Fisheries in the open sea are not
appropriated, but fisheries in lakes or rivers almost always are so, and
likewise oyster-beds or other particular fishing grounds on coasts. We
may take salmon fisheries as an example of the whole class. Some rivers
are far more productive in salmon than others. Edition: current; Page:
[475] None, however, without being exhausted, can supply more than a
very limited demand. The demand of a country like England can only be
supplied by taking salmon from many different rivers of unequal
productiveness, and the value must be sufficient to repay the cost of
obtaining the fish from the least productive of these. All others,
therefore, will if appropriated afford a rent equal to the value of
their superiority. Much higher than this it cannot be, if there are
salmon rivers accessible which from distance or inferior productiveness
have not yet contributed to supply the market. If there are not, the
value, doubtless, may rise to a scarcity rate, and the worst fisheries
in use may then yield a considerable rent.

Both in the case of mines and of fisheries, the natural order of events
is liable to be interrupted by the opening of a new mine, or a new
fishery, of superior quality to some of those already in use. The first
effect of such an incident is an increase of the supply; which of course
lowers the value to call forth an increased demand. This reduced value
may be no longer sufficient to remunerate the worst of the existing
mines or fisheries, and these may consequently be abandoned. If the
superior mines or fisheries, with the addition of the one newly opened,
produce as much of the commodity as is required at the lower value
corresponding to their lower cost of production, the fall of value will
be permanent, and there will be a corresponding fall in the rents of
those mines or fisheries which are not abandoned. In this case, when
things have permanently adjusted themselves, the result will be, that
the scale of qualities which supply the market will have been cut short
at the lower end, while a new insertion will have been made in the scale
at some point higher up; and the worst mine or fishery in use—the one
which regulates the rents of the superior qualities and the value of the
commodity—will be a mine or fishery of better quality than that by which
they were previously regulated.

Land is used for other purposes than agriculture, especially for
residence; and when so used, yields a rent, determined by principles
similar to those already laid down. The ground rent of a building, and
the rent of a garden or park attached to it, will not be less than the
rent which the same land would afford in agriculture: but may be greater
than this to an indefinite amount; the surplus being either in
consideration of beauty or of convenience, the convenience often
consisting in superior facilities for pecuniary gain. Sites of
remarkable beauty are generally limited in supply, and therefore, if in
great demand, are at a scarcity value. Sites superior Edition: current;
Page: [476] only in convenience are governed as to their value by the
ordinary principles of rent. The ground rent of a house in a small
village is but little higher than the rent of a similar patch of ground
in the open fields: but that of a shop in Cheapside will exceed these,
by the whole amount at which people estimate the superior facilities of
money-making in the more crowded place. The rents of wharfage, dock and
harbour room, water-power, and many other privileges, may be analysed on
similar principles.

§ 4. Cases of extra profit analogous to rent, are more frequent in the
transactions of industry than is sometimes supposed. Take the case, for
example, of a patent, or exclusive privilege for the use of a process by
which cost of production is lessened. If the value of the product
continues to be regulated by what it costs to those who are obliged to
persist in the old process, the patentee will make an extra profit equal
to the advantage which his process possesses over theirs. This extra
profit is essentially similar to rent, and sometimes even assumes the
form of it; the patentee allowing to other producers the use of his
privilege, in consideration of an annual payment. So long as he, and
those whom he associates in the privilege, do not produce enough to
supply the whole market, so long the original cost of production, being
the necessary condition of producing a part, will regulate the value of
the whole; and the patentee will be enabled to keep up his rent to a
full equivalent for the advantage which his process gives him. In the
commencement indeed he will probably forego a part of this advantage for
the sake of underselling others: the increased supply which he brings
forward will lower the value, and make the trade a bad one for those who
do not share in the privilege: many of whom therefore will gradually
retire, or restrict their operations, or enter into arrangements with
the patentee: as his supply increases theirs will diminish, the value
meanwhile continuing slightly depressed. But if he stops short in his
operations before the market is wholly supplied by the new process,
things will again adjust themselves to what was the natural value before
the invention was made, and the benefit of the improvement will accrue
solely to the patentee.

The extra gains which any producer or dealer obtains through superior
talents for business, or superior business arrangements, are very much
of a similar kind. If all his competitors had the same advantages, and
used them, the benefit would be transferred to their customers, through
the diminished value of the article: Edition: current; Page: [477] he
only retains it for himself because he is able to bring his commodity to
market at a lower cost, while its value is determined by a higher. All
advantages, in fact, which one competitor has over another, whether
natural or acquired, whether personal or the result of social
arrangements, bring the commodity, so far, into the Third Class, and
assimilate the possessor of the advantage to a receiver of rent. Wages
and profits represent the universal elements in production, while rent
may be taken to represent the differential and peculiar: any difference
in favour of certain producers, or in favour of production in certain
circumstances, being the source of a gain, which, though not called rent
unless paid periodically by one person to another, is governed by laws
entirely the same with it. The price paid for a differential advantage
in producing a commodity, cannot enter into the general cost of
production of the commodity.

A commodity may no doubt, in some contingencies, yield a rent even under
the most disadvantageous circumstances of its production: but only when
it is, for the time, in the condition of those commodities which are
absolutely limited in supply, and is therefore selling at a scarcity
value; which never is, nor has been, nor can be, a permanent condition
of any of the great rent-yielding commodities: unless through their
approaching exhaustion, if they are mineral products (coal for example),
or through an increase of population, continuing after a further
increase of production becomes impossible: a contingency, which the
almost inevitable progress of human culture and improvement in the long
interval which has first to elapse, forbids us to consider as probable.

Edition: current; Page: [478]


CHAPTER VI: summary of the theory of value

§ 1. We have now attained a favourable point for looking back, and
taking a simultaneous view of the space which we have traversed since
the commencement of the present Book. The following are the principles
of the theory of Value, so far as we have yet ascertained them.

-   

    I. Value is a relative term. The value of a thing means the quantity
    of some other thing, or of things in general, which it exchanges
    for. The values of all things can never, therefore, rise or fall
    simultaneously. There is no such thing as a general rise or a
    general fall of values. Every rise of value supposes a fall, and
    every fall a rise.
-   

    II. The temporary or Market Value of a thing, depends on the demand
    and supply; rising as the demand rises, and falling as the supply
    rises. The demand, however, varies with the value, being generally
    greater when the thing is cheap than when it is dear; and the value
    always adjusts itself in such a manner, that the demand is equal to
    the supply.
-   

    III. Besides their temporary value, things have also a permanent, or
    as it may be called, a Natural Value, to which the market value,
    after every variation, always tends to return; and the oscillations
    compensate for one another, so that, on the average, commodities
    exchange at about their natural value.
-   

    IV. The natural value of some things is a scarcity value; but most
    things naturally exchange for one another in the ratio of their cost
    of production, or at what may be termed their Cost Value.
-   

    V. The things which are naturally and permanently at a scarcity
    value are those of which the supply cannot be increased at all, or
    not sufficiently to satisfy the whole of the demand which would
    exist for them at their cost value.
-   

    VI. A monopoly value means a scarcity value. Monopoly Edition:
    current; Page: [479] cannot give a value to anything except through
    a limitation of the supply.
-   

    VII. Every commodity of which the supply can be indefinitely
    increased by labour and capital, exchanges for other things
    proportionally to the cost necessary for producing and bringing to
    market the most costly portion of the supply required. The natural
    value is synonymous with the Cost Value and the cost value of a
    thing, means the cost value of the most costly portion of it.
-   

    VIII. Cost of Production consists of several elements, some of which
    are constant and universal, others occasional. The universal
    elements of cost of production are, the wages of the labour, and the
    profits of the capital. The occasional elements are taxes, and any
    extra cost occasioned by a scarcity value of some of the requisites.
-   

    IX. Rent is not an element in the cost of production of the
    commodity which yields it; except in the cases (rather conceivable
    than actually existing) in which it results from, and represents, a
    scarcity value. But when land capable of yielding rent in
    agriculture is applied to some other purpose, the rent which it
    would have yielded is an element in the cost of production of the
    commodity which it is employed to produce.
-   

    X. Omitting the occasional elements; things which admit of
    indefinite increase, naturally and permanently exchange for each
    other according to the comparative amount of wages which must be
    paid for producing them, and the comparative amount of profits which
    must be obtained by the capitalists who pay those wages.
-   

    XI. The comparative amount of wages does not depend on what wages
    are in themselves. High wages do not make high values, nor low wages
    low values. The comparative amount of wages depends partly on the
    comparative quantities of labour required, and partly on the
    comparative rates of its remuneration.
-   

    XII. So, the comparative rate of profits does not depend on what
    profits are in themselves; nor do high or low profits make high or
    low values. It depends partly on the comparative lengths of time
    during which the capital is employed, and partly on the comparative
    rate of profits in different employments.
-   

    XIII. If two things are made by the same quantity of labour, and
    that labour paid at the same rate, and if the wages of the labourer
    have to be advanced for the same space of time, and the nature of
    the employment does not require that there be a permanent Edition:
    current; Page: [480] difference in their rate of profit; then,
    whether wages and profits be high or low, and whether the quantity
    of labour expended be much or little, these two things will, on the
    average, exchange for one another.
-   

    XIV. If one of two things commands, on the average, a greater value
    than the other, the cause must be that it requires for its
    production either a greater quantity of labour, or a kind of labour
    permanently paid at a higher rate; or that the capital, or part of
    the capital, which suPports that labour, must be advanced for a
    longer period; or lastly, that the production is attended with some
    circumstance which requires to be compensated by a permanently
    higher rate of profit.
-   

    XV. Of these elements, the quantity of labour required for the
    production is the most important: the effect of the others is
    smaller, though none of them are insignificant.
-   

    XVI. The lower profits are, the less important become the minor
    elements of cost of production, and the less do commodities deviate
    from a value proportioned to the quantity and quality of the labour
    required for their production.
-   

    XVII. But every fall of profits lowers, in some degree, the cost
    value of things made with much or durable machinery, and raises that
    of things made by hand; and every rise of profits does the reverse.

§ 2. Such is the general theory of Exchange Value. It is necessary,
however, to remark that this theory contemplates a system of production
carried on by capitalists for profit, and not by labourers for
subsistence. In proportion as we admit this last supposition—and in most
countries we must admit it, at least in respect of agricultural produce,
to a very great extent—such of the preceding theorems as relate to the
dependence of value on cost of production will require modification.
Those theorems are all grounded on the supposition, that the producer’s
object and aim is to derive a profit from his capital. This granted, it
follows that he must sell his commodity at the price which will afford
the ordinary rate of profit, that is to say, it must exchange for other
commodities at its cost value. But the peasant proprietor, the metayer,
and even the peasant-farmer or allotment-holder—the labourer, under
whatever name, producing on his own account—is seeking, not an
investment for his little capital, but an advantageous employment for
his time and labour. His disbursements, beyond his own Edition: current;
Page: [481] maintenance and that of his family, are so small, that
nearly the whole proceeds of the sale of the produce are wages of
labour. When he and his family have been fed from the produce of the
farm (and perhaps clothed with materials grown thereon, and manufactured
in the family) he may, in respect of the supplementary remuneration
derived from the sale of the surplus produce, be compared to those
labourers who, deriving their subsistence from an independent source,
can afford to sell their labour at any price which is to their minds
worth the exertion. A peasant, who supports himself and his family with
one portion of his produce, will often sell the remainder very much
below what would be its cost value to the capitalist.

There is, however, even in this case, a minimum, or inferior limit, of
value. The produce which he carries to market, must bring in to him the
value of all necessaries which he is compelled to purchase; and it must
enable him to pay his rent. Rent, under peasant cultivation, is not
governed by the principles set forth in the chapters immediately
preceding, but is either determined by custom, as in the case of
metayers, or, if fixed by competition, depends on the ratio of
population to land. Rent, therefore, in this case, is an element of cost
of production. The peasant must work until he has cleared his rent and
the price of all purchased necessaries. After this, he will go on
working only if he can sell the produce for such a price as will
overcome his aversion to labour.

The minimum just mentioned is what the peasant must obtain in exchange
for the whole of his surplus produce. But inasmuch as this surplus is
not a fixed quantity, but may be either greater or less according to the
degree of his industry, a minimum value for the whole of it does not
give any minimum value for a definite quantity of the commodity. In this
state of things, therefore, it can hardly be said, that the value
depends at all on cost of production. It depends entirely on demand and
supply, that is, on the proportion between the quantity of surplus food
which the peasants choose to produce, and the numbers of the
non-agricultural, or rather of the non-peasant population. If the buying
class were numerous and the growing class lazy, food might be
permanently at a scarcity price. I am not aware that this case has
anywhere a real existence. If the growing class is energetic and
industrious, and the buyers few, food will be extremely cheap. This also
is a rare case, though some parts of France perhaps approximate to it.
The common cases are, either that, as in Ireland until lately, the
peasant class Edition: current; Page: [482] is indolent and the buyers
few, or the peasants industrious and the town population numerous and
opulent, as in Belgium, the north of Italy, and parts of Germany. The
price of the produce will adjust itself to these varieties of
circumstances unless modified, as in many cases it is, by the
competition of producers who are not peasants, or by the prices of
foreign markets.

§ 3. Another anomalous case is that of slave-grown produce: which
presents, however, by no means the same degree of complication. The
slave-owner is a capitalist, and his inducement to production consists
in a profit on his capital. This profit must amount to the ordinary
rate. In respect to his expenses, he is in the same position as if his
slaves were free labourers working with their present efficiency, and
were hired with wages equal to their present cost. If the cost is less
in proportion to the work done, than the wages of free labour would be,
so much the greater are his profits: but if all other producers in the
country possess the same advantage, the values of commodities will not
be at all affected by it. The only case in which they can be affected,
is when the privilege of cheap labour is confined to particular branches
of production, free labourers at proportionally higher wages being
employed in the remainder. In this case, as in all cases of permanent
inequality between the wages of different employments, prices and values
receive the impress of the inequality. Slave-grown will exchange for
non-slave-grown commodities in a less ratio than that of the quantity of
labour required for their production; the value of the former will be
less, of the latter greater, than if slavery did not exist.

The further adaptation of the theory of value to the varieties of
existing or possible industrial systems may be left with great advantage
to the intelligent reader. It is well said by Montesquieu, “Il ne faut
pas toujours tellement épuiser un sujet, qu'on ne laisse rien à faire au
lecteur. Il ne s'agit pas de faire lire, mais de faire penser.”∗

Edition: current; Page: [483]


CHAPTER VII: of money

§ 1. Having proceeded thus far in ascertaining the general laws of
Value, without introducing the idea of Money (except occasionally for
illustration,) it is time that we should now superadd that idea, and
consider in what manner the principles of the mutual interchange of
commodities are affected by the use of what is termed a Medium of
Exchange.

In order to understand the manifold functions of a Circulating Medium,
there is no better way than to consider what are the principal
inconveniences which we should experience if we had not such a medium.
The first and most obvious would be the want of a common measure for
values of different sorts. If a tailor had only coats, and wanted to buy
bread or a horse, it would be very troublesome to ascertain how much
bread he ought to obtain for a coat, or how many coats he should give
for a horse. The calculation must be recommenced on different data,
every time he bartered his coats for a different kind of article; and
there could be no current price, or regular quotations of value. Whereas
now each thing has a current price in money, and he gets over all
difficulties by reckoning his coat at 4l. or 5l., and a four-pound loaf
at 6d. or 7d. As it is much easier to compare different lengths by
expressing them in a common language of feet and inches, so it is much
easier to compare values by means of a common language of pounds,
shillings, and pence. In no other way can values be arranged one above
another in a scale; in no other can a person conveniently calculate the
sum of his possessions; and it is easier to ascertain and remember the
relations of many things to one thing, than their innumerable cross
relations with one another. This advantage of having a common language
in which values may be expressed, is, even by itself, so important, that
some such mode of expressing and computing them would probably be used
even if a Edition: current; Page: [484] pound or a shilling did not
express any real thing, but a mere unit of calculation. It is said that
there are African tribes in which this somewhat artificial contrivance
actually prevails. They calculate the value of things in a sort of money
of account, called macutes. They say one thing is worth ten macutes,
another fifteen, another twenty.∗ There is no real thing called a
macute: it is a conventional unit, for the more convenient comparison of
things with one another.

This advantage, however, forms but an inconsiderable part of the
economical benefits derived from the use of money. The inconveniences of
barter are so great, that without some more commodious means of
effecting exchanges, the division of employments could hardly have been
carried to any considerable extent. A tailor, who had nothing but coats,
might starve before he could find any person having bread to sell who
wanted a coat: besides, he would not want as much bread at a time as
would be worth a coat, and the coat could not be divided. Every person,
therefore, would at all times hasten to dispose of his commodity in
exchange for anything which, though it might not be fitted to his own
immediate wants, was in great and general demand, and easily divisible,
so that he might be sure of being able to purchase with it whatever was
offered for sale. The primary necessaries of life possess these
properties in a high degree. Bread is extremely divisible, and an object
of universal desire. Still, this is not the sort of thing required: for,
of food, unless in expectation of a scarcity, no one wishes to possess
more at once, than is wanted for immediate consumption; so that a person
is never sure of finding an immediate purchaser for articles of food;
and unless soon disposed of, most of them perish. The thing which people
would select to keep by them for making purchases, must be one which,
besides being divisible and generally desired, does not deteriorate by
keeping. This reduces the choice to a small number of articles.

§ 2. By a tacit concurrence, almost all nations, at a very early period,
fixed upon certain metals, and especially gold and silver, to serve this
purpose. No other substances unite the necessary qualities in so great a
degree, with so many subordinate advantages. Next to food and clothing,
and in some climates even before clothing, the strongest inclination in
a rude state of society is for personal ornament, and for the kind of
distinction which is obtained by rarity or costliness in such ornaments.
After the immediate Edition: current; Page: [485] necessities of life
were satisfied, every one was eager to accumulate as great a store as
possible of things at once costly and ornamental; which were chiefly
gold, silver, and jewels. These were the things which it most pleased
every one to possess, and which there was most certainty of finding
others willing to receive in exchange for any kind of produce. They were
among the most imperishable of all substances. They were also portable,
and containing great value in small bulk, were easily hid; a
consideration of much importance in an age of insecurity. Jewels are
inferior to gold and silver in the quality of divisibility; and are of
very various qualities, not to be accurately discriminated without great
trouble. Gold and silver are eminently divisible, and when pure, always
of the same quality; and their purity may be ascertained and certified
by a public authority.

Accordingly, though furs have been employed as money in some countries,
cattle in others, in Chinese Tartary cubes of tea closely pressed
together, the shells called cowries on the coast of Western Africa, and
in Abyssinia at this day blocks of rock salt; though even of metals, the
less costly have sometimes been chosen, as iron in Lacedaemon from an
ascetic policy, copper in the early Roman republic from the poverty of
the people; gold and silver have been generally preferred by nations
which were able to obtain them, either by industry, commerce, or
conquest. To the qualities which originally recommended them, another
came to be added, the importance of which only unfolded itself by
degrees. Of all commodities they are among the least influenced by any
of the causes which produce fluctuations of value. No commodity is quite
free from such fluctuations. Gold and silver have sustained, since the
beginning of history, one great permanent alteration of value, from the
discovery of the American mines; and some temporary variations, such as
that which, in the last great war,1 was produced by the absorption of
the metals in hoards, and in the military chests of the immense armies
constantly in the field. In the present age the opening of new sources
of supply, so abundant as the Ural mountains, California, and
Australia,2 may be the commencement of another period of decline, on the
limits of which it would be useless at present to speculate. But on the
whole, no commodities are so little exposed to causes of variation. They
fluctuate less than almost any other things in their cost of production.
And from Edition: current; Page: [486] their durability, the total
quantity in existence is at all times so great in proportion to the
annual supply, that the effect on value even of a change in the cost of
production is not sudden: a very long time being required to diminish
materially the quantity in existence, and even to increase it very
greatly not being a rapid process. Gold and silver, therefore, are more
fit than any other commodity to be the subject of engagements for
receiving or paying a given quantity at some distant period. If the
engagement were made in corn, a failure of crops might increase the
burthen of the payment in one year to fourfold what was intended, or an
exuberant harvest sink it in another to one-fourth. If stipulated in
cloth, some manufacturing invention might permanently reduce the payment
to a tenth of its original value. Such things have occurred even in the
case of payments stipulated in gold and silver; but the great fall of
their value after the discovery of America, is, as yet,1 the only
authenticated instance; and in this case the change was extremely
gradual, being spread over a period of many years.

When gold and silver had become virtually a medium of exchange, by
becoming the things for which people generally sold, and with which they
generally bought, whatever they had to sell or to buy; the contrivance
of coining obviously suggested itself. By this process the metal was
divided into convenient portions, of any degree of smallness, and
bearing a recognised proportion to one another; and the trouble was
saved of weighing and assaying at every change of possessors, an
inconvenience which on the occasion of small purchases would soon have
become insupportable. Governments found it their interest to take the
operation into their own hands, and to interdict all coining by private
persons; indeed, their guarantee was often the only one which would have
been relied on, a reliance however which very often it ill deserved;
profligate governments having until a very modern period seldom
scrupled, for the sake of robbing their creditors, to confer on all
other debtors a licence to rob theirs, by the shallow and impudent
artifice of lowering the standard; that least covert of all modes of
knavery, which consists in calling a shilling a pound, that a debt of
one hundred pounds may be cancelled by the payment of a hundred
shillings. It would have been as simple a plan, and would have answered
the purpose as well, to have enacted that “a hundred” should always be
interpreted to mean five, which would have affected the same reduction
in all pecuniary contracts, and would Edition: current; Page: [487] not
have been at all more shameless. Such strokes of policy have not wholly
ceased to be recommended, but they have ceased to be practised; except
occasionally through the medium of paper money, in which case the
character of the transaction, from the greater obscurity of the subject,
is a little less barefaced.

§ 3. Money, when its use has grown habitual, is the medium through which
the incomes of the different members of the community are distributed to
them, and the measure by which they estimate their possessions. As it is
always by means of money that people provide for their different
necessities, there grows up in their minds a powerful association
leading them to regard money as wealth in a more peculiar sense than any
other article; and even those who pass their lives in the production of
the most useful objects, acquire the habit of regarding those objects as
chiefly important by their capacity of being exchanged for money. A
person who parts with money to obtain commodities, unless he intends to
sell them, appears to the imagination to be making a worse bargain than
a person who parts with commodities to get money; the one seems to be
spending his means, the other adding to them. Illusions which, though
now in some measure dispelled, were long powerful enough to overmaster
the mind of every politician, both speculative and practical, in Europe.

It must be evident, however, that the mere introduction of a particular
mode of exchanging things for one another by first exchanging a thing
for money, and then exchanging the money for something else, makes no
difference in the essential character of transactions. It is not with
money that things are really purchased. Nobody’s income (except that of
the gold or silver miner) is derived from the precious metals. The
pounds or shillings which a person receives weekly or yearly, are not
what constitutes his income; they are a sort of tickets or orders which
he can present for payment at any shop he pleases, and which entitle him
to receive a certain value of any commodity that he makes choice of. The
farmer pays his labourers and his landlord in these tickets, as the most
convenient plan for himself and them; but their real income is their
share of his corn, cattle, and hay, and it makes no essential difference
whether he distributes it to them directly, or sells it for them and
gives them the price; but as they would have to sell it for money if he
did not, and as he is a seller at any rate, it best suits the purposes
of all, that he should sell their share along with his own, and leave
the labourers more leisure for work and the Edition: current; Page:
[488] landlord for being idle. The capitalists, except those who are
producers of the precious metals, derive no part of their income from
those metals, since they only get them by buying them with their own
produce: while all other persons have their incomes paid to them by the
capitalists, or by those who have received payment from the capitalists
and as the capitalists have nothing, from the first, except their
produce, it is that and nothing else which supplies all incomes
furnished by them. There cannot, in short, be intrinsically a more
insignificant thing, in the economy of society, than money; except in
the character of a contrivance for sparing time and labour. It is a
machine for doing quickly and commodiously, what would be done, though
less quickly and commodiously, without it: and like many other kinds of
machinery, it only exerts a distinct and independent influence of its
own when it gets out of order.

The introduction of money does not interfere with the operation of any
of the Laws of Value laid down in the preceding chapters. The reasons
which make the temporary or market value of things depend on the demand
and supply, and their average and permanent values upon their cost of
production, are as applicable to a money system as to a system of
barter. Things which by barter would exchange for one another, will, if
sold for money, sell for an equal amount of it, and so will exchange for
one another still, though the process of exchanging them will consist of
two operations instead of only one. The relations of commodities to one
another remain unaltered by money: the only new relation introduced is
their relation to money itself; how much or how little money they will
exchange for; in other words, how the Exchange Value of money itself is
determined. And this is not a question of any difficulty, when the
illusion is dispelled, which caused money to be looked upon as a
peculiar thing, not governed by the same laws as other things. Money is
a commodity, and its value is determined like that of other commodities,
temporarily by demand and supply, permanently and on the average by cost
of production. The illustration of these principles, considered in their
application to money, must be given in some detail, on account of the
confusion which, in minds not scientifically instructed on the subject,
envelopes the whole matter; partly from a lingering remnant of the
misleading associations, and partly from the mass of vapoury and
baseless speculation with which this, more than any other topic of
political economy, has in latter times become surrounded. I shall
therefore treat of the Value of Money in a chapter apart.

Edition: current; Page: [489]


CHAPTER VIII: of the value of money, as dependent on demand and supply

§ 1. It is unfortunate that in the very outset of the subject we have to
clear from our path a formidable ambiguity of language. The Value of
Money is to appearance an expression as precise, as free from
possibility of misunderstanding, as any in science. The value of a thing
is what it will exchange for: the value of money, is what money will
exchange for; the purchasing power of money. If prices are low, money
will buy much of other things, and is of high value; if prices are high,
it will buy little of other things, and is of low value. The value of
money is inversely as general prices: falling as they rise, and rising
as they fall.

But unhappily the same phrase is also employed, in the current language
of commerce, in a very different sense. Money, which is so commonly
understood as the synonym of wealth, is more especially the term in use
to denote it when it is the subject of borrowing. When one person lends
to another, as well as when he pays wages or rent to another, what he
transfers is not the mere money, but a right to a certain value of the
produce of the country, to be selected at pleasure; the lender having
first bought this right, by giving for it a portion of his capital. What
he really lends is so much capital; the money is the mere instrument of
transfer. But the capital usually passes from the lender to the receiver
through the means either of money, or of an order to receive money, and
at any rate it is in money that the capital is computed and estimated.
Hence, borrowing capital is universally called borrowing money; the loan
market is called the money market: those who have their capital
disposable for investment on loan are called the monied class: and the
equivalent given for the use of capital, or in other words, interest, is
not only called the interest of money, but, by a grosser perversion of
terms, the value of money. This misapplication of language, assisted by
some fallacious appearances which we Edition: current; Page: [490] shall
notice and clear up hereafter,∗ has created a general notion among
persons in business, that the Value of Money, meaning the rate of
interest, has an intimate connexion with the Value of Money in its
proper sense, the value or purchasing power of the circulating medium.
We shall return to this subject before long: at present it is enough to
say, that by Value I shall always mean Exchange Value, and by money the
medium of exchange, not the capital which is passed from hand to hand
through that medium.

§ 2. The value or purchasing power of money depends, in the first
instance, on demand and supply. But demand and supply, in relation to
money, present themselves in a somewhat different shape from the demand
and supply of other things.

The supply of a commodity means the quantity offered for sale. But it is
not usual to speak of offering money for sale. People are not usually
said to buy or sell money. This, however, is merely an accident of
language. In point of fact, money is bought and sold like other things,
whenever other things are bought and sold for money. Whoever sells corn,
or tallow, or cotton, buys money. Whoever buys bread, or wine, or
clothes, sells money to the dealer in those articles. The money with
which people are offering to buy is money offered for sale. The supply
of money, then, is the quantity of it which people are wanting to lay
out; that is, all the money they have in their possession, except what
they are hoarding, or at least keeping by them as a reserve for future
contingencies. The supply of money, in short, is all the money in
circulation at the time.

The demand for money, again, consists of all the goods offered for sale.
Every seller of goods is a buyer of money, and the goods he brings with
him constitute his demand. The demand for money differs from the demand
for other things in this, that it is limited only by the means of the
purchaser. The demand for other things is for so much and no more; but
there is always a demand for as much money as can be got. Persons may
indeed refuse to sell, and withdraw their goods from the market, if they
cannot get for them what they consider a sufficient price. But this is
only when they think that the price will rise, and that they shall get
more money by waiting. If they thought the low price likely to be
permanent, they would take what they could get. It is always a sine quâ
non with a dealer to dispose of his goods.

Edition: current; Page: [491]
As the whole of the goods in the market compose the demand for money, so
the whole of the money constitutes the demand for goods. The money and
the goods are seeking each other for the purpose of being exchanged.
They are reciprocally supply and demand to one another. It is
indifferent whether, in characterizing the phenomena, we speak of the
demand and supply of goods, or the supply and the demand of money. They
are equivalent expressions.

We shall proceed to illustrate this proposition more fully. And in doing
this, the reader will remark a great difference between the class of
questions which now occupy us, and those which we previously had under
discussion respecting Values. In considering Value, we were only
concerned with causes which acted upon particular commodities apart from
the rest. Causes which affect all commodities alike do not act upon
values. But in considering the relation between goods and money, it is
with the causes that operate upon all goods whatever that we are
specially concerned. We are comparing goods of all sorts on one side,
with money on the other side, as things to be exchanged against each
other.

Suppose, everything else being the same, that there is an increase in
the quantity of money, say by the arrival of a foreigner in a place,
with a treasure of gold and silver. When he commences expending it (for
this question it matters not whether productively or unproductively), he
adds to the supply of money, and, by the same act, to the demand for
goods. Doubtless he adds, in the first instance, to the demand only for
certain kinds of goods, namely, those which he selects for purchase; he
will immediately raise the price of those, and so far as he is
individually concerned, of those only. If he spends his funds in giving
entertainments, he will raise the prices of food and wine. If he expends
them in establishing a manufactory, he will raise the prices of labour
and materials. But at the higher prices, more money will pass into the
hands of the sellers of these different articles; and they, whether
labourers or dealers, having more money to lay out, will create an
increased demand for all the things which they are accustomed to
purchase: these accordingly will rise in price, and so on until the rise
has reached everything. I say everything, though it is of course
possible that the influx of money might take place through the medium of
some new class of consumers, or in such a manner as to alter the
proportions of different classes of consumers to one another, so that a
greater share of the national income than before would Edition: current;
Page: [492] thenceforth be expended in some articles, and a smaller in
others; exactly as if a change had taken place in the tastes and wants
of the community. If this were the case, then until production had
accommodated itself to this change in the comparative demand for
different things, there would be a real alteration in values, and some
things would rise in price more than others, while some perhaps would
not rise at all. These effects, however, would evidently proceed, not
from the mere increase of money, but from accessory circumstances
attending it. We are now only called upon to consider what would be the
effect of an increase of money, considered by itself. Supposing the
money in the hands of individuals to be increased, the wants and
inclinations of the community collectively in respect to consumption
remaining exactly the same; the increase of demand would reach all
things equally, and there would be an universal rise of prices. We might
suppose, with Hume, that some morning, every person in the nation should
wake and find a gold coin in his pocket: this example, however, would
involve an alteration of the proportions in the demand for different
commodities; the luxuries of the poor would, in the first instance, be
raised in price in a much greater degree than other things. Let us
rather suppose, therefore, that to every pound, or shilling, or penny,
in the possession of any one, another pound, shilling, or penny, were
suddenly added. There would be an increased money demand, and
consequently an increased money value, or price, for things of all
sorts. This increased value would do no good to any one; would make no
difference, except that of having to reckon pounds, shillings, and
pence, in higher numbers. It would be an increase of values only as
estimated in money, a thing only wanted to buy other things with; and
would not enable any one to buy more of them than before. Prices would
have risen in a certain ratio, and the value of money would have fallen
in the same ratio.

It is to be remarked that this ratio would be precisely that in which
the quantity of money had been increased. If the whole money in
circulation was doubled, prices would be doubled. If it was only
increased one-fourth, prices would rise one-fourth. There would be
one-fourth more money, all of which would be used to purchase goods of
some description. When there had been time for the increased supply of
money to reach all markets, or (according to the conventional metaphor)
to permeate all the channels of circulation, all prices would have risen
one-fourth. But the general rise of price is independent of this
diffusing and equalizing process. Even Edition: current; Page: [493] if
some prices were raised more, and others less, the average rise would be
one-fourth. This is a necessary consequence of the fact that a fourth
more money would have been given for only the same quantity of goods.
General prices, therefore, would in any case be a fourth higher.

The very same effect would be produced on prices if we suppose the goods
diminished, instead of the money increased: and the contrary effect if
the goods were increased or the money diminished. If there were less
money in the hands of the community, and the same amount of goods to be
sold, less money altogether would be given for them, and they would be
sold at lower prices; lower, too, in the precise ratio in which the
money was diminished. So that the value of money, other things being the
same, varies inversely as its quantity; every increase of quantity
lowering the value, and every diminution raising it, in a ratio exactly
equivalent.

This, it must be observed, is a property peculiar to money. We did not
find it to be true of commodities generally, that every diminution of
supply raised the value exactly in proportion to the deficiency, or that
every increase lowered it in the precise ratio of the excess. Some
things are usually affected in a greater ratio than that of the excess
or deficiency, others usually in a less: because, in ordinary cases of
demand, the desire, being for the thing itself, may be stronger or
weaker: and the amount of what people are willing to expend on it, being
in any case a limited quantity, may be affected in very unequal degrees
by difficulty or facility of attainment. But in the case of money, which
is desired as the means of universal purchase, the demand consists of
everything which people have to sell; and the only limit to what they
are willing to give is the limit set by their having nothing more to
offer. The whole of the goods being in any case exchanged for the whole
of the money which comes into the market to be laid out, they will sell
for less or more of it, exactly according as less or more is brought.

§ 3. From what precedes, it might for a moment be supposed that all the
goods on sale in a country, at any one time, are exchanged for all the
money existing and in circulation at that same time: or, in other words,
that there is always in circulation in a country, a quantity of money
equal in value to the whole of the goods then and there on sale. But
this would be a complete misapprehension. The money laid out is equal in
value to the goods it purchases; but the quantity of money laid out is
not the same thing with the Edition: current; Page: [494] quantity in
circulation. As the money passes from hand to hand, the same piece of
money is laid out many times, before all the things on sale at one time
are purchased and finally removed from the market: and each pound or
dollar must be counted for as many pounds or dollars, as the number of
times it changes hands in order to effect this object. The greater part
of the goods must also be counted more than once, not only because most
things pass through the hands of several sets of manufacturers and
dealers before they assume the form in which they are finally consumed,
but because in times of speculation (and all times are so, more or less)
the same goods are often bought repeatedly, to be resold for a profit,
before they are bought for the purpose of consumption at all.

If we assume the quantity of goods on sale, and the number of times
those goods are resold, to be fixed quantities, the value of money will
depend upon its quantity, together with the average number of times that
each piece changes hands in the process. The whole of the goods sold
(counting each resale of the same goods as so much added to the goods)
have been exchanged for the whole of the money, multiplied by the number
of purchases made on the average by each piece. Consequently, the amount
of goods and of transactions being the same, the value of money is
inversely as its quantity multiplied by what is called the rapidity of
circulation. And the quantity of money in circulation is equal to the
money value of all the goods sold, divided by the number which expresses
the rapidity of circulation.

The phrase, rapidity of circulation, requires some comment. It must not
be understood to mean the number of purchases made by each piece of
money in a given time. Time is not the thing to be considered. The state
of society may be such that each piece of money hardly performs more
than one purchase in a year: but if this arises from the small number of
transactions—from the small amount of business done, the want of
activity in traffic, or because what traffic there is, mostly takes
place by barter—it constitutes no reason why prices should be lower, or
the value of money higher. The essential point is, not how often the
same money changes hands in a given time, but how often it changes hands
in order to perform a given amount of traffic. We must compare the
number of purchases made by the money in a given time, not with the time
itself, but with the goods sold in that same time. If each piece of
money changes hands on an average ten times while goods are sold to the
value of a million sterling, it is Edition: current; Page: [495] evident
that the money required to circulate those goods is 100,000l. And
conversely, if the money in circulation is 100,000l., and each piece
changes hands by the purchase of goods ten times in a month, the sales
of goods for money which take place every month must amount on the
average to 1,000,000l.

Rapidity of circulation being a phrase so ill adapted to express the
only thing which it is of any importance to express by it, and having a
tendency to confuse the subject by suggesting a meaning extremely
different from the one intended, it would be a good thing if the phrase
could be got rid of, and another substituted, more directly significant
of the idea meant to be conveyed. Some such expression as “the
efficiency of money,” though not unexceptionable, would do better; as it
would point attention to the quantity of work done, without suggesting
the idea of estimating it by time. Until an appropriate term can be
devised, we must be content, when ambiguity is to be apprehended, to
express the idea by the circumlocution which alone conveys it
adequately, namely, the average number of purchases made by each piece
in order to effect a given pecuniary amount of transactions.

§ 4. The proposition which we have laid down respecting the dependence
of general prices upon the quantity of money in circulation, must be
understood as applying only to a state of things in which money, that
is, gold or silver, is the exclusive instrument of exchange, and
actually passes from hand to hand at every purchase, credit in any of
its shapes being unknown. When credit comes into play as a means of
purchasing, distinct from money in hand, we shall hereafter find that
the connexion between prices and the amount of the circulating medium is
much less direct and intimate, and that such connexion as does exist no
longer admits of so simple a mode of expression. But on a subject so
full of complexity as that of currency and prices, it is necessary to
lay the foundation of our theory in a thorough understanding of the most
simple cases, which we shall always find lying as a groundwork or
substratum under those which arise in practice. That an increase of the
quantity of money raises prices, and a diminution lowers them, is the
most elementary proposition in the theory of currency, and without it we
should have no key to any of the others. In any state of things,
however, except the simple and primitive one which we have supposed, the
proposition is only true other things being the same: and what those
other things are, which must be the same, we are Edition: current; Page:
[496] not yet ready to pronounce. We can, however, point out, even now,
one or two of the cautions with which the principle must be guarded in
attempting to make use of it for the practical explanation of phenomena;
cautions the more indispensable, as the doctrine, though a scientific
truth, has of late years been the foundation of a greater mass of false
theory, and erroneous interpretation of facts, than any other
proposition relating to interchange. From the time of the resumption of
cash payments by the Act of 1819, and especially since the commercial
crisis of 1825, the favourite explanation of every rise or fall of
prices has been “the currency;” and like most popular theories, the
doctrine has been applied with little regard to the conditions necessary
for making it correct.

For example, it is habitually assumed that whenever there is a greater
amount of money in the country, or in existence, a rise of prices must
necessarily follow. But this is by no means an inevitable consequence.
In no commodity is it the quantity in existence, but the quantity
offered for sale, that determines the value. Whatever may be the
quantity of money in the country, only that part of it will affect
prices which goes into the market of commodities, and is there actually
exchanged against goods. Whatever increases the amount of this portion
of the money in the country, tends to raise prices. But money hoarded
does not act on prices. Money kept in reserve by individuals to meet
contingencies which do not occur, does not act on prices. The money in
the coffers of the Bank, or retained as a reserve by private bankers,
does not act on prices until drawn out, nor even then unless drawn out
to be expended in commodities.

It frequently happens that money, to a considerable amount, is brought
into the country, is there actually invested1 as capital, and again
flows out, without having ever once acted upon the markets of
commodities, but only upon the market of securities, or, as it is
commonly though improperly called, the money market. Let us return to
the case already put for illustration, that of a foreigner landing in
the country with a treasure. We supposed him to employ his treasure in
the purchase of goods for his own use, or in setting up a manufactory
and employing labourers; and in either case he would, caeteris paribus,
raise prices. But instead of doing either of these things, he might very
probably prefer to invest his fortune at interest; which we shall
suppose him to do in the most obvious way, by becoming a competitor for
a portion of Edition: current; Page: [497] the stock, exchequer bills,
railway debentures, mercantile bills, mortgages, &c., which are at all
times in the hands of the public. By doing this he would raise the
prices of those different securities, or in other words would lower the
rate of interest; and since this would disturb the relation previously
existing between the rate of interest on capital in the country itself,
and that in foreign countries, it would probably induce some of those
who had floating capital seeking employment, to send it abroad for
foreign investment rather than buy securities at home at the advanced
price. As much money might thus go out as had previously come in, while
the prices of commodities would have shown no trace of its temporary
presence. This is a case highly deserving of attention: and it is a fact
now beginning to be recognised, that the passage of the precious metals
from country to country is determined much more than was formerly
supposed by the state of the loan market in different countries, and
much less by the state of prices.

Another point must be adverted to, in order to avoid serious error in
the interpretation of mercantile phenomena. If there be, at any time, an
increase in the number of money transactions, a thing continually liable
to happen from differences in the activity of speculation, and even in
the time of year (since certain kinds of business are transacted only at
particular seasons); an increase of the currency which is only
proportional to this increase of transactions, and is of no longer
duration, has no tendency to raise prices. At the quarterly periods when
the public dividends are paid at the Bank, a sudden increase takes place
of the money in the hands of the public; an increase estimated at from a
fifth to two-fifths of the whole issues of the Bank of England. Yet this
never has any effect on prices; and in a very few weeks, the currency
has again shrunk into its usual dimensions, by a mere reduction in the
demands of the public (after so copious a supply of ready money) for
accommodation from the Bank in the way of discount or loan. In like
manner the currency of the agricultural districts fluctuates in amount
at different seasons of the year. It is always lowest in August: “it
rises generally towards Christmas, and obtains its greatest elevation
about Lady-day, when the farmer commonly lays in his stock, and has to
pay his rent and summer taxes,” and when he therefore makes his
principal applications to country bankers for loans. “Those variations
occur with the same regularity as the season, and with just as little
disturbance of the markets as the quarterly fluctuations of the notes of
the Bank of England. Edition: current; Page: [498] As soon as the extra
payments have been completed, the superfluous” currency, which is
estimated at half a million, “as certainly and immediately is reabsorbed
and disappears.”∗

If extra currency were not forthcoming to make these extra payments, one
of three things must happen. Either the payments must be made without
money, by a resort to some of those contrivances by which its use is
dispensed with; or there must be an increase in the rapidity of
circulation, the same sum of money being made to perform more payments;
or, if neither of these things took place, money to make the extra
payments must be withdrawn from the market for commodities, and prices,
consequently, must fall. An increase of the circulating medium,
conformable in extent and duration to the temporary stress of business,
does not raise prices, but merely prevents this fall.

The sequel of our investigation will point out many other qualifications
with which the proposition must be received, that the value of the
circulating medium depends on the demand and supply, and is in the
inverse ratio of the quantity;1 qualifications which, under a complex
system of credit like that existing in England, render the proposition
an extremely incorrect expression of the fact.

Edition: current; Page: [499]


CHAPTER IX: of the value of money, as dependent on cost of production

§ 1. But money, no more than commodities in general, has its value
definitively determined by demand and supply. The ultimate regulator of
its value is Cost of Production.

We are supposing, of course, that things are left to themselves.
Governments have not always left things to themselves. They have
undertaken to prevent the quantity of money from adjusting itself
according to spontaneous laws, and have endeavoured to regulate it at
their pleasure; generally with a view of keeping a greater quantity of
money in the country, than would otherwise have remained there. It was,
until lately, the policy of all governments to interdict the exportation
and the melting of money; while, by encouraging the exportation and
impeding the importation of other things, they endeavoured to have a
stream of money constantly flowing in. By this course they gratified two
prejudices; they drew, or thought that they drew, more money into the
country, which they believed to be tantamount to more wealth; and they
gave, or thought that they gave, to all producers and dealers, high
prices, which, though no real advantage, people are always inclined to
suppose to be one.

In this attempt to regulate the value of money artificially by means of
the supply, governments have never succeeded in the degree, or even in
the manner, which they intended. Their prohibitions against exporting or
melting the coin have never been effectual. A commodity of such small
bulk in proportion to its value is so easily smuggled, and still more
easily melted, that it has been impossible by the most stringent
measures to prevent these operations. All the risk which it was in the
power of governments to attach to them, was outweighed by a very
moderate profit.∗ In Edition: current; Page: [500] the more indirect
mode of aiming at the same purpose, by throwing difficulties in the way
of making the returns for exported goods in any other commodity than
money, they have not been quite so unsuccessful. They have not, indeed,
succeeded in making money flow continuously into the country; but they
have to a certain extent been able to keep it at a higher than its
natural level; and have, thus far, removed the value of money from
exclusive dependence on the causes which fix the value of things not
artificially interfered with.

We are, however, to suppose a state, not of artificial regulation, but
of freedom. In that state, and assuming no charge to be made for
coinage, the value of money will conform to the value of the bullion of
which it is made. A pound weight of gold or silver in coin, and the same
weight in an ingot, will precisely exchange for one another. On the
supposition of freedom, the metal cannot be worth more in the state of
bullion than of coin; for as it can be melted without any loss of time,
and with hardly any expense, this would of course be done until the
quantity in circulation was so much diminished as to equalize its value
with that of the same weight in bullion. It may be thought however that
the coin, though it cannot be of less, may be, and being a manufactured
article will naturally be, of greater value than the bullion contained
in it, on the same principle on which linen cloth is of more value than
an equal weight of linen yarn. This would be true, were it not that
Government, in this country, and in some others, coins money gratis for
any one who furnishes the metal. The labour and expense of coinage, when
not charged to the possessor, do not raise the value of the article. If
Government opened an office where, on delivery of a given weight of
yarn, it returned the same weight of cloth to any one who asked for it,
cloth would be worth no more in the market than the yarn it contained.
As soon as coin is worth a fraction more than the value of the bullion,
it becomes the interest of the holders of bullion to send it to be
coined. If Government, however, throws the expense of coinage, as is
reasonable, upon the holder, by making a charge to cover the expense
(which is done by giving back rather less in coin than has been received
in bullion, and is called levying a seignorage), the coin will rise,
Edition: current; Page: [501] to the extent of the seignorage, above the
value of the bullion. If the Mint kept back one per cent to pay the
expense of coinage, it would be against the interest of the holders of
bullion to have it coined, until the coin was more valuable than the
bullion by at least that fraction. The coin, therefore, would be kept
one per cent higher in value, which could only be by keeping it one per
cent less in quantity, than if its coinage were gratuitous.

The Government might attempt to obtain a profit by the transaction, and
might lay on a seignorage calculated for that purpose; but whatever they
took for coinage beyond its expenses, would be so much profit on private
coining. Coining, though not so easy an operation as melting, is far
from a difficult one, and, when the coin produced is of full weight and
standard fineness, is very difficult to detect. If, therefore, a profit
could be made by coining good money, it would certainly be done: and the
attempt to make seignorage a source of revenue would be defeated. Any
attempt to keep the value of the coin at an artificial elevation, not by
a seignorage, but by refusing to coin, would be frustrated in the same
manner.∗

§ 2. The value of money, then, conforms, permanently, and, in a state of
freedom, almost immediately, to the value of the metal of which it is
made; with the addition, or not, of the expenses of coinage, according
as those expenses are borne by the individual or by the state. This
simplifies extremely the question which we have here to consider: since
gold and silver bullion are commodities like any others, and their value
depends, like that of other things, on their cost of production.

To the majority of civilized countries, gold and silver are foreign
products: and the circumstances which govern the values of foreign
products, present some questions which we are not yet ready to examine.
For the present, therefore, we must suppose the country which is the
subject of our inquiries, to be supplied with gold and Edition: current;
Page: [502] silver by its own mines, reserving for future consideration
how far our conclusions require modification to adapt them to the more
usual case.

Of the three classes into which commodities are divided—those absolutely
limited in supply, those which may be had in unlimited quantity at a
given cost of production, and those which may be had in unlimited
quantity, but at an increasing cost of production—the precious metals,
being the produce of mines, belong to the third class. Their natural
value, therefore, is in the long run proportional to their cost of
production in the most unfavourable existing circumstances, that is, at
the worst mine which it is necessary to work in order to obtain the
required supply. A pound weight of gold will, in the gold-producing
countries, ultimately tend to exchange for as much of every other
commodity as is produced at a cost equal to its own; meaning by its own
cost the cost in labour and expense, at the least productive sources of
supply which the then existing demand makes it necessary to work. The
average value of gold is made to conform to its natural value in the
same manner as the values of other things are made to conform to their
natural value. Suppose that it were selling above its natural value;
that is, above the value which is an equivalent for the labour and
expense of mining, and for the risks attending a branch of industry in
which nine out of ten experiments have usually been failures. A part of
the mass of floating capital which is on the look out for investment,
would take the direction of mining enterprise; the supply would thus be
increased, and the value would fall. If, on the contrary, it were
selling below its natural value, miners would not be obtaining the
ordinary profit; they would slacken their works; if the depreciation was
great, some of the inferior mines would perhaps stop working altogether:
and a falling off in the annual supply, preventing the annual wear and
tear from being completely compensated, would by degrees reduce the
quantity, and restore the value.

When examined more closely, the following are the details of the
process. If gold is above its natural or cost value—the coin, as we have
seen, conforming in its value to the bullion—money will be of high
value, and the prices of all things, labour included, will be low. These
low prices will lower the expenses of all producers; but as their
returns will also be lowered, no advantage will be obtained by any
producer, except the producer of gold: whose returns from his mine, not
depending on price, will be the same as Edition: current; Page: [503]
before, and his expenses being less, he will obtain extra profits, and
will be stimulated to increase his production. E converso if the metal
is below its natural value: since this is as much as to say that prices
are high, and the money expenses of all producers unusually great: for
this, however, all other producers will be compensated by increased
money returns: the miner alone will extract from his mine no more metal
than before, while his expenses will be greater: his profits therefore
being diminished or annihilated, he will diminish his production, if not
abandon his employment.

In this manner it is that the value of money is made to conform to the
cost of production of the metal of which it is made. It may be well,
however, to repeat (what has been said before) that the adjustment takes
a long time to effect, in the case of a commodity so generally desired
and at the same time so durable as the precious metals. Being so largely
used not only as money but for plate and ornament, there is at all times
a very large quantity of these metals in existence: while they are so
slowly worn out, that a comparatively small annual production is
sufficient to keep up the supply, and to make any addition to it which
may be required by the increase of goods to be circulated, or by the
increased demand for gold and silver articles by wealthy consumers. Even
if this small annual supply were stopt entirely, it would require many
years to reduce the quantity so much as to make any very material
difference in prices. The quantity may be increased, much more rapidly
than it can be diminished; but the increase must be very great before it
can make itself much felt over such a mass of the precious metals as
exists in the whole commercial world. And hence the effects of all
changes in the conditions of production of the precious metals are at
first, and continue to be for many years, questions of quantity only,
with little reference to cost of production. 1 More especially is this
the case when, as at the present time, many new sources of supply have
been simultaneously opened, most of them practicable by labour alone,
without any capital in advance beyond a pickaxe and a week’s food; and
when the operations are as yet wholly experimental, the comparative
permanent productiveness of the different sources being entirely
unascertained.

§ 3. Since, however, the value of money really conforms, like that of
other things, though more slowly, to its cost of production, Edition:
current; Page: [504] some political economists have objected altogether
to the statement that the value of money depends on its quantity
combined with the rapidity of circulation; which, they think, is
assuming a law for money that does not exist for any other commodity,
when the truth is that it is governed by the very same laws. To this we
may answer, in the first place, that the statement in question assumes
no peculiar law. It is simply the law of demand and supply, which is
acknowledged to be applicable to all commodities, and which, in the case
of money as of most other things, is controlled, but not set aside, by
the law of cost of production, since cost of production would have no
effect on value if it could have none on supply. But, secondly, there
really is, in one respect, a closer connexion between the value of money
and its quantity, than between the values of other things and their
quantity. The value of other things conforms to the changes in the cost
of production, without requiring, as a condition, that there should be
any actual alteration of the supply: the potential alteration is
sufficient; and if there even be an actual alteration, it is but a
temporary one, except in so far as the altered value may make a
difference in the demand, and so require an increase or diminution of
supply, as a consequence, not a cause, of the alteration in value. Now
this is also true of gold and silver, considered as articles of
expenditure for ornament and luxury; but it is not true of money. If the
permanent cost of production of gold were reduced one-fourth, it might
happen that there would not be more of it bought for plate, gilding, or
jewellery, than before; and if so, though the value would fall, the
quantity extracted from the mines for these purposes would be no greater
than previously. Not so with the portion used as money; that portion
could not fall in value one-fourth, unless actually increased
one-fourth; for, at prices one-fourth higher, one-fourth more money
would be required to make the accustomed purchases; and if this were not
forthcoming, some of the commodities would be without purchasers, and
prices could not be kept up. Alterations, therefore, in the cost of
production of the precious metals, do not act upon the value of money
except just in proportion as they increase or diminish its quantity;
which cannot be said of any other commodity. It would therefore, I
conceive, be an error, both scientifically and practically, to discard
the proposition which asserts a connexion between the value of money and
its quantity.

It is evident, however, that the cost of production, in the long
Edition: current; Page: [505] run, regulates the quantity; and that
every country (temporary fluctuations excepted) will possess, and have
in circulation, just that quantity of money which will perform all the
exchanges required of it, consistently with maintaining a value
conformable to its cost of production. The prices of things will, on the
average, be such that money will exchange for its own cost in all other
goods: and, precisely because the quantity cannot be prevented from
affecting the value, the quantity itself will (by a sort of self-acting
machinery) be kept at the amount consistent with that standard of
prices—at the amount necessary for performing, at those prices, all the
business required of it.

“The quantity wanted will depend partly on the cost of producing gold,
and partly on the rapidity of its circulation. The rapidity of
circulation being given, it would depend on the cost of production: and
the cost of production being given, the quantity of money would depend
on the rapidity of its circulation.”∗ After what has been already said,
I hope that neither of these propositions stands in need of any further
illustration.

Money, then, like commodities in general, having a value dependent on,
and proportional to, its cost of production; the theory of money is, by
the admission of this principle, stript of a great part of the mystery
which apparently surrounded it. We must not forget, however, that this
doctrine only applies to the places in which the precious metals are
actually produced; and that we have yet to enquire whether the law of
the dependence of value on cost of production applies to the exchange of
things produced at distant places. But however this may be, our
propositions with respect to value will require no other alteration,
where money is an imported commodity, than that of substituting for the
cost of its production the cost of obtaining it in the country. Every
foreign commodity is bought by giving for it some domestic production;
and the labour and capital which a foreign commodity costs to us is the
labour and capital expended in producing the quantity of our own goods
which we give in exchange for it. What this quantity depends upon,—what
determines the proportions of interchange between the productions of one
country and those of another,—is indeed a question of somewhat greater
complexity than those we Edition: current; Page: [506] have hitherto
considered. But this at least is indisputable, that within the country
itself the value of imported commodities is determined by the value, and
consequently by the cost of production, of the equivalent given for
them; and money, where it is an imported commodity, is subject to the
same law.1

Edition: current; Page: [507]


CHAPTER X: of a double standard, and subsidiary coins

§ 1. Though the qualities necessary to fit any commodity for being used
as money are rarely united in any considerable perfection, there are two
commodities which possess them in an eminent, and nearly an equal
degree; the two precious metals, as they are called; gold and silver.
Some nations have accordingly attempted to compose their circulating
medium of these two metals indiscriminately.

There is an obvious convenience in making use of the more costly metal
for larger payments and the cheaper one for smaller: and the only
question relates to the mode in which this can best be done. The mode
most frequently adopted has been to establish between the two metals a
fixed proportion; to decide, for example, that a gold coin called a
sovereign should be equivalent to twenty of the silver coins called
shillings: both the one and the other being called, in the ordinary
money of account of the country, by the same denomination, a pound: and
it being left free to every one who has a pound to pay, either to pay it
in the one metal or in the other.

At the time when the valuation of the two metals relatively to each
other, say twenty shillings to the sovereign, or twenty-one shillings to
the guinea, was first made, the proportion probably corresponded, as
nearly as it could be made to do, with the ordinary relative values of
the two metals grounded on their cost of production: and if those
natural or cost values always continued to bear the same ratio to one
another, the arrangement would be unobjectionable. This, however, is far
from being the fact. Gold and silver, though the least variable in value
of all commodities, are not invariable, and do not always vary
simultaneously. Silver, for example, was lowered in permanent value more
than gold, by the discovery of the American mines; and those smal1
variations of value which take place occasionally do not affect both
metals alike. Edition: current; Page: [508] Suppose such a variation to
take place: the value of the two metals relatively to one another no
longer agreeing with their rated proportion, one or other of them will
now be rated below its bullion value, and there will be a profit to be
made by melting it.

Suppose, for example, that gold rises in value relatively to silver, so
that the quantity of gold in a sovereign is now worth more than the
quantity of silver in twenty shillings. Two consequences will ensue. No
debtor will any longer find it his interest to pay in gold. He will
always pay in silver, because twenty shillings are a legal tender for a
debt of one pound, and he can procure silver convertible into twenty
shillings for less gold than that contained in a sovereign. The other
consequence will be, that unless a sovereign can be sold for more than
twenty shillings, all the sovereigns will be melted, since as bullion
they will purchase a greater number of shillings than they exchange for
as coin. The converse of all this would happen if silver, instead of
gold, were the metal which had risen in comparative value. A sovereign
would not now be worth so much as twenty shillings, and whoever had a
pound to pay would prefer paying it by a sovereign; while the silver
coins would be collected for the purpose of being melted, and sold as
bullion for gold at their real value, that is, above the legal
valuation. The money of the community, therefore, would never really
consist of both metals, but of the one only which, at the particular
time, best suited the interest of debtors; and the standard of the
currency would be constantly liable to change from the one metal to the
other, at a loss, on each change, of the expense of coinage on the metal
which fell out of use.

It appears, therefore, that the value of money is liable to more
frequent fluctuations when both metals are a legal tender at a fixed
valuation, than when the exclusive standard of the currency is either
gold or silver. Instead of being only affected by variations in the cost
of production of one metal it is subject to derangement from those of
two. The particular kind of variation to which a currency is rendered
more liable by having two legal standards, is a fall of value, or what
is commonly called a depreciation; since practically that one of the two
metals will always be the standard, of which the real has fallen below
the rated value. If the tendency of the metals be to rise in value, all
payments will be made in the one which has risen least; and if to fall,
then in that which has fallen most.

§ 2. The plan of a double standard is still occasionally brought
Edition: current; Page: [509] forward by here and there a writer or
orator as a great improvement in currency. It is probable that, with
most of its adherents, its chief merit is its tendency to a sort of
depreciation, there being at all times abundance of supporters for any
mode, either open or covert, of lowering the standard. Some, however,
are influenced by an exaggerated estimate of an advantage which to a
certain extent is real, that of being able to have recourse, for
replenishing the circulation, to the united stock of gold and silver in
the commercial world, instead of being confined to one of them, which,
from accidental absorption, may not be obtainable with sufficient
rapidity. The advantage without the disadvantages of a double standard,
seems to be best obtained by those nations with whom one only of the two
metals is a legal tender, but the other also is coined, and allowed to
pass for whatever value the market assigns to it.1

When this plan is adopted, it is naturally the more costly metal which
is left to be bought and sold as an article of commerce. But nations
which, like England, adopt the more costly of the two as their standard,
resort to a different expedient for retaining them both in circulation,
namely, to make silver a legal tender, but only for small payments. In
England, no one can be compelled to receive silver in payment for a
larger amount than forty shillings. With this regulation there is
necessarily combined another, namely, that silver coin should be rated,
in comparison with gold, somewhat above its intrinsic value; that there
should not be, in twenty shillings, as much silver as is worth a
sovereign: for if there were, a very slight turn of the market in its
favour would make it worth more than a sovereign, and it would be
profitable to melt the silver coin. The over-valuation of the silver
coin creates an inducement to buy silver and send it to the Mint to be
coined, since it is given back at a higher value than properly belongs
to it: this, however, has been guarded Edition: current; Page: [510]
against, by limiting the quantity of the silver coinage, which is not
left, like that of gold, to the discretion of individuals, but is
determined by the government, and restricted to the amount supposed to
be required for small payments. The only precaution necessary is, not to
put so high a valuation upon the silver, as to hold out a strong
temptation to private coining.1

Edition: current; Page: [511]


CHAPTER XI: of credit, as a substitute for money

§ 1. The functions of credit have been a subject of as much
misunderstanding and as much confusion of ideas, as any single topic in
Political Economy. This is not owing to any peculiar difficulty in the
theory of the subject, but to the complex nature of some of the
mercantile phenomena arising from the forms in which credit clothes
itself; by which attention is diverted from the properties of credit in
general, to the peculiarities of its particular forms.

As a specimen of the confused notions entertained respecting the nature
of credit, we may advert to the exaggerated language so often used
respecting its national importance. Credit has a great, but not, as many
people seem to suppose, a magical power; it cannot make something out of
nothing. How often is an extension of credit talked of as equivalent to
a creation of capital, or as if credit actually were capital. It seems
strange that there should be any need to point out, that credit being
only permission to use the capital of another person, the means of
production cannot be increased by it, but only transferred. If the
borrower’s means of production and of employing labour are increased by
the credit given him, the lender’s are as much diminished. The same sum
cannot be used as capital both by the owner and also by the person to
whom it is lent: it cannot supply its entire value in wages, tools, and
materials, to two sets of labourers at once. It is true that the capital
which A has borrowed from B, and makes use of in his business, still
forms part of the wealth of B for other purposes: he can enter into
arrangements in reliance on it, and can borrow, when needful, an
equivalent sum on the security of it; so that to a superficial eye it
might seem as if both B and A had the use of it at once. But the
smallest consideration will show that when B has parted with his capital
to A, the use of it as capital rests with A alone, and that B has no
other service from it than in so far as his ultimate claim upon it
serves him Edition: current; Page: [512] to obtain the use of another
capital from a third person C. All capital (not his own) of which any
person has really the use, is, and must be, so much subtracted from the
capital of some one else.∗

§ 2. But though credit is but a transfer of capital from hand to hand,
it is generally, and naturally, a transfer to hands more competent to
employ the capital efficiently in production. If there were no such
thing as credit, or if, from general insecurity and want of confidence,
it were scantily practised, many persons who possess more or less of
capital, but who, from their occupations, or for want of the necessary
skill and knowledge, cannot personally superintend its employment, would
derive no benefit from it: their funds would either lie idle, or would
be, perhaps, wasted and annihilated in unskilful attempts to make them
yield a profit. All this capital is now lent at interest, and made
available for production. Capital thus circumstanced forms a large
portion of the productive resources of any commercial country; and is
naturally attracted to those producers or traders who, being in the
greatest business, have the means of employing it to most advantage;
because such are both the most desirous to obtain it, and able to give
the best security. Although, therefore, the productive funds of the
country are not increased by credit, they are called into a more
complete state of productive activity. As the confidence on which credit
is grounded Edition: current; Page: [513] extends itself, means are
developed by which even the smallest portions of capital, the sums which
each person keeps by him to meet contingencies, are made available for
productive uses. The principal instruments for this purpose are banks of
deposit. Where these do not exist, a prudent person must keep a
sufficient sum unemployed in his own possession, to meet every demand
which he has even a slight reason for thinking himself liable to. When
the practice, however, has grown up of keeping this reserve not in his
own custody but with a banker, many small sums, previously lying idle,
become aggregated in the banker’s hands; and the banker, being taught by
experience what proportion of the amount is likely to be wanted in a
given time, and knowing that if one depositor happens to require more
than the average, another will require less, is able to lend the
remainder, that is, the far greater part, to producers and dealers:
thereby adding the amount, not indeed to the capital in existence, but
to that in employment, and making a corresponding addition to the
aggregate production of the community.

While credit is thus indispensable for rendering the whole capital of
the country productive, it is also a means by which the industrial
talent of the country is turned to better account for purposes of
production. Many a person who has either no capital of his own, or very
little, but who has qualifications for business which are known and
appreciated by some possessors of capital, is enabled to obtain either
advances in money, or more frequently goods on credit, by which his
industrial capacities are made instrumental to the increase of the
public wealth; and this benefit will be reaped far more largely,
whenever, through better laws and better education, the community shall
have made such progress in integrity, that personal character can be
accepted as a sufficient guarantee not only against dishonestly
appropriating, but against dishonestly risking, what belongs to another.

Such are, in the most general point of view, the uses of credit to the
productive resources of the world. But these considerations only apply
to the credit given to the industrious classes—to producers and dealers.
Credit given by dealers to unproductive consumers is never an addition,
but always a detriment, to the sources of public wealth. It makes over
in temporary use, not the capital of the unproductive classes to the
productive, but that of the productive to the unproductive. If A, a
dealer, supplies goods to B, a landowner or annuitant, to be paid for at
the end of five years, as much of the capital of A as is equal to the
value of these goods Edition: current; Page: [514] remains for five
years unproductive. During such a period, if payment had been made at
once, the sum might have been several times expended and replaced, and
goods to the amount might have been several times produced, consumed,
and reproduced: consequently B’s withholding 100l. for five years, even
if he pays at last, has cost to the labouring classes of the community
during that period an absolute loss of probably several times that
amount. A, individually, is compensated, by putting a higher price upon
his goods, which is ultimately paid by B: but there is no compensation
made to the labouring classes, the chief sufferers by every diversion of
capital, whether permanently or temporarily, to unproductive uses. The
country has had 100l. less of capital during those five years, B having
taken that amount from A’s capital, and spent it unproductively, in
anticipation of his own means, and having only after five years set
apart a sum from his income and converted it into capital for the
purpose of indemnifying A.

§ 3. Thus far of the general functions of Credit in production. It is
not a productive power in itself, though, without it, the productive
powers already existing could not be brought into complete employment.
But a more intricate portion of the theory of Credit is its influence on
prices; the chief cause of most of the mercantile phenomena which
perplex observers. In a state of commerce in which much credit is
habitually given, general prices at any moment depend much more upon the
state of credit than upon the quantity of money. For credit, though it
is not productive power, is purchasing power; and a person who, having
credit, avails himself of it in the purchase of goods, creates just as
much demand for the goods, and tends quite as much to raise their price,
as if he made an equal amount of purchases with ready money.

The credit which we are now called upon to consider, as a distinct
purchasing power, independent of money, is of course not credit in its
simplest form, that of money lent by one person to another, and paid
directly into his hands; for when the borrower expends this in
purchases, he makes the purchases with money, not credit, and exerts no
purchasing power over and above that conferred by the money. The forms
of credit which create purchasing power are those in which no money
passes at the time, and very often none passes at all, the transaction
being included with a mass of other transactions in an account, and
nothing paid but a balance. This Edition: current; Page: [515] takes
place in a variety of ways, which we shall proceed to examine,
beginning, as is our custom, with the simplest.

First: Suppose A and B to be two dealers, who have transactions with
each other both as buyers and as sellers. A buys from B on credit. B
does the like with respect to A. At the end of the year, the sum of A’s
debts to B is set against the sum of B’s debts to A, and it is
ascertained to which side a balance is due. This balance, which may be
less than the amount of many of the transactions singly, and is
necessarily less than the sum of the transactions, is all that is paid
in money; and perhaps even this is not paid, but carried over in an
account current to the next year. A single payment of a hundred pounds
may in this manner suffice to liquidate a long series of transactions,
some of them to the value of thousands.

But secondly. The debts of A to B may be paid without the intervention
of money, even though there be no reciprocal debts of B to A. A may
satisfy B by making over to him a debt due to himself from a third
person, C. This is conveniently done by means of a written instrument,
called a bill of exchange, which is, in fact, a transferable order by a
creditor upon his debtor, and when accepted by the debtor, that is,
authenticated by his signature, becomes an acknowledgment of debt.

§ 4. Bills of exchange were first introduced to save the expense and
risk of transporting the precious metals from place to place. “Let it be
supposed,” says Mr. Henry Thornton,∗ “that there are in London ten
manufacturers who sell their article to ten shopkeepers in York, by whom
it is retailed; and that there are in York ten manufacturers of another
commodity, who sell it to ten shopkeepers in London. There would be no
occasion for the ten shopkeepers in London to send yearly to York
guineas for the payment of the York manufacturers, and for the ten York
shopkeepers to send yearly as many guineas to London. It would only be
necessary for the York manufacturers to receive from each of the
shopkeepers at their own door the money in question, giving in return
letters which should acknowledge the receipt of it; and which should
also direct the money, lying ready in the hands of their debtors in
London, to be paid to the London manufacturers, so as to cancel the debt
in London Edition: current; Page: [516] in the same manner as that at
York. The expense and the risk of all transmission of money would thus
be saved. Letters ordering the transfer of the debt are termed, in the
language of the present day, bills of exchange. They are bills by which
the debt of one person is exchanged for the debt of another; and the
debt, perhaps, which is due in one place, for the debt due in another.”

Bills of exchange having been found convenient as means of paying debts
at distant places without the expense of transporting the precious
metals, their use was afterwards greatly extended from another motive.
It is usual in every trade to give a certain length of credit for goods
bought: three months, six months, a year, even two years, according to
the convenience or custom of the particular trade. A dealer who has sold
goods, for which he is to be paid in six months, but who desires to
receive payment sooner, draws a bill on his debtor payable in six
months, and gets the bill discounted by a banker or other money-lender,
that is, transfers the bill to him, receiving the amount, minus interest
for the time it has still to run. It has become one of the chief
functions of bills of exchange to serve as a means by which a debt due
from one person can thus be made available for obtaining credit from
another. The convenience of the expedient has led to the frequent
creation of bills of exchange not grounded on any debt previously due to
the drawer of the bill by the person on whom it is drawn. These are
called accommodation bills; and sometimes, with a tinge of
disapprobation, fictitious bills. Their nature is so clearly stated, and
with such judicious remarks, by the author whom I have just quoted, that
I shall transcribe the entire passage.∗

“A, being in want of 100l., requests B to accept a note or bill drawn at
two months, which B, therefore, on the face of it, is bound to pay; it
is understood, however, that A will take care either to discharge the
bill himself, or to furnish B with the means of paying it. A obtains
ready money for the bill on the joint credit of the two parties. A
fulfils his promise of paying it when due, and thus concludes the
transaction. This service rendered by B to A is, however, not unlikely
to be requited, at a more or less distant period, by a similar
acceptance of a bill on A, drawn and discounted for B’s convenience.

“Let us now compare such a bill with a real bill. Let us consider in
what points they differ, or seem to differ; and in what they agree.

“They agree, inasmuch as each is a discountable article; each Edition:
current; Page: [517] has also been created for the purpose of being
discounted; and each is, perhaps, discounted in fact. Each, therefore,
serves equally to supply means of speculation to the merchant. So far,
moreover, as bills and notes constitute what is called the circulating
medium, or paper currency of the country, and prevent the use of
guineas, the fictitious and the real bill are upon an equality; and if
the price of commodities be raised in proportion to the quantity of
paper currency, the one contributes to that rise exactly in the same
manner as the other.

“Before we come to the points in which they differ, let us advert to one
point in which they are commonly supposed to be unlike; but in which
they cannot be said always or necessarily to differ.

“Real notes (it is sometimes said) represent actual property. There are
actual goods in existence, which are the counterpart to every real note.
Notes which are not drawn in consequence of a sale of goods, are a
species of false wealth, by which a nation is deceived. These supply
only an imaginary capital; the others indicate one that is real.

“In answer to this statement it may be observed, first, that the notes
given in consequence of a real sale of goods cannot be considered as on
that account certainly representing any actual property. Suppose that A
sells 100l. worth of goods to B at six months' credit, and takes a bill
at six months for it; and that B, within a month after, sells the same
goods, at a like credit, to C, taking a like bill; and again, that C,
after another month, sells them to D, taking a like bill, and so on.
There may then, at the end of six months, be six bills of 100l. each,
existing at the same time; and every one of these may possibly have been
discounted. Of all these bills, then, only one represents any actual
property.

“In order to justify the supposition that a real bill (as it is called)
represents actual property, there ought to be some power in the
bill-holder to prevent the property which the bill represents, from
being turned to other purposes than that of paying the bill in question.
No such power exists; neither the man who holds the real bill, nor the
man who discounts it, has any property in the specific goods for which
it was given: he as much trusts to the general ability to pay of the
giver of the bill, as the holder of any fictitious bill does. The
fictitious bill may, in many cases, be a bill given by a person having a
large and known capital, a part of which the fictitious bill may be said
in that case to represent. The supposition that real bills represent
property, and that fictitious bills do not, Edition: current; Page:
[518] seems, therefore, to be one by which more than justice is done to
one of these species of bills, and something less than justice to the
other.

“We come next to some point in which they differ.

“First, the fictitious note, or note of accommodation, is liable to the
objection that it professes to be what it is not. This objection,
however, lies only against those fictitious bills which are passed as
real. In many cases it is sufficiently obvious what they are. Secondly,
the fictitious bill is, in general, less likely to be punctually paid
than the real one. There is a general presumption, that the dealer in
fictitious bills is a man who is a more adventurous speculator than he
who carefully abstains from them. It follows, thirdly, that fictitious
bills, besides being less safe, are less subject to limitation as to
their quantity. The extent of a man’s actual sales forms some limit to
the amount of his real notes; and as it is highly desirable in commerce
that credit should be dealt out to all persons in some sort of regular
and due proportion, the measure of a man’s actual sales, certified by
the appearance of his bills drawn in virtue of those sales, is some rule
in the case, though a very imperfect one in many respects.

“A fictitious bill, or bill of accommodation, is evidently in substance
the same as any common promissory note; and even better in this respect,
that there is but one security to the promissory note, whereas in the
case of the bill of accommodation, there are two. So much jealousy
subsists lest traders should push their means of raising money too far,
that paper, the same in its general nature with that which is given,
being the only paper which can be given, by men out of business, is
deemed somewhat discreditable when coming from a merchant. And because
such paper, when in the merchant’s hand, necessarily imitates the paper
which passes on the occasion of a sale of goods, the epithet fictitious
has been cast upon it; an epithet which has seemed to countenance the
confused and mistaken notion, that there is something altogether false
and delusive in the nature of a certain part both of the paper and of
the apparent wealth of the country.”

A bill of exchange, when merely discounted, and kept in the portfolio of
the discounter until it falls due, does not perform the functions or
supply the place of money, but is itself bought and sold for money. It
is no more currency than the public funds, or any other securities. But
when a bill drawn upon one person is paid to another (or even to the
same person) in discharge of a debt or a pecuniary Edition: current;
Page: [519] claim, it does something for which, if the bill did not
exist, money would be required: it performs the functions of currency.
This is a use to which bills of exchange are often applied. “They not
only,” continues Mr. Thornton,∗ “spare the use of ready money; they also
occupy its place in many cases. Let us imagine a farmer in the country
to discharge a debt of 10l. to his neighbouring grocer, by giving him a
bill for that sum, drawn on his cornfactor in London for grain sold in
the metropolis; and the grocer to transmit the bill, he having
previously indorsed it, to a neighbouring sugar-baker, in discharge of a
like debt; and the sugar-baker to send it, when again indorsed, to a
West India merchant in an outport, and the West India merchant to
deliver it to his country banker, who also indorses it, and sends it
into further circulation. The bill in this case will have effected five
payments, exactly as if it were a 10l. note payable to a bearer on
demand. A multitude of bills pass between trader and trader in the
country, in the manner which has been described; and they evidently
form, in the strictest sense, a part of the circulating medium of the
kingdom.”

Many bills, both domestic and foreign, are at least presented for
payment quite covered with indorsements, each of which represents either
a fresh discounting, or a pecuniary transaction in which the bill has
performed the functions of money. Within the present generation,1 the
circulating medium of Lancashire, for sums above five pounds, was almost
entirely composed of such bills.

§ 5. A third form in which credit is employed as a substitute for
currency, is that of promissory notes. A bill drawn upon any one and
accepted by him, and a note of hand by him promising to pay the same
sum, are, as far as he is concerned, exactly equivalent, except that the
former commonly bears interest and the latter generally does not; and
that the former is commonly payable only after a certain lapse of time,
and the latter payable at sight. But it is chiefly in the latter form
that it has become, in commercial countries, an express occupation to
issue such substitutes for money. Dealers in money (as lenders by
profession are improperly called) desire, like other dealers, to stretch
their operations beyond what can be carried on by their own means: they
wish to lend, not their capital merely, but their credit, and not only
such portion of their Edition: current; Page: [520] credit as consists
of funds actually deposited with them, but their power of obtaining
credit from the public generally, so far as they think they can safely
employ it. This is done in a very convenient manner by lending their own
promissory notes payable to bearer on demand: the borrower being willing
to accept these as so much money, because the credit of the lender makes
other people willingly receive them on the same footing, in purchases or
other payments. These notes, therefore, perform all the functions of
currency, and render an equivalent amount of money which was previously
in circulation, unnecessary. As, however, being payable on demand, they
may be at any time returned on the issuer, and money demanded for them,
he must, on pain of bankruptcy, keep by him as much money as will enable
him to meet any claims of that sort which can be expected to occur
within the time necessary for providing himself with more: and prudence
also requires that he should not attempt to issue notes beyond the
amount which experience shows can remain in circulation without being
presented for payment.

The convenience of this mode of (as it were) coining credit, having once
been discovered, governments have availed themselves of the same
expedient, and have issued their own promissory notes in payment of
their expenses; a resource the more useful, because it is the only mode
in which they are able to borrow money without paying interest, their
promises to pay on demand being, in the estimation of the holders,
equivalent to money in hand. The practical differences between such
government notes and the issues of private bankers, and the further
diversities of which this class of substitutes for money are
susceptible, will be considered presently.

§ 6. A fourth mode of making credit answer the purposes of money, by
which, when carried far enough, money may be very completely superseded,
consists in making payments by cheques. The custom of keeping the spare
cash reserved for immediate use or against contingent demands, in the
hands of a banker, and making all payments, except small ones, by orders
on bankers, is in this country spreading to a continually larger portion
of the public. If the person making the payment, and the person
receiving it, keep their money with the same banker, the payment takes
place without any intervention of money, by the mere transfer of its
amount in the banker’s books from the credit of the payer to that
Edition: current; Page: [521] of the receiver. If all persons in London
kept their cash at the same banker’s, and made all their payments by
means of cheques, no money would be required or used for any
transactions beginning and terminating in London. This ideal limit is
almost attained in fact, so far as regards transactions between dealers.
It is chiefly in the retail transactions between dealers and consumers,
and in the payment of wages, that money or bank notes now pass, and then
only when the amounts are small. In London, even shopkeepers of any
amount of capital or extent of business have generally an account with a
banker; which, besides the safety and convenience of the practice, is to
their advantage in another respect, by giving them an understood claim
to have their bills discounted in cases when they could not otherwise
expect it. As for the merchants and larger dealers, they habitually make
all payments in the course of their business by cheques. They do not,
however, all deal with the same banker, and when A gives a cheque to B,
B usually pays it not into the same but into some other bank. But the
convenience of business has given birth to an arrangement which makes
all the banking houses of the City of London, for certain purposes,
virtually one establishment. A banker does not send the cheques which
are paid into his banking house, to the banks on which they are drawn,
and demand money for them. There is a building called the
Clearing-house, to which every City banker sends, each afternoon, all
the cheques on other bankers which he has received during the day, and
they are there exchanged for the cheques on him which have come into the
hands of other bankers, the balances only being paid in money;1 or even
these not in money, but in cheques on the Bank of England. By this
contrivance, all the business transactions of the City of London during
that day, amounting often to millions of pounds, and a vast amount
besides of country transactions, represented by bills which country
bankers have drawn upon their London correspondents, are [1848]
liquidated by payments not exceeding on the average 200,000l.∗

By means of the various instruments of credit which have now Edition:
current; Page: [522] been explained, the immense business of a country
like Great Britain is transacted with an amount of the precious metals
surprisingly small; many times smaller, in proportion to the pecuniary
value of the commodities bought and sold, than is found necessary in
France, or any other country in which, the habit and the disposition to
give credit not being so generally diffused, these “economizing
expedients,” as they have been called, are not practised to the same
extent. What becomes of the money thus superseded in its functions, and
by what process it is made to disappear from circulation, are questions
the discussion of which must be for a short time postponed.

Edition: current; Page: [523]


CHAPTER XII: influence of credit on prices

§ 1. Having now formed a general idea of the modes in which credit is
made available as a substitute for money, we have to consider in what
manner the use of these substitutes affects the value of money, or, what
is equivalent, the prices of commodities. It is hardly necessary to say
that the permanent value of money—the natural and average prices of
commodities—are not in question here. These are determined by the cost
of producing or of obtaining the precious metals. An ounce of gold or
silver will in the long run exchange for as much of every other
commodity, as can be produced or imported at the same cost with itself.
And an order, or note of hand, or bill payable at sight, for an ounce of
gold, while the credit of the giver is unimpaired, is worth neither more
nor less than the gold itself.

It is not, however, with ultimate or average, but with immediate and
temporary prices, that we are now concerned. These, as we have seen, may
deviate very widely from the standard of cost of production. Among other
causes of fluctuation, one we have found to be the quantity of money in
circulation. Other things being the same, an increase of the money in
circulation raises prices, a diminution lowers them. If more money is
thrown into circulation than the quantity which can circulate at a value
conformable to its cost of production, the value of money, so long as
the excess lasts, will remain below the standard of cost of production,
and general prices will be sustained above the natural rate.

But we have now found that there are other things, such as bank notes,
bills of exchange, and cheques, which circulate as money, and perform
all the functions of it: and the question arises, Do these various
substitutes operate on prices in the same manner as money itself? Does
an increase in the quantity of transferable paper tend to raise prices,
in the same manner Edition: current; Page: [524] and degree as an
increase in the quantity of money? There has been no small mount of
discussion on this point among writers on currency, without any result
so conclusive as to have yet obtained general assent.

I apprehend that bank notes, bills, or cheques, as such, do not act on
prices at all. What does act on prices is Credit, in whatever shape
given, and whether it gives rise to any transferable instruments capable
of passing into circulation or not.

I proceed to explain and substantiate this opinion.

§ 2. Money acts upon prices in no other way than by being tendered in
exchange for commodities. The demand which influences the prices of
commodities consists of the money offered for them. But the money
offered is not the same thing with the money possessed. It is sometimes
less, sometimes very much more. In the long run indeed, the money which
people lay out will be neither more nor less than the money which they
have to lay out: but this is far from being the case at any given time.
Sometimes they keep money by them for fear of an emergency, or in
expectation of a more advantageous opportunity for expending it. In that
case the money is said not to be in circulation: in plainer language, it
is not offered, nor about to be offered, for commodities. Money not in
circulation has no effect on prices. The converse, however, is a much
commoner case; people make purchases with money not in their possession.
An article, for instance, which is paid for by a cheque on a banker, is
bought with money which not only is not in the payer’s possession, but
generally not even in the banker’s, having been lent by him (all but the
usual reserve) to other persons. We just now made the imaginary
supposition that all persons dealt with a bank, and all with the same
bank, payments being universally made by cheques. In this ideal case,
there would be no money anywhere except in the hands of the banker: who
might then safely part with all of it, by selling it as bullion, or
lending it, to be sent out of the country in exchange for goods or
foreign securities. But though there would then be no money in
possession, or ultimately perhaps even in existence, money would be
offered, and commodities bought with it, just as at present. People
would continue to reckon their incomes and their capitals in money, and
to make their usual purchases with orders for the receipt of a thing
which would have literally ceased to exist. There would be in all this
nothing to complain of, so long as the money, in disappearing, left an
equivalent Edition: current; Page: [525] value in other things,
applicable when required to the reimbursement of those to whom the money
originally belonged.

In the case however of payment by cheques, the purchases are at any rate
made, though not with money in the buyer’s possession, yet with money to
which he has a right. But he may make purchases with money which he only
expects to have, or even only pretends to expect. He may obtain goods in
return for his acceptances payable at a future time; or on his note of
hand; or on a simple book credit, that is, on a mere promise to pay. All
these purchases have exactly the same effect on price, as if they were
made with ready money. The amount of purchasing power which a person can
exercise is composed of all the money in his possession or due to him,
and of all his credit. For exercising the whole of this power he finds a
sufficient motive only under peculiar circumstances; but he always
possesses it; and the portion of it which he at any time does exercise,
is the measure of the effect which he produces on price.

Suppose that, in the expectation that some commodity will rise in price,
he determines, not only to invest in it all his ready money, but to take
up on credit, from the producers or importers, as much of it as their
opinion of his resources will enable him to obtain. Every one must see
that by thus acting he produces a greater effect on price, than if he
limited his purchases to the money he has actually in hand. He creates a
demand for the article to the full amount of his money and credit taken
together, and raises the price proportionally to both. And this effect
is produced, though none of the written instruments called substitutes
for currency may be called into existence; though the transaction may
give rise to no bill of exchange, nor to the issue of a single bank
note. The buyer, instead of taking a mere book credit, might have given
a bill for the amount; or might have paid for the goods with bank notes
borrowed for that purpose from a banker, thus making the purchase not on
his own credit with the seller, but on the banker’s credit with the
seller, and his own with the banker. Had he done so, he would have
produced as great an effect on price as by a simple purchase to the same
amount on a book credit, but no greater effect. The credit itself, not
the form and mode in which it is given, is the operating cause.

§ 3. The inclination of the mercantile public to increase their demand
for commodities by making use of all or much of their credit Edition:
current; Page: [526] as a purchasing power, depends on their expectation
of profit. When there is a general impression that the price of some
commodity is likely to rise, from an extra demand, a short crop,
obstruction to importation, or any other cause, there is a disposition
among dealers to increase their stocks, in order to profit by the
expected rise. This disposition tends in itself to produce the effect
which it looks forward to, a rise of price: and if the rise is
considerable and progressive, other speculators are attracted, who, so
long as the price has not begun to fall, are willing to believe that it
will continue rising. These, by further purchases, produce a further
advance: and thus a rise of price for which there were originally some
rational grounds, is often heightened by merely speculative purchases,
until it greatly exceeds what the original grounds will justify. After a
time this begins to be perceived; the price ceases to rise, and the
holders, thinking it time to realize their gains, are anxious to sell.
Then the price begins to decline: the holders rush into the market to
avoid a still greater loss, and, few being willing to buy in a falling
market, the price falls much more suddenly than it rose. Those who have
bought at a higher price than reasonable calculation justified, and who
have been overtaken by the revulsion before they had realized, are
losers in proportion to the greatness of the fall, and to the quantity
of the commodity which they hold, or have bound themselves to pay for.

Now all these effects might take place in a community to which credit
was unknown: the prices of some commodities might rise from speculation,
to an extravagant height, and then fall rapidly back. But if there were
no such thing as credit, this could hardly happen with respect to
commodities generally. If all purchases were made with ready money, the
payment of increased prices for some articles would draw an unusual
proportion of the money of the community into the markets for those
articles, and must therefore draw it away from some other class of
commodities, and thus lower their prices. The vacuum might, it is true,
be partly filled up by increased rapidity of circulation; and in this
manner the money of the community is virtually increased in a time of
speculative activity, because people keep little of it by them, but
hasten to lay it out in some tempting adventure as soon as possible
after they receive it. This resource, however, is limited: on the whole,
people cannot, while the quantity of money remains the same, lay out
much more of it in some things, without laying out less in others. But
what they cannot do by ready money, they can do by an extension of
credit. Edition: current; Page: [527] When people go into the market and
purchase with money which they hope to receive hereafter, they are
drawing upon an unlimited, not a limited fund. Speculation, thus
supported, may be going on in any number of commodities, without
disturbing the regular course of business in others. It might even be
going on in all commodities at once. We could imagine that in an
epidemic fit of the passion of gambling, all dealers, instead of giving
only their accustomed orders to the manufacturers or growers of their
commodity, commenced buying up all of it which they could procure, as
far as their capital and credit would go. All prices would rise
enormously, even if there were no increase of money, and no paper
credit, but a mere extension of purchases on book credits. After a time
those who had bought would wish to sell, and prices would collapse.

This is the ideal extreme case of what is called a commercial crisis.
There is said to be a commercial crisis, when a great number of
merchants and traders at once, either have, or apprehend that they shall
have, a difficulty in meeting their engagements. The most usual cause of
this general embarrassment, is the recoil of prices after they have been
raised by a spirit of speculation, intense in degree, and extending to
many commodities. Some accident which excites expectations of rising
prices, such as the opening of a new foreign market, or simultaneous
indications of a short supply of several great articles of commerce,
sets speculation at work in several leading departments at once. The
prices rise, and the holders realize, or appear to have the power of
realizing, great gains. In certain states of the public mind, such
examples of rapid increase of fortune call forth numerous imitators, and
speculation not only goes much beyond what is justified by the original
grounds for expecting rise of price, but extends itself to articles in
which there never was any such ground: these, however, rise like the
rest as soon as speculation sets in. At periods of this kind a great
extension of credit takes place. Not only do all whom the contagion
reaches employ their credit much more freely than usual; but they really
have more credit, because they seem to be making unusual gains, and
because a generally reckless and adventurous feeling prevails, which
disposes people to give as well as take credit more largely than at
other times, and give it to persons not entitled to it. In this manner,
in the celebrated speculative year 1825, and at various other periods
during the present century, the prices of many of the principal articles
of commerce rose greatly, without any fall in others, so that general
prices might, without incorrectness, be said to have risen. Edition:
current; Page: [528] When, after such a rise, the reaction comes, and
prices begin to fall, though at first perhaps only through the desire of
the holders to realize, speculative purchases cease: but were this all,
prices would only fall to the level from which they rose, or to that
which is justified by the state of the consumption and of the supply.
They fall, however, much lower; for as, when prices were rising, and
everybody apparently making a fortune, it was easy to obtain almost any
amount of credit, so now, when everybody seems to be losing, and many
fail entirely, it is with difficulty that firms of known solidity can
obtain even the credit to which they are accustomed, and which it is the
greatest inconvenience to them to be without; because all dealers have
engagements to fulfil, and nobody feeling sure that the portion of his
means which he has entrusted to others will be available in time, no one
likes to part with ready money, or to postpone his claim to it. To these
rational considerations there is superadded, in extreme cases, a panic
as unreasoning as the previous overconfidence; money is borrowed for
short periods at almost any rate of interest, and sales of goods for
immediate payment are made at almost any sacrifice. Thus general prices,
during a commercial revulsion, fall as much below the usual level as
during the previous period of speculation they have risen above it: the
fall, as well as the rise, originating not in anything affecting money,
but in the state of credit; an unusually extended employment of credit
during the earlier period, followed by a great diminution, never
amounting, however, to an entire cessation of it, in the later.

It is not, however, universally true that the contraction of credit,
characteristic of a commercial crisis, must have been preceded by an
extraordinary and irrational extension of it. There are other causes;
and one of the more recent crises, that of 1847, is an instance, having
been preceded by no particular extension of credit, and by no
speculations; except those in railway shares, which, though in many
cases extravagant enough, yet being carried on mostly with that portion
of means which the speculators could afford to lose, were not calculated
to produce the wide-spread ruin which arises from vicissitudes of price
in the commodities in which men habitually deal, and in which the bulk
of their capital is invested. The crisis of 1847 belonged to another
class of mercantile phenomena. There occasionally happens a concurrence
of circumstances tending to withdraw from the loan market a considerable
portion of the capital which usually supplies it. These circumstances,
in the present case, Edition: current; Page: [529] were great foreign
payments, (occasioned by a high price of cotton and an unprecedented
importation of food,) together with the continual demands on the
circulating capital of the country by railway calls and the loan
transactions of railway companies, for the purpose of being converted
into fixed capital and made unavailable for future lending. These
various demands fell principally, as such demands always do, on the loan
market. A great, though not the greatest, part of the imported food was
actually paid for by the proceeds of a government loan. The extra
payments which purchasers of corn and cotton, and railway shareholders,
found themselves obliged to make, were either made with their own spare
cash, or with money raised for the occasion. On the first supposition,
they were made by withdrawing deposits from bankers, and thus cutting
off a part of the streams which fed the loan market; on the second
supposition, they were made by actual drafts on the loan market, either
by the sale of securities, or by taking up money at interest. This
combination of a fresh demand for loans, with a curtailment of the
capital disposable for them, raised the rate of interest, and made it
impossible to borrow except on the very best security. Some firms,
therefore, which by an improvident and unmercantile mode of conducting
business had allowed their capital to become either temporarily or
permanently unavailable, became unable to command that perpetual renewal
of credit which had previously enabled them to struggle on. These firms
stopped payment: their failure involved more or less deeply many other
firms which had trusted them; and, as usual in such cases, the general
distrust, commonly called a panic, began to set in, and might have
produced a destruction of credit equal to that of 1825, had not
circumstances which may almost be called accidental, given to a very
simple measure of the government (the suspension of the Bank Charter Act
of 1844) a fortunate power of allaying panic, to which, when considered
in itself, it had no sort of claim.∗

§ 4. The general operation of credit upon prices being such as we have
described, it is evident that if any particular mode or form of credit
is calculated to have a greater operation on prices than Edition:
current; Page: [530] others, it can only be by giving greater facility,
or greater encouragement, to the multiplication of credit transactions
generally. If bank notes, for instance, or bills, have a greater effect
on prices than book credits, it is not by any difference in the
transactions themselves, which are essentially the same, whether taking
place in the one way or in the other: it must be that there are likely
to be more of them. If credit is likely to be more extensively used as a
purchasing power when bank notes or bills are the instruments used, than
when the credit is given by mere entries in an account, to that extent
and no more there is ground for ascribing to the former a greater power
over the markets than belongs to the latter.

Now it appears that there is some such distinction. As far as respects
the particular transactions, it makes no difference in the effect on
price whether A buys goods of B on simple credit, or gives a bill for
them, or pays for them with bank notes lent to him by a banker C. The
difference is in a subsequent stage. If A has bought the goods on a book
credit, there is no obvious or convenient mode by which B can make A’s
debt to him a means of extending his own credit. Whatever credit he has,
will be due to the general opinion entertained of his solvency; he
cannot specifically pledge A’s debt to a third person, as a security for
money lent or goods bought. But if A has given him a bill for the
amount, he can get this discounted, which is the same thing as borrowing
money on the joint credit of A and himself: or he may pay away the bill
in exchange for goods, which is obtaining goods on the same joint
credit. In either case, here is a second credit transaction, grounded on
the first, and which would not have taken place if the first had been
transacted without the intervention of a bill. Nor need the transactions
end here. The bill may be again discounted, or again paid away for
goods, several times before it is itself presented for payment. Nor
would it be correct to say that these successive holders, if they had
not had the bill, might have attained their purpose by purchasing goods
on their own credit with the dealers. They may not all of them be
persons of credit, or they may already have stretched their credit as
far as it will go. And at all events, either money or goods are more
readily obtained on the credit of two persons than of one. Nobody will
pretend that it is as easy a thing for a merchant to borrow a thousand
pounds on his own credit, as to get a bill discounted to the same
amount, when the drawee is of known solvency.

If we now suppose that A, instead of giving a bill, obtains a loan of
bank notes from a banker C, and with them pays B for his Edition:
current; Page: [531] goods, we shall find the difference to be still
greater. B is now independent even of a discounter: A’s bill would have
been taken in payment only by those who were acquainted with his
reputation for solvency, but a banker is a person who has credit with
the public generally, and whose notes are taken in payment by every one,
at least in his own neighbourhood: insomuch that, by a custom which has
grown into law, payment in bank notes is a complete acquittance to the
payer, whereas, if he has paid by a bill, he still remains liable to the
debt, if the person on whom the bill is drawn fails to pay it when due.
B therefore can expend the whole of the bank notes without at all
involving his own credit; and whatever power he had before of obtaining
goods on book credit, remains to him unimpaired, in addition to the
purchasing power he derives from the possession of the notes. The same
remark applies to every person in succession, into whose hands the notes
may come. It is only A, the first holder, (who used his credit to obtain
the notes as a loan from the issuer,) who can possibly find the credit
he possesses in other quarters abated by it; and even in his case that
result is not probable; for though, in reason, and if all his
circumstances were known, every draft already made upon his credit ought
to diminish by so much his power of obtaining more, yet in practice the
reverse more frequently happens, and his having been trusted by one
person is supposed to be evidence that he may safely be trusted by
others also.

It appears, therefore, that bank notes are a more powerful instrument
for raising prices than bills, and bills than book credits. It does not,
indeed, follow that credit will be more used because it can be. When the
state of trade holds out no particular temptation to make large
purchases on credit, dealers will use only a small portion of the credit
power, and it will depend only on convenience whether the portion which
they use will be taken in one form or in another. It is not until the
circumstances of the markets, and the state of the mercantile mind,
render many persons desirous of stretching their credit to an unusual
extent, that the distinctive properties of the different forms of credit
display themselves. Credit already stretched to the utmost in the form
of book debts, would be susceptible of a great additional extension by
means of bills, and of a still greater by means of bank notes. The
first, because each dealer, in addition to his own credit, would be
enabled to create a further purchasing power out of the credit which he
had himself given to others: the second, because the banker’s credit
with the Edition: current; Page: [532] public at large, coined into
notes, as bullion is coined into pieces of money to make it portable and
divisible, is so much purchasing power superadded, in the hands of every
successive holder, to that which he may derive from his own credit. To
state the matter otherwise; one single exertion of the credit-power in
the form of book credit is only the foundation of a single purchase: but
if a bill is drawn, that same portion of credit may serve for as many
purchases as the number of times the bill changes hands: while every
bank note issued renders the credit of the banker a purchasing power to
that amount in the hands of all the successive holders, without
impairing any power they may possess of effecting purchases on their own
credit. Credit, in short, has exactly the same purchasing power with
money; and as money tells upon prices not simply in proportion to its
amount, but to its amount multiplied by the number of times it changes
hands, so also does credit; and credit transferable from hand to hand is
in that proportion more potent than credit which only performs one
purchase.

§ 5. All this purchasing power, however, is operative upon prices only
according to the proportion of it which is used; and the effect,
therefore, is only felt in a state of circumstances calculated to lead
to an unusually extended use of credit. In such a state of
circumstances, that is, in speculative times, it cannot, I think, be
denied, that prices are likely to rise higher if the speculative
purchases are made with bank notes, than when they are made with bills,
and when made by bills than when made by book credits. This, however, is
of far less practical importance than might at first be imagined;
because, in point of fact, speculative purchases are not, in the great
majority of cases, made either with bank notes or with bills, but are
made almost exclusively on book credits. “Applications to the Bank for
extended discount,” says the highest authority on such subjects,∗ (and
the same thing must be true of applications to other banks) “occur
rarely if ever in the origin or progress of extensive speculations in
commodities. These are entered into, for the most part if not entirely,
in the first instance, on credit, for the length of term usual in the
several trades; thus entailing on the parties no immediate necessity for
borrowing so much as may be wanted for the purpose beyond their own
available capital. This applies particularly to speculative purchases of
commodities on the spot, with a view to resale. But these generally form
the smaller Edition: current; Page: [533] proportion of engagements on
credit. By far the largest of those entered into on the prospect of a
rise of prices, are such as have in view importations from abroad. The
same remark, too, is applicable to the export of commodities, when a
large proportion is on the credit of the shippers or their consignees.
As long as circumstances hold out the prospect of a favourable result,
the credit of the parties is generally sustained. If some of them wish
to realize, there are others with capital and credit ready to replace
them; and if the events fully justify the grounds on which the
speculative transactions were entered into (thus admitting of sales for
consumption in time to replace the capital embarked) there is no unusual
demand for borrowed capital to sustain them. It is only when by the
vicissitudes of political events, or of the seasons, or other
adventitious circumstances, the forthcoming supplies are found to exceed
the computed rate of consumption, and a fall of prices ensues, that an
increased demand for capital takes place; the market rate of interest
then rises, and increased applications are made to the Bank of England
for discount.” So that the multiplication of bank notes and other
transferable paper does not, for the most part, accompany and facilitate
the speculation; but comes into play chiefly when the tide is turning,
and difficulties begin to be felt.

Of the extraordinary height to which speculative transactions can be
carried upon mere book credits, without the smallest addition to what is
commonly called the currency, very few persons are at all aware. “The
power of purchase,” says Mr. Tooke,∗ “by persons having capital and
credit, is much beyond anything that those who are unacquainted
practically with speculative markets have any idea of.... A person
having the reputation of capital enough for his regular business, and
enjoying good credit in his trade, if he takes a sanguine view of the
prospect of a rise of price of the article in which he deals, and is
favoured by circumstances in the outset and progress of his speculation,
may effect purchases to an extent perfectly enormous, compared with his
capital.” Mr. Tooke confirms this statement by some remarkable
instances, exemplifying the immense purchasing power which may be
exercised, and rise of price which may be produced, by credit not
represented by either bank notes or bills of exchange.

“Amongst the earlier speculators for an advance in the price of tea, in
consequence of our dispute with China in 1839, were several Edition:
current; Page: [534] retail grocers and tea-dealers. There was a general
disposition among the trade to get into stock: that is, to lay in at
once a quantity which would meet the probable demand from their
customers for several months to come. Some, however, among them, more
sanguine and adventurous than the rest, availed themselves of their
credit with the importers and wholesale dealers, for purchasing
quantities much beyond the estimated demand in their own business. As
the purchases were made in the first instance ostensibly, and perhaps
really, for the legitimate purposes and within the limits of their
regular business, the parties were enabled to buy without the condition
of any deposit; whereas speculators, known to be such, are required to
pay 2l. per chest, to cover any probable difference of price which might
arise before the expiration of the prompt, which, for this article, is
three months. Without, therefore, the outlay of a single farthing of
actual capital or currency in any shape, they made purchases to a
considerable extent; and with the profit realized on the resale of a
part of these purchases, they were enabled to pay the deposit on further
quantities when required, as was the case when the extent of the
purchases attracted attention. In this way, the speculation went on at
advancing prices (100 per cent and upwards) till nearly the expiration
of the prompt; and if at that time circumstances had been such as to
justify the apprehension which at one time prevailed, that all future
supplies would be cut off, the prices might have still further advanced,
and at any rate not have retrograded. In this case, the speculators
might have realized, if not all the profit they had anticipated, a very
handsome sum, upon which they might have been enabled to extend their
business greatly, or to retire from it altogether, with a reputation for
great sagacity in thus making their fortune. But instead of this
favourable result, it so happened that two or three cargoes of tea which
had been transhipped were admitted, contrary to expectation, to entry on
their arrival here, and it was found that further indirect shipments
were in progress. Thus the supply was increased beyond the calculation
of the speculators: and, at the same time, the consumption had been
diminished by the high price. There was, consequently, a violent
reaction on the market; the speculators were unable to sell without such
a sacrifice as disabled them from fulfilling their engagements, and
several of them consequently failed. Among these, one was mentioned, who
having a capital not exceeding 1200l. which was locked up in his
business, had contrived to buy 4000 chests, value above 80,000l., the
loss upon which was about 16,000l.

Edition: current; Page: [535]
“The other example which I have to give, is that of the operation on the
corn market between 1838 and 1842. There was an instance of a person
who, when he entered on his extensive speculations, was, as it appeared
by the subsequent examination of his affairs, possessed of a capital not
exceeding 5000l., but being successful in the outset, and favoured by
circumstances in the progress of his operations, he contrived to make
purchases to such an extent, that when he stopped payment his
engagements were found to amount to between 500,000l. and 600,000l.
Other instances might be cited of parties without any capital at all,
who, by dint of mere credit, were enabled, while the aspect of the
market favoured their views, to make purchases to a very great extent.

“And be it observed, that these speculations, involving enormous
purchases on little or no capital, were carried on in 1839 and 1840,
when the money market was in its most contracted state; or when,
according to modern phraseology, there was the greatest scarcity of
money.”

But though the great instrument of speculative purchases is book
credits, it cannot be contested that in speculative periods an increase
does take place in the quantity both of bills of exchange and of bank
notes. This increase, indeed, so far as bank notes are concerned, hardly
ever takes place in the earliest stage of the speculations: advances
from bankers (as Mr. Tooke observes) not being applied for in order to
purchase, but in order to hold on without selling when the usual term of
credit has expired, and the high price which was calculated on has not
arrived. But the tea speculators mentioned by Mr. Tooke could not have
carried their speculations beyond the three months which are the usual
term of credit in their trade, unless they had been able to obtain
advances from bankers, which, if the expectation of a rise of price had
still continued, they probably could have done.

Since, then, credit in the form of bank notes is a more potent
instrument for raising prices than book credits, an unrestrained power
of resorting to this instrument may contribute to prolong and heighten
the speculative rise of prices, and hence to aggravate the subsequent
recoil. But in what degree? and what importance ought we to ascribe to
this possibility? It may help us to form some judgment on this point, if
we consider the proportion which the utmost increase of bank notes in a
period of speculation, bears, I do not say to the whole mass of credit
in the country, but to the bills of exchange alone. The average amount
of bills in existence Edition: current; Page: [536] at any one time is
supposed greatly to exceed [1848] a hundred millions sterling.∗ The bank
note circulation of Great Britain and Ireland seldom exceeds forty
millions, and the increase in speculative periods at most two or three.
And even this, as we have seen, hardly ever comes into play until that
advanced period of the speculation at which the tide shows signs of
turning, and the dealers generally are rather thinking of the means of
fulfilling their existing engagements, than meditating an extension of
them: while the quantity of bills in existence is largely increased from
the very commencement of the speculations.

§ 6. It is well known that of late years, an artificial limitation of
the issue of bank notes has been regarded by many political economists,
and by a great portion of the public, as an expedient of supreme
efficacy for preventing, and when it cannot prevent, for moderating, the
fever of speculation; and this opinion received the recognition and
sanction of the legislature by the Currency Act of 1844. At the point,
however, which our inquiries have reached, though we have conceded to
bank notes a greater power over prices than is possessed by bills or
book credits, we have not Edition: current; Page: [537] found reason to
think that this superior efficacy has much share in producing the rise
of prices which accompanies a period of speculation, nor consequently
that any restraint applied to this one instrument can be efficacious to
the degree which is often supposed, in moderating either that rise, or
the recoil which follows it. We shall be still less inclined to think
so, when we consider that there is a fourth form of credit transactions,
by cheques on bankers, and transfers in a banker’s books, which is
exactly parallel in every respect to bank notes, giving equal facilities
to an extension of credit, and capable of acting on prices quite as
powerfully. In the words of Mr. Fullarton,∗ “there is not a single
object at present attained through the agency of Bank of England notes,
which might not be as effectually accomplished by each individual
keeping an account with the bank, and transacting all his payments of
five pounds and upwards by cheque.” A bank, instead of lending its notes
to a merchant or dealer, might open an account with him, and credit the
account with the sum it had agreed to advance: on an understanding that
he should not draw out that sum in any other mode than by drawing
cheques against it in favour of those to whom he had occasion to make
payments. These cheques might possibly even pass from hand to hand like
bank notes; more commonly, however, the receiver would pay them into the
hands of his own banker, and when he wanted the money, would draw a
fresh cheque against it: and hence an objector may urge that as the
original cheque would very soon be presented for payment, when it must
be paid either in notes or in coin, notes or coin to an equal amount
must be provided as the ultimate means of liquidation. It is not so,
however. The person to whom the cheque is transferred may perhaps deal
with the same banker, and the cheque may return to the very bank on
which it was drawn: this is very often the case in country districts; if
so, no payment will be called for, but a simple transfer in the banker’s
books will settle the transaction. If the cheque is paid into a
different bank, it will not be presented for payment, but liquidated by
set-off against other cheques; and in a state of circumstances
favourable to a general extension of banking credits, a banker who has
granted more credit, and has therefore more cheques drawn on him, will
also have more cheques on other bankers paid to him, and will only have
to provide notes or cash for the payment of balances; for which purpose
the ordinary Edition: current; Page: [538] reserve of prudent bankers,
one-third of their liabilities, will abundantly suffice. Now, if he had
granted the extension of credit by means of an issue of his own notes,
he must equally have retained, in coin or Bank of England notes, the
usual reserve: so that he can, as Mr. Fullarton says, give every
facility of credit by what may be termed a cheque circulation, which he
could give by a note circulation.

This extension of credit by entries in a banker’s books, has all that
superior efficiency in acting on prices, which we ascribed to an
extension by means of bank notes. As a bank note of 20l., paid to any
one, gives him 20l. of purchasing power based on credit, over and above
whatever credit he had of his own, so does a cheque paid to him do the
same: for, although he may make no purchase with the cheque itself, he
deposits it with his banker, and can draw against it. As this act of
drawing a cheque against another which has been exchanged and cancelled,
can be repeated as often as a purchase with a bank note, it effects the
same increase of purchasing power. The original loan, or credit, given
by the banker to his customer, is potentially multiplied as a means of
purchase, in the hands of the successive persons to whom portions of the
credit are paid away, just as the purchasing power of a bank note is
multiplied by the number of persons through whose hands it passes before
it is returned to the issuer.

These considerations abate very much from the importance of any effect
which can be produced in allaying the vicissitudes of commerce, by so
superficial a contrivance as the one so much relied on of late, the
restriction of the issue of bank notes by an artificial rule. An
examination of all the consequences of that restriction, and an estimate
of the reasons for and against it, must be deferred until we have
treated of the foreign exchanges, and the international movements of
bullion. At present we are only concerned with the general theory of
prices, of which the different influence of different kinds of credit is
an essential part.

§ 7.1 There has been a great amount of discussion and argument on the
question whether several of these forms of credit, and in particular
whether bank notes, ought to be considered as money. The question is so
purely verbal as to be scarcely worth raising, and one would have some
difficulty in comprehending why so much Edition: current; Page: [539]
importance is attached to it, if there were not some authorities who,
still adhering to the doctrine of the infancy of society and of
political economy, that the quantity of money compared with that of
commodities, determines general prices, think it important to prove that
bank notes and no other forms of credit are money, in order to support
the inference that bank notes and no other forms of credit influence
prices. It is obvious, however, that prices do not depend on money, but
on purchases. Money left with a banker, and not drawn against, or drawn
against for other purposes than buying commodities, has no effect on
prices, any more than credit which is not used. Credit which is used to
purchase commodities affects prices in the same manner as money. Money
and credit are thus exactly on a par, in their effect on prices; and
whether we choose to class bank notes with the one or the other, is in
this respect entirely immaterial.

Since, however, this question of nomenclature has been raised, it seems
desirable that it should be answered. The reason given for considering
bank notes as money, is, that by law and usage they have the property,
in common with metallic money, of finally closing the transactions in
which they are employed; while no other mode of paying one debt by
transferring another has that privilege. The first remark which here
suggests itself is, that on this showing, the notes at least of private
banks are not money; for a creditor cannot be forced to accept them in
payment of a debt. They certainly close the transaction if he does
accept them; but so, on the same supposition, would a bale of cloth, or
a pipe of wine; which are not for that reason regarded as money. It
seems to be an essential part of the idea of money that it be legal
tender. An inconvertible paper which is legal tender is universally
admitted to be money; in the French language the phrase papier-monnaie
actually means inconvertibility, convertible notes being merely billets
à porteur. It is only in the case of Bank of England notes under the law
of convertibility, that any difficulty arises; those notes not being a
legal tender from the Bank itself, though a legal tender from all other
persons. Bank of England notes undoubtedly do close transactions, so far
as respects the buyer. When he has once paid in Bank of England notes,
he can in no case be required to pay over again. But I confess I cannot
see how the transaction can be deemed complete, as regards the seller,
when he will only be found to have received the price of his commodity
provided the Bank keeps its promise to pay. An instrument which Edition:
current; Page: [540] would be deprived of all value by the insolvency of
a corporation, cannot be money in any sense in which money is opposed to
credit. It either is not money, or it is money and credit too. It may be
most suitably described as coined credit. The other forms of credit may
be distinguished from it as credit in ingots.

§ 8. Some high authorities have claimed for bank notes, as compared with
other modes of credit, a greater distinction in respect to influence on
price, than we have seen reason to allow; a difference, not in degree,
but in kind. They ground this distinction on the fact that all bills and
cheques, as well as all book-debts, are from the first intended to be,
and actually are, ultimately liquidated either in coin or in notes. The
bank notes in circulation, jointly with the coin, are therefore,
according to these authorities, the basis on which all the other
expedients of credit rest; and in proportion to the basis will be the
superstructure; insomuch that the quantity of bank notes determines that
of all the other forms of credit. If bank notes are multiplied, there
will, they seem to think, be more bills, more payments by cheque, and I
presume, more book credits; and by regulating and limiting the issue of
bank notes, they think that all other forms of credit are, by an
indirect consequence, brought under a similar limitation. I believe I
have stated the opinion of these authorities correctly, though I have
nowhere seen the grounds of it set forth with such distinctness as to
make me feel quite certain that I understand them. It may be true that,
according as there are more or fewer bank notes, there is also in
general (though not invariably), more or less of other descriptions of
credit; for the same state of affairs which leads to an increase of
credit in one shape, leads to an increase of it in other shapes. But I
see no reason for believing that the one is the cause of the other.1 If
indeed we begin by assuming, as I suspect is tacitly done, that prices
are regulated by coin and bank notes, the proposition maintained will
certainly follow; for, according as prices are higher or lower, the same
purchases will give rise to bills, cheques, and book credits of a larger
or a smaller amount. But the premise in this reasoning is the very
proposition to be proved. Setting this assumption aside, I know not how
the conclusion can be substantiated. The credit given to any one by
Edition: current; Page: [541] those with whom he deals, does not depend
on the quantity of bank notes or coin in circulation at the time, but on
their opinion of his solvency: if any consideration of a more general
character enters into their calculation, it is only in a time of
pressure on the loan market, when they are not certain of being
themselves able to obtain the credit on which they have been accustomed
to rely; and even then, what they look to is the general state of the
loan market, and not (preconceived theory apart) the amount of bank
notes. So far as to the willingness to give credit. And the willingness
of a dealer to use his credit depends on his expectations of gain, that
is, on his opinion of the probable future price of his commodity; an
opinion grounded either on the rise or fall already going on, or on his
prospective judgment respecting the supply and the rate of consumption.
When a dealer extends his purchases beyond his immediate means of
payment, engaging to pay at a specified time, he does so in the
expectation either that the transaction will have terminated favourably
before that time arrives, or that he shall then be in possession of
sufficient funds from the proceeds of his other transactions. The
fulfilment of these expectations depends upon prices, but not especially
upon the amount of bank notes. He may, doubtless, also ask himself, in
case he should be disappointed in these expectations, to what quarter he
can look for a temporary advance, to enable him, at the worst, to keep
his engagements. But in the first place, this prospective reflection on
the somewhat more or less of difficulty which he may have in tiding over
his embarrassments, seems too slender an inducement to be much of a
restraint in a period supposed to be one of rash adventure, and upon
persons so confident of success as to involve themselves beyond their
certain means of extrication. And further, I apprehend that their
confidence of being helped out in the event of ill-fortune, will mainly
depend on their opinion of their own individual credit, with, perhaps,
some consideration, not of the quantity of the currency, but of the
general state of the loan market. They are aware that, in case of a
commercial crisis, they shall have difficulty in obtaining advances. But
if they thought it likely that a commercial crisis would occur before
they had realized, they would not speculate. If no great contraction of
general credit occurs, they will feel no doubt of obtaining any advances
which they absolutely require, provided the state of their own affairs
at the time affords in the estimation of lenders a sufficient prospect
that those advances will be repaid.

Edition: current; Page: [542]


CHAPTER XIII: of an inconvertible paper currency

§ 1. After experience had shown that pieces of paper, of no intrinsic
value, by merely bearing upon them the written profession of being
equivalent to a certain number of francs, dollars, or pounds, could be
made to circulate as such, and to produce all the benefit to the issuers
which could have been produced by the coins which they purported to
represent; governments began to think that it would be a happy device if
they could appropriate to themselves this benefit, free from the
condition to which individuals issuing such paper substitutes for money
were subject, of giving, when required, for the sign, the thing
signified. They determined to try whether they could not emancipate
themselves from this unpleasant obligation, and make a piece of paper
issued by them pass for a pound, by merely calling it a pound, and
consenting to receive it in payment of the taxes. And such is the
influence of almost all established governments, that they have
generally succeeded in attaining this object: I believe I might say they
have always succeeded for a time, and the power has only been lost to
them after they had compromised it by the most flagrant abuse.

In the case supposed, the functions of money are performed by a thing
which derives its power for performing them solely from convention; but
convention is quite sufficient to confer the power; since nothing more
is needful to make a person accept anything as money, and even at any
arbitrary value, than the persuasion that it will be taken from him on
the same terms by others. The only question is, what determines the
value of such a currency; since it cannot be, as in the case of gold and
silver (or paper exchangeable for them at pleasure), the cost of
production.

We have seen, however, that even in the case of a metallic currency, the
immediate agency in determining its value is its quantity. If the
quantity, instead of depending on the ordinary Edition: current; Page:
[543] mercantile motives of profit and loss, could be arbitrarily fixed
by authority, the value would depend on the fiat of that authority, not
on cost of production. The quantity of a paper currency not convertible
into the metals at the option of the holder, can be arbitrarily fixed;
especially if the issuer is the sovereign power of the state. The value,
therefore, of such a currency is entirely arbitrary.

Suppose that, in a country of which the currency is wholly metallic, a
paper currency is suddenly issued, to the amount of half the metallic
circulation; not by a banking establishment, or in the form of loans,
but by the government, in payment of salaries and purchase of
commodities. The currency being suddenly increased by one-half, all
prices will rise, and among the rest, the prices of all things made of
gold and silver. An ounce of manufactured gold will become more valuable
than an ounce of gold coin, by more than that customary difference which
compensates for the value of the workmanship; and it will be profitable
to melt the coin for the purpose of being manufactured, until as much
has been taken from the currency by the subtraction of gold, as had been
added to it by the issue of paper. Then prices will relapse to what they
were at first, and there will be nothing changed except that a paper
currency has been substituted for half of the metallic currency which
existed before. Suppose, now, a second emission of paper; the same
series of effects will be renewed; and so on, until the whole of the
metallic money has disappeared: that is, if paper be issued of as low a
denomination as the lowest coin; if not, as much will remain as
convenience requires for the smaller payments. The addition made to the
quantity of gold and silver disposable for ornamental purposes, will
somewhat reduce, for a time, the value of the article; and as long as
this is the case, even though paper has been issued to the original
amount of the metallic circulation, as much coin will remain in
circulation along with it, as will keep the value of the currency down
to the reduced value of the metallic material; but the value having
fallen below the cost of production, a stoppage or diminution of the
supply from the mines will enable the surplus to be carried off by the
ordinary agents of destruction, after which, the metals and the currency
will recover their natural value. We are here supposing, as we have
supposed throughout, that the country has mines of its own, and no
commercial intercourse with other countries; for, in a country having
foreign trade, the coin which is rendered superfluous by an issue of
paper is carried off by a much prompter method.

Edition: current; Page: [544]
Up to this point, the effects of a paper currency are substantially the
same, whether it is convertible into specie or not. It is when the
metals have been completely superseded and driven from circulation, that
the difference between convertible and inconvertible paper begins to be
operative. When the gold or silver has all gone from circulation, and an
equal quantity of paper has taken its place, suppose that a still
further issue is superadded. The same series of phenomena recommences:
prices rise, among the rest the prices of gold and silver articles, and
it becomes an object as before to procure coin in order to convert it
into bullion. There is no longer any coin in circulation; but if the
paper currency is convertible, coin may still be obtained from the
issuers, in exchange for notes. All additional notes, therefore, which
are attempted to be forced into circulation after the metals have been
completely superseded, will return upon the issuers in exchange for
coin; and they will not be able to maintain in circulation such a
quantity of convertible paper as to sink its value below the metal which
it represents. It is not so, however, with an inconvertible currency. To
the increase of that (if permitted by law) there is no check. The
issuers may add to it indefinitely, lowering its value and raising
prices in proportion; they may, in other words, depreciate the currency
without limit.

Such a power, in whomsoever vested, is an intolerable evil. All
variations in the value of the circulating medium are mischievous: they
disturb existing contracts and expectations, and the liability to such
changes renders every pecuniary engagement of long date entirely
precarious. The person who buys for himself, or gives to another, an
annuity of 100l., does not know whether it will be equivalent to 200l.
or to 50l. a few years hence. Great as this evil would be if it depended
only on accident, it is still greater when placed at the arbitrary
disposal of an individual or a body of individuals; who may have any
kind or degree of interest to be served by an artificial fluctuation in
fortunes; and who have at any rate a strong interest in issuing as much
as possible, each issue being in itself a source of profit. Not to add,
that the issuers may have, and in the case of a government paper, always
have, a direct interest in lowering the value of the currency, because
it is the medium in which their own debts are computed.

§ 2. In order that the value of the currency may be secure from being
altered by design, and may be as little as possible liable to
fluctuation from accident, the articles least liable of all known
Edition: current; Page: [545] commodities to vary in their value, the
precious metals, have been made in all civilized countries the standard
of value for the circulating medium; and no paper currency ought to
exist of which the value cannot be made to conform to theirs. Nor has
this fundamental maxim ever been entirely lost sight of, even by the
governments which have most abused the power of creating inconvertible
paper. If they have not (as they generally have) professed an intention
of paying in specie at some indefinite future time, they have at least,
by giving to their paper issues the names of their coins, made a
virtual, though generally a false, profession of intending to keep them
at a value corresponding to that of the coins. This is not
impracticable, even with an inconvertible paper. There is not indeed the
self-acting check which convertibility brings with it. But there is a
clear and unequivocal indication by which to judge whether the currency
is depreciated, and to what extent. That indication is, the price of the
precious metals. When holders of paper cannot demand coin to be
converted into bullion, and when there is none left in circulation,
bullion rises and falls in price like other things; and if it is above
the Mint price, if an ounce of gold, which would be coined into the
equivalent of 3l. 17s. 101/2d., is sold for 4l. or 5l. in paper, the
value of the currency has sunk just that much below what the value of a
metallic currency would be. If, therefore, the issue of inconvertible
paper were subjected to strict rules, one rule being that whenever
bullion rose above the Mint price, the issues should he contracted until
the market price of bullion and the Mint price were again in accordance,
such a currency would not be subject to any of the evils usually deemed
inherent in an inconvertible paper.

But also such a system of currency would have no advantages sufficient
to recommend it to adoption. An inconvertible currency, regulated by the
price of bullion, would conform exactly, in all its variations, to a
convertible one; and the only advantage gained, would be that of
exemption from the necessity of keeping any reserve of the precious
metals; which is not a very important consideration, especially as a
government, so long as its good faith is not suspected, needs not keep
so large a reserve as private issuers, being not so liable to great and
sudden demands, since there never can be any real doubt of its solvency.
Against this small advantage is to be set, in the first place, the
possibility of fraudulent tampering with the price of bullion for the
sake of acting on the currency; in the manner of the fictitious sales of
corn, to influence the averages, so Edition: current; Page: [546] much
and so justly complained of while the corn laws were in force. But a
still stronger consideration is the importance of adhering to a simple
principle, intelligible to the most untaught capacity. Everybody can
understand convertibility; every one sees that what can be at any moment
exchanged for five pounds, is worth five pounds. Regulation by the price
of bullion is a more complex idea, and does not recommend itself through
the same familiar associations. There would be nothing like the same
confidence, by the public generally, in an inconvertible currency so
regulated, as in a convertible one: and the most instructed person might
reasonably doubt whether such a rule would be as likely to be inflexibly
adhered to. The grounds of the rule not being so well understood by the
public, opinion would probably not enforce it with as much rigidity,
and, in any circumstances of difficulty, would be likely to turn against
it; while to the government itself a suspension of convertibility would
appear a much stronger and more extreme measure, than a relaxation of
what might possibly be considered a somewhat artificial rule. There is
therefore a great preponderance of reasons in favour of a convertible,
in preference to even the best regulated inconvertible currency. The
temptation to over-issue, in certain financial emergencies, is so
strong, that nothing is admissible which can tend, in however slight a
degree, to weaken the barriers that restrain it.

§ 3. Although no doctrine in political economy rests on more obvious
grounds than the mischief of a paper currency not maintained at the same
value with a metallic, either by convertibility, or by some principle of
limitation equivalent to it; and although, accordingly, this doctrine
has, though not till after the discussions of many years, been tolerably
effectually drummed into the public mind; yet dissentients are still
numerous, and projectors every now and then start up, with plans for
curing all the economical evils of society by means of an unlimited
issue of inconvertible paper. There is, in truth, a great charm in the
idea. To be able to pay off the national debt, defray the expenses of
government without taxation, and in fine, to make the fortunes of the
whole community, is a brilliant prospect, when once a man is capable of
believing that printing a few characters on bits of paper will do it.
The philosopher’s stone could not be expected to do more.

As these projects, however often slain, always resuscitate, it is not
superfluous to examine one or two of the fallacies by which the schemers
impose upon themselves. One of the commonest is, Edition: current; Page:
[547] that a paper currency cannot be issued in excess so long as every
note issued represents property, or has a foundation of actual property
to rest on. These phrases, of representing and resting, seldom convey
any distinct or well-defined idea: when they do, their meaning is no
more than this—that the issuers of the paper must have property, either
of their own, or entrusted to them, to the value of all the notes they
issue: though for what purpose does not very clearly appear; for if the
property cannot be claimed in exchange for the notes, it is difficult to
divine in what manner its mere existence can serve to uphold their
value. I presume, however, it is intended as a guarantee that the
holders would be finally reimbursed, in case any untoward event should
cause the whole concern to be wound up. On this theory there have been
many schemes for “coining the whole land of the country into money” and
the like.

In so far as this notion has any connexion at all with reason, it seems
to originate in confounding two entirely distinct evils, to which a
paper currency is liable. One is, the insolvency of the issuers; which,
if the paper is grounded on their credit—if it makes any promise of
payment in cash, either on demand or at any future time—of course
deprives the paper of any value which it derives from the promise. To
this evil paper credit is equally liable, however moderately used; and
against it a proviso that all issues should be “founded on property,” as
for instance that notes should only be issued on the security of some
valuable thing expressly pledged for their redemption, would really be
efficacious as a precaution. But the theory takes no account of another
evil, which is incident to the notes of the most solvent firm, company,
or government; that of being depreciated in value from being issued in
excessive quantity. The assignats, during the French Revolution, were an
example of a currency grounded on these principles. The assignats
“represented” an immense amount of highly valuable property, namely the
lands of the crown, the church, the monasteries, and the emigrants;
amounting possibly to half the territory of France. They were, in fact,
orders or assignments on this mass of land. The revolutionary government
had the idea of “coining” these lands into money; but, to do them
justice, they did not originally contemplate the immense multiplication
of issues to which they were eventually driven by the failure of all
other financial resources. They imagined that the assignats would come
rapidly back to the issuers in exchange for land, and that they should
be Edition: current; Page: [548] able to reissue them continually until
the lands were all disposed of, without having at any time more than a
very moderate quantity in circulation. Their hope was frustrated: the
land did not sell so quickly as they expected; buyers were not inclined
to invest their money in possessions which were likely to be resumed
without compensation if the Revolution succumbed: the bits of paper
which represented land, becoming prodigiously multiplied, could no more
keep up their value than the land itself would have done if it had all
been brought to market at once: and the result was that it at last
required an assignat of six hundred francs to pay for a pound of
butter.1

The example of the assignats has been said not to be conclusive, because
an assignat only represented land in general, but not a definite
quantity of land. To have prevented their depreciation, the proper
course, it is affirmed, would have been to have made a valuation of all
the confiscated property at its metallic value, and to have issued
assignats up to, but not beyond, that limit; giving to the holders a
right to demand any piece of land, at its registered valuation, in
exchange for assignats to the same amount. There can be no question
about the superiority of this plan over the one actually adopted. Had
this course been followed, the assignats could never have been
depreciated to the inordinate degree they were; for—as they would have
retained all their purchasing power in relation to land, however much
they might have fallen in respect to other things—before they had lost
very much of their market value, they would probably have been brought
in to be exchanged for land. It must be remembered, however, that their
not being depreciated would pre-suppose that no greater number of them
continued in circulation than would have circulated if they had been
convertible into cash. However convenient, therefore, in a time of
revolution, this currency convertible into land on demand might have
been, as a contrivance for selling rapidly a great quantity of land with
the least possible sacrifice; it is difficult to see what advantage it
would have, as the permanent system of a country, over a currency
convertible into coin: while it is not at all difficult to see what
would be its disadvantages; since land is far more variable in value
than gold and silver; and besides, land, to most persons, being rather
an encumbrance than a desirable possession, except to be converted into
money, people would submit to a Edition: current; Page: [549] much
greater depreciation before demanding land, than they will before
demanding gold or silver.∗ 1

Edition: current; Page: [550]
§ 4. Another of the fallacies from which the advocates of an
inconvertible currency derive support, is the notion that an increase of
the currency quickens industry. This idea was set afloat by Hume, in his
Essay on Money, and has had many devoted adherents since; witness the
Birmingham currency school, of whom Mr. Attwood was at one time the most
conspicuous representative. Mr. Attwood maintained that a rise of
prices, produced by an increase of paper currency, stimulates every
producer to his utmost exertions, and brings all the capital and labour
of the country into complete employment; and that this has invariably
happened in all periods of rising prices, when the rise was on a
sufficiently great scale. I presume, however, that the inducement which,
according to Mr. Attwood, excited this unusual ardour in all persons
engaged in production, must have been the expectation of getting more
commodities generally, more real wealth, in exchange for the produce of
their labour, and not merely more pieces of paper. This expectation,
however, must have been, by the very terms of the supposition,
disappointed, since, all prices being supposed to rise equally, no one
was really better paid for his goods than before. Those who agree with
Mr. Attwood could only succeed in winning people on to these unwonted
exertions by a prolongation of what would in fact be a delusion;
contriving matters so, that by a progressive rise of money prices, every
producer shall always seem to be in the very act of obtaining an
increased remuneration which he never, in reality, does obtain. It is
unnecessary to advert to any other of the objections to this plan than
that of its total impracticability. It calculates on finding the whole
world persisting for ever in the belief that more pieces of paper are
more riches, and never discovering that, with all their paper, they
cannot buy more of anything that they could before. No such mistake was
made during any of the periods of high prices, on the experience of
which this school lays so much stress. At the periods which Mr. Attwood
mistook for times of prosperity, and which were simply (as all periods
of high prices, under a convertible currency, must be) times of
speculation, the speculators did not think they were growing rich
because the high prices would last, but because they would not last, and
because whoever contrived to realize while they did last, would find
himself, after the recoil, in possession of a greater number of pounds
sterling, without their having become of less value. If, at Edition:
current; Page: [551] the close of the speculation, an issue of paper had
been made, sufficient to keep prices up to the point which they attained
when at the highest, no one would have been more disappointed than the
speculators; since the gain which they thought to have reaped by
realizing in time (at the expense of their competitors, who bought when
they sold, and had to sell after the revulsion) would have faded away in
their hands, and instead of it they would have got nothing except a few
more paper tickets to count by.

Hume’s version of the doctrine differed in a slight degree from Mr.
Attwood’s. He thought that all commodities would not rise in price
simultaneously, and that some persons therefore would obtain a real
gain, by getting more money for what they had to sell, while the things
which they wished to buy might not yet have risen. And those who would
reap this gain would always be (he seems to think) the first comers. It
seems obvious, however, that for every person who thus gains more than
usual, there is necessarily some other person who gains less. The loser,
if things took place as Hume supposes, would be the seller of the
commodities which are slowest to rise; who, by the supposition, parts
with his goods at the old prices, to purchasers who have already
benefited by the new. This seller has obtained for his commodity only
the accustomed quantity of money, while there are already some things of
which that money will no longer purchase as much as before. If,
therefore, he knows what is going on, he will raise his price, and then
the buyer will not have the gain, which is supposed to stimulate his
industry. But if, on the contrary, the seller does not know the state of
the case, and only discovers it when he finds, in laying his money out,
that it does not go so far, he then obtains less than the ordinary
remuneration for his labour and capital; and if the other dealer’s
industry is encouraged, it should seem that his must, from the opposite
cause, be impaired.

§ 5. There is no way in which a general and permanent rise of prices, or
in other words, depreciation of money, can benefit anybody, except at
the expense of somebody else. The substitution of paper for metallic
currency is a national gain: any further increase of paper beyond this
is but a form of robbery.

An issue of notes is a manifest gain to the issuers, who, until the
notes are returned for payment, obtain the use of them as if they were a
real capital: and so long as the notes are no permanent addition to the
currency, but merely supersede gold or silver to Edition: current; Page:
[552] the same amount, the gain of the issuer is a loss to no one; it is
obtained by saving to the community the expense of the more costly
material. But if there is no gold or silver to be superseded—if the
notes are added to the currency, instead of being substituted for the
metallic part of it—all holders of currency lose, by the depreciation of
its value, the exact equivalent of what the issuer gains. A tax is
virtually levied on them for his benefit. It will be objected by some,
that gains are also made by the producers and dealers who, by means of
the increased issue, are accommodated with loans. Theirs, however, is
not an additional gain, but a portion of that which is reaped by the
issuer at the expense of all possessors of money. The profits arising
from the contribution levied upon the public, he does not keep to
himself, but divides with his customers.

But besides the benefit reaped by the issuers, or by others through
them, at the expense of the public generally, there is another unjust
gain obtained by a larger class, namely by those who are under fixed
pecuniary obligations. All such persons are freed, by a depreciation of
the currency, from a portion of the burthen of their debts or other
engagements: in other words, part of the property of their creditors is
gratuitously transferred to them. On a superficial view it may be
imagined that this is an advantage to industry; since the productive
classes are great borrowers, and generally owe larger debts to the
unproductive (if we include among the latter all persons not actually in
business) than the unproductive classes owe to them; especially if the
national debt be included. It is only thus that a general rise of prices
can be a source of benefit to producers and dealers; by diminishing the
pressure of their fixed burthens. And this might be accounted an
advantage, if integrity and good faith were of no importance to the
world, and to industry and commerce in particular. Not many, however,
have been found to say that the currency ought to be depreciated on the
simple ground of its being desirable to rob the national creditor and
private creditors of a part of what is in their bond. The schemes which
have tended that way have almost always had some appearance of special
and circumstantial justification, such as the necessity of compensating
for a prior injustice committed in the contrary direction.

§ 6. Thus in England, for many years subsequent to 1819, it was
pertinaciously contended, that a large portion of the national debt and
a multitude of private debts still in existence, were contracted between
1797 and 1819, when the Bank of England was Edition: current; Page:
[553] exempted from giving cash for its notes; and that it is grossly
unjust to borrowers (that is, in the case of the national debt, to all
tax-payers) that they should be paying interest on the same nominal sums
in a currency of full value, which were borrowed in a depreciated one.1
The depreciation, according to the views and objects of the particular
writer, was represented to have averaged thirty, fifty, or even more
than fifty per cent: and the conclusion was, that either we ought to
return to this depreciated currency, or to strike off from the national
debt, and from mortgages or other private debts of old standing, a
percentage corresponding to the estimated amount of the depreciation.

To this doctrine, the following was the answer usually made. Granting
that, by returning to cash payments without lowering the standard, an
injustice was done to debtors, in holding them liable for the same
amount of a currency enhanced in value, which they had borrowed while it
was depreciated; it is now too late to make reparation for this injury.
The debtors and creditors of to-day are not the debtors and creditors of
1819: the lapse of years has entirely altered the pecuniary relations of
the community; and it being impossible now to ascertain the particular
persons who were either benefited or injured, to attempt to retrace our
steps would not be redressing a wrong, but superadding a second act of
wide-spread injustice to the one already committed. This argument is
certainly conclusive on the practical question; but it places the honest
conclusion on too narrow and too low a ground. It concedes that the
measure of 1819, called Peel’s Bill; by which cash payments were resumed
at the original standard of 3l. 17s. 10½d., was really the injustice it
was said to be. This is an admission wholly opposed to the truth.
Parliament had no alternative; it was absolutely bound to adhere to the
acknowledged standard; as may be shown on three distinct grounds, two of
fact, and one of principle.

The reasons of fact are these. In the first place, it is not true that
the debts, private or public, incurred during the Bank restriction, were
contracted in a currency of lower value than that in which the interest
is now paid. It is indeed true that the suspension of the obligation to
pay in specie did put it in the power of the Bank to depreciate the
currency. It is true also that the Bank really exercised Edition:
current; Page: [554] that power, though to a far less extent than is
often pretended; since the difference between the market price of gold
and the Mint valuation, during the greater part of the interval, was
very trifling, and when it was greatest, during the last five years of
the war, did not much exceed thirty per cent. To the extent of that
difference, the currency was depreciated, that is, its value was below
that of the standard to which it professed to adhere. But the state of
Europe at that time was such—there was so unusual an absorption of the
precious metals, by hoarding, and in the military chests of the vast
armies which then desolated the Continent, that the value of the
standard itself was very considerably raised: and the best authorities,
among whom it is sufficient to name Mr. Tooke, have, after an elaborate
investigation, satisfied themselves that the difference between paper
and bullion was not greater than the enhancement in value of gold
itself, and that the paper, though depreciated relatively to the then
value of gold, did not sink below the ordinary value, at other times,
either of gold or of a convertible paper. If this be true (and the
evidences of the fact are conclusively stated in Mr. Tooke’s History of
Prices) the foundation of the whole case against the fundholder and
other creditors on the ground of depreciation is subverted.

But, secondly, even if the currency had really been lowered in value at
each period of the Bank restriction, in the same degree in which it was
depreciated in relation to its standard, we must remember that a part
only of the national debt, or of other permanent engagements, was
incurred during the Bank restriction. A large part had been contracted
before 1797; a still larger during the early years of the restriction,
when the difference between paper and gold was yet small. To the holders
of the former part, an injury was done, by paying the interest for
twenty-two years in a depreciated currency: those of the second,
suffered an injury during the years in which the interest was paid in a
currency more depreciated than that in which the loans were contracted.
To have resumed cash payments at a lower standard would have been to
perpetuate the injury to these two classes of creditors, in order to
avoid giving an undue benefit to a third class, who had lent their money
during the few years of greatest depreciation. As it is, there was an
underpayment to one set of persons, and an overpayment to another. The
late Mr. Mushet took the trouble to make an arithmetical comparison
between the two amounts. He ascertained, by calculation, that if an
account had been made out in 1819, of what the fundholders had Edition:
current; Page: [555] gained and lost by the variation of the paper
currency from its standard, they would have been found as a body to have
been losers; so that if any compensation was due on the ground of
depreciation, it would not be from the fundholders collectively, but to
them.

Thus it is with the facts of the case. But these reasons of fact are not
the strongest. There is a reason of principle, still more powerful.
Suppose that, not a part of the debt merely, but the whole, had been
contracted in a depreciated currency, depreciated not only in comparison
with its standard, but with its own value before and after; and that we
were now paying the interest of this debt in a currency fifty or even a
hundred per cent more valuable than that in which it was contracted.
What difference would this make in the obligation of paying it, if the
condition that it should be so paid was part of the original compact?
Now this is not only truth, but less than the truth. The compact
stipulated better terms for the fundholder than he has received. During
the whole continuance of the Bank restriction, there was a parliamentary
pledge, by which the legislature was as much bound as any legislature is
capable of binding itself, that cash payments should be resumed on the
original footing, at farthest in six months after the conclusion of a
general peace. This was therefore an actual condition of every loan; and
the terms of the loan were more favourable in consideration of it.
Without some such stipulation, the Government could not have expected to
borrow, unless on the terms on which loans are made to the native
princes of India. If it had been understood and avowed that, after
borrowing the money, the standard at which it was commuted might be
permanently lowered, to any extent which to the “collective wisdom” of a
legislature of borrowers might seem fit—who can say what rate of
interest would have been a sufficient inducement to persons of common
sense to risk their savings in such an adventure? However much the
fundholders had gained by the resumption of cash payments, the terms of
the contract insured their giving ample value for it. They gave value
for more than they received; since cash payments were not resumed in six
months, but in as many years, after the peace. So that waving all our
arguments except the last, and conceding all the facts asserted on the
other side of the question, the fundholders, instead of being unduly
benefited, are the injured party; and would have a claim to
compensation, if such claims were not very properly barred by the
impossibility of adjudication, and by the salutary general maxim of law
and policy, “quod interest reipublicae ut sit finis litium.”

Edition: current; Page: [556]


CHAPTER XIV: of excess of supply

§ 1. After the elementary exposition of the theory of money contained in
the last few chapters, we shall return to a question in the general
theory of Value, which could not be satisfactorily discussed until the
nature and operations of Money were in some measure understood, because
the errors against which we have to contend mainly originate in a
misunderstanding of those operations.

We have seen that the value of everything gravitates towards a certain
medium point (which has been called the Natural Value), namely, that at
which it exchanges for every other thing in the ratio of their cost of
production. We have seen, too, that the actual or market value
coincides, or nearly so, with the natural value only on an average of
years; and is continually either rising above, or falling below it, from
alterations in the demand, or casual fluctuations in the supply: but
that these variations correct themselves, through the tendency of the
supply to accommodate itself to the demand which exists for the
commodity at its natural value. A general convergence thus results from
the balance of opposite divergences. Dearth, or scarcity, on the one
hand, and over-supply, or in mercantile language, glut, on the other,
are incident to all commodities. In the first case, the commodity
affords to the producers or sellers, while the deficiency lasts, an
unusually high rate of profit: in the second, the supply being in excess
of that for which a demand exists at such a value as will afford the
ordinary profit, the sellers must be content with less, and must, in
extreme cases, submit to a loss.

Because this phenomenon of over-supply, and consequent inconvenience or
loss to the producer or dealer, may exist in the case of any one
commodity whatever, many persons, including some distinguished political
economists, have thought that it may exist with regard to all
commodities; that there may be a general over-production of wealth; a
supply of commodities in the aggregate, Edition: current; Page: [557]
surpassing the demand; and a consequent depressed condition of all
classes of producers. Against this doctrine, of which Mr. Malthus and
Dr. Chalmers in this country, and M. de Sismondi on the Continent, were
the chief apostles, I have already contended in the First Book;∗ but it
was not possible, in that stage of our inquiry, to enter into a complete
examination of an error (as I conceive) essentially grounded on a
misunderstanding of the phenomena of Value and Price.

The doctrine appears to me to involve so much inconsistency in its very
conception, that I feel considerable difficulty in giving any statement
of it which shall be at once clear, and satisfactory to its supporters.
They agree in maintaining that there may be, and sometimes is, an excess
of productions in general beyond the demand for them; that when this
happens, purchasers cannot be found at prices which will repay the cost
of production with a profit; that there ensues a general depression of
prices or values (they are seldom accurate in discriminating between the
two), so that producers, the more they produce, find themselves the
poorer, instead of richer; and Dr. Chalmers accordingly inculcates on
capitalists the practice of a moral restraint in reference to the
pursuit of gain; while Sismondi deprecates machinery, and the various
inventions which increase productive power. They both maintain that
accumulation of capital may proceed too fast, not merely for the moral,
but for the material, interests of those who produce and accumulate; and
they enjoin the rich to guard against this evil by an ample unproductive
consumption.

§ 2. When these writers speak of the supply of commodities as outrunning
the demand, it is not clear which of the two elements of demand they
have in view—the desire to possess, or the means of purchase; whether
their meaning is that there are, in such cases, more consumable products
in existence than the public desires to consume, or merely more than it
is able to pay for. In this uncertainty, it is necessary to examine both
suppositions.

First, let us suppose that the quantity of commodities produced is not
greater than the community would be glad to consume: is it, in that
case, possible that there should be a deficiency of demand for all
commodities for want of the means of payment? Those who think so cannot
have considered what it is which constitutes the means of payment for
commodities. It is simply commodities. Edition: current; Page: [558]
Each person’s means of paying for the productions of other people
consists of those which he himself possesses. All sellers are inevitably
and ex vi termini buyers. Could we suddenly double the productive powers
of the country, we should double the supply of commodities in every
market; but we should, by the same stroke, double the purchasing power.
Everybody would bring a double demand as well as supply: everybody would
be able to buy twice as much, because every one would have twice as much
to offer in exchange. It is probable, indeed, that there would now be a
superfluity of certain things. Although the community would willingly
double its aggregate consumption, it may already have as much as it
desires of some commodities, and it may prefer to do more than double
its consumption of others, or to exercise its increased purchasing power
on some new thing. If so, the supply will adapt itself accordingly, and
the values of things will continue to conform to their cost of
production. At any rate, it is a sheer absurdity that all things should
fall in value, and that all producers should, in consequence, be
insufficiently remunerated. If values remain the same, what becomes of
prices is immaterial, since the remuneration of producers does not
depend on how much money, but on how much of consumable articles, they
obtain for their goods. Besides, money is a commodity; and if all
commodities are supposed to be doubled in quantity, we must suppose
money to be doubled too, and then prices would no more fall than values
would.

§ 3. A general over-supply, or excess of all commodities above the
demand, so far as demand consists in means of payment, is thus shown to
be an impossibility. But it may perhaps be supposed that it is not the
ability to purchase, but the desire to possess, that falls short, and
that the general produce of industry may be greater than the community
desires to consume—the part, at least, of the community which has an
equivalent to give. It is evident enough that produce makes a market for
produce, and that there is wealth in the country with which to purchase
all the wealth in the country; but those who have the means may not have
the wants, and those who have the wants may be without the means. A
portion, therefore, of the commodities produced may be unable to find a
market from the absence of means in those who have the desire to
consume, and the want of desire in those who have the means.

This is much the most plausible form of the doctrine, and does Edition:
current; Page: [559] not, like that which we first examined, involve a
contradiction. There may easily be a greater quantity of any particular
commodity than is desired by those who have the ability to purchase, and
it is abstractedly conceivable that this might be the case with all
commodities. The error is in not perceiving that though all who have an
equivalent to give might be fully provided with every consumable article
which they desire, the fact that they go on adding to the production
proves that this is not actually the case. Assume the most favourable
hypothesis for the purpose, that of a limited community, every member of
which possesses as much of necessaries and of all known luxuries as he
desires: and since it is not conceivable that persons whose wants were
completely satisfied would labour and economize to obtain what they did
not desire, suppose that a foreigner arrives and produces an additional
quantity of something of which there was already enough. Here, it will
be said, is over-production: true, I reply; over-production of that
particular article: the community wanted no more of that, but it wanted
something. The old inhabitants, indeed, wanted nothing; but did not the
foreigner himself want something? When he produced the superfluous
article, was he labouring without a motive? He has produced, but the
wrong thing instead of the right. He wanted, perhaps, food, and has
produced watches, with which everybody was sufficiently supplied. The
new comer brought with him into the country a demand for commodities,
equal to all that he could produce by his industry, and it was his
business to see that the supply he brought should be suitable to that
demand. If he could not produce something capable of exciting a new want
or desire in the community, for the satisfaction of which some one would
grow more food and give it to him in exchange, he had the alternative of
growing food for himself; either on fresh land, if there was any
unoccupied, or as a tenant, or partner, or servant, of some former
occupier, willing to be partially relieved from labour. He has produced
a thing not wanted, instead of what was wanted; and he himself, perhaps,
is not the kind of producer who is wanted; but there is no
over-production; production is not excessive, but merely ill assorted.
We saw before, that whoever brings additional commodities to the market,
brings an additional power of purchase; we now see that he brings also
an additional desire to consume; since if he had not that desire, he
would not have troubled himself to produce. Neither of the elements of
demand, therefore, can be wanting, when there is an additional supply;
though it is perfectly possible that the demand Edition: current; Page:
[560] may be for one thing, and the supply may unfortunately consist of
another.

Driven to his last retreat, an opponent may perhaps allege that there
are persons who produce and accumulate from mere habit; not because they
have any object in growing richer, or desire to add in any respect to
their consumption, but from vis inertiae. They continue producing
because the machine is ready mounted, and save and re-invest their
savings because they have nothing on which they care to expend them. I
grant that this is possible, and in some few instances probably happens;
but these do not in the smallest degree affect our conclusion. For, what
do these persons do with their savings? They invest them productively
that is, expend them in employing labour. In other words, having a
purchasing power belonging to them, more than they know what to do with,
they make over the surplus of it for the general benefit of the
labouring class. Now, will that class also not know what to do with it?
Are we to suppose that they too have their wants perfectly satisfied,
and go on labouring from mere habit? Until this is the case; until the
working classes have also reached the point of satiety—there will be no
want of demand for the produce of capital, however rapidly it may
accumulate; since, if there is nothing else for it to do, it can always
find employment in producing the necessaries or luxuries of the
labouring class. And when they too had no further desire for necessaries
or luxuries, they would take the benefit of any further increase of
wages by diminishing their work; so that the over-production which then
for the first time would be possible in idea, could not even then take
place in fact, for want of labourers. Thus, in whatever manner the
question is looked at, even though we go to the extreme verge of
possibility to invent a supposition favourable to it, the theory of
general over-production implies an absurdity.

§ 4. What then is it by which men who have reflected much on economical
phenomena, and have even contributed to throw new light upon them by
original speculations, have been led to embrace so irrational a
doctrine? I conceive them to have been deceived by a mistaken
interpretation of certain mercantile facts. They imagined that the
possibility of a general over-supply of commodities was proved by
experience. They believed that they saw this phenomenon in certain
conditions of the markets, the true explanation of which is totally
different.

Edition: current; Page: [561]
I have already described the state of the markets for commodities which
accompanies what is termed a commercial crisis. At such times there is
really an excess of all commodities above the money demand: in other
words, there is an under-supply of money. From the sudden annihilation
of a great mass of credit, every one dislikes to part with ready money,
and many are anxious to procure it at any sacrifice. Almost everybody
therefore is a seller, and there are scarcely any buyers; so that there
may really be, though only while the crisis lasts, an extreme depression
of general prices, from what may be indiscriminately called a glut of
commodities or a dearth of money. But it is a great error to suppose,
with Sismondi, that a commercial crisis is the effect of a general
excess of production. It is simply the consequence of an excess of
speculative purchases. It is not a gradual advent of low prices, but a
sudden recoil from prices extravagantly high: its immediate cause is a
contraction of credit, and the remedy is, not a diminution of supply,
but the restoration of confidence. It is also evident that this
temporary derangement of markets is an evil only because it is
temporary. The fall being solely of money prices, if prices did not rise
again no dealer would lose, since the smaller price would be worth as
much to him as the larger price was before. In no manner does this
phenomenon answer to the description which these celebrated economists
have given of the evil of over-production. The permanent decline in the
circumstances of producers, for want of markets, which those writers
contemplate, is a conception to which the nature of a commercial crisis
gives no support.

The other phenomenon from which the notion of a general excess of wealth
and superfluity of accumulation seems to derive countenance, is one of a
more permanent nature, namely, the fall of profits and interest which
naturally takes place with the progress of population and production.
The cause of this decline of profit is the increased cost of maintaining
labour, which results from an increase of population and of the demand
for food, outstripping the advance of agricultural improvement. This
important feature in the economical progress of nations will receive
full consideration and discussion in the succeeding Book.∗ It is
obviously a totally different thing from a want of market for
commodities, though often confounded with it in the complaints of the
producing and trading classes. The true interpretation of the modern or
present state of industrial economy is that there is hardly any amount
of business which may Edition: current; Page: [562] not be done, if
people will be content to do it on small profits; and this, all active
and intelligent persons in business perfectly well know: but even those
who comply with the necessities of their time, grumble at what they
comply with, and wish that there were less capital, or, as they express
it, less competition, in order that there might be greater profits. Low
profits, however, are a different thing from deficiency of demand; and
the production and accumulation which merely reduce profits, cannot be
called excess of supply or of production. What the phenomenon really is,
and its effects and necessary limits, will be seen when we treat of that
express subject.

I know not of any economical facts, except the two I have specified,
which can have given occasion to the opinion that a general
over-production of commodities ever presented itself in actual
experience. I am convinced that there is no fact in commercial affairs
which, in order to its explanation, stands in need of that chimerical
supposition.

The point is fundamental; any difference of opinion on it involves
radically different conceptions of Political Economy, especially in its
practical aspect. On the one view, we have only to consider how a
sufficient production may be combined with the best possible
distribution; but, on the other, there is a third thing to be
considered—how a market can be created for produce, or how production
can be limited to the capabilities of the market. Besides, a theory so
essentially self-contradictory cannot intrude itself without carrying
confusion into the very heart of the subject, and making it impossible
even to conceive with any distinctness many of the more complicated
economical workings of society. This error has been, I conceive, fatal
to the systems, as systems, of the three distinguished economists to
whom I before referred, Malthus, Chalmers, and Sismondi; all of whom
have admirably conceived and explained several of the elementary
theorems of political economy, but this fatal misconception has spread
itself like a veil between them and the more difficult portions of the
subject, not suffering one ray of light to penetrate. Still more is this
same confused idea constantly crossing and bewildering the speculations
of minds inferior to theirs. It is but justice to two eminent names to
call attention to the fact, that the merit of having placed this most
important point in its true light belongs principally, on the Continent,
to the judicious J. B. Say, and in this country to Mr. [James] Mill; who
(besides the conclusive exposition which he gave of the subject in his
Elements of Political Edition: current; Page: [563] Economy) had set
forth the correct doctrine with great force and clearness in an early
pamphlet, called forth by a temporary controversy, and entitled,
Commerce Defended; the first of his writings which attained any
celebrity, and which he prized more as having been his first
introduction to the friendship of David Ricardo, the most valued and
most intimate friendship of his life.

Edition: current; Page: [564]


CHAPTER XV: of a measure of value

§ 1. There has been much discussion among political economists
respecting a Measure of Value. An importance has been attached to the
subject greater than it deserved, and what has been written respecting
it has contributed not a little to the reproach of logomachy, which is
brought, with much exaggeration, but not altogether without ground,
against the speculations of political economists. It is necessary,
however, to touch upon the subject, if only to show how little there is
to be said on it.

A Measure of Value, in the ordinary sense of the word measure, would
mean something by comparison with which we may ascertain what is the
value of any other thing. When we consider farther, that value itself is
relative, and that two things are necessary to constitute it,
independently of the third thing which is to measure it; we may define a
Measure of Value to be something, by comparing with which any two other
things, we may infer their value in relation to one another.

In this sense, any commodity will serve as a measure of value at a given
time and place; since we can always infer the proportion in which things
exchange for one another, when we know the proportion in which each
exchanges for any third thing. To serve as a convenient measure of value
is one of the functions of the commodity selected as a medium of
exchange. It is in that commodity that the values of all other things
are habitually estimated. We say that one thing is worth 2l., another
3l.; and it is then known, without express statement, that one is worth
two-thirds of the other, or that the things exchange for one another in
the proportion of 2 to 3. Money is a complete measure of their value.

But the desideratum sought by political economists is not a measure of
the value of things at the same time and place, but a measure of the
value of the same thing at different times and places: Edition: current;
Page: [565] something by comparison with which it may be known whether
any given thing is of greater or less value now than a century ago, or
in this country than in America or China. And for this also, money, or
any other commodity, will serve quite as well as at the same time and
place, provided we can obtain the same data; provided we are able to
compare with the measure not one commodity only, but the two or more
which are necessary to the idea of value. If wheat is now [1852] 40s.
the quarter, and a fat sheep the same, and if in the time of Henry the
Second wheat was 20s., and a sheep 10s., we know that a quarter of wheat
was then worth two sheep, and is now only worth one, and that the value
therefore of a sheep, estimated in wheat, is twice as great as it was
then; quite independently of the value of money at the two periods,
either in relation to those two articles (in respect to both of which we
suppose it to have fallen), or to other commodities in respect to which
we need not make any supposition.

What seems to be desired, however, by writers on the subject, is some
means of ascertaining the value of a commodity by merely comparing it
with the measure, without referring it specially to any other given
commodity. They would wish to be able, from the mere fact that wheat is
now 40s. the quarter, and was formerly 20s., to decide whether wheat has
varied in its value, and in what degree, without selecting a second
commodity, such as a sheep, to compare it with; because they are
desirous of knowing, not how much wheat has varied in value relatively
to sheep, but how much it has varied relatively to things in general.

The first obstacle arises from the necessary indefiniteness of the idea
of general exchange value—value in relation not to some one commodity,
but to commodities at large. Even if we knew exactly how much a quarter
of wheat would have purchased, at the earlier period, of every
marketable article considered separately, and that it will now purchase
more of some things and less of others, we should often find it
impossible to say whether it had risen or fallen in relation to things
in general. How much more impossible, when we only know how it has
varied in relation to the measure. To enable the money price of a thing
at two different periods to measure the quantity of things in general
which it will exchange for, the same sum of money must correspond at
both periods to the same quantity of things in general, that is, money
must always have the same exchange value, the same general purchasing
power. Now, not only is this not true of money, or of any other
commodity, but we Edition: current; Page: [566] cannot even suppose any
state of circumstances in which it would be true.

§ 2. A measure of exchange value, therefore, being impossible, writers
have formed a notion of something, under the name of a measure of value,
which would be more properly termed a measure of cost of production.
They have imagined a commodity invariably produced by the same quantity
of labour; to which supposition it is necessary to add, that the fixed
capital employed in the production must bear always the same proportion
to the wages of the immediate labour, and must be always of the same
durability: in short, the same capital must be advanced for the same
length of time, so that the element of value which consists of profits,
as well as that which consists of wages, may be unchangeable. We should
then have a commodity always produced under one and the same combination
of all the circumstances which affect permanent value. Such a commodity
would be by no means constant in its exchange value; for (even without
reckoning the temporary fluctuations arising from supply and demand) its
exchange value would be altered by every change in the circumstances of
production of the things against which it was exchanged. But if there
existed such a commodity, we should derive this advantage from it, that
whenever any other thing varied permanently in relation to it, we should
know that the cause of variation was not in it, but in the other thing.
It would thus be suited to serve as a measure, not indeed of the value
of other things, but of their cost of production. If a commodity
acquired a greater permanent purchasing power in relation to the
invariable commodity, its cost of production must have become greater;
and in the contrary case, less. This measure of cost is what political
economists have generally meant by a measure of value.

But a measure of cost, though perfectly conceivable, can no more exist
in fact, than a measure of exchange value. There is no commodity which
is invariable in its cost of production. Gold and silver are the least
variable, but even these are liable to changes in their cost of
production, from the exhaustion of old sources of supply, the discovery
of new, and improvements in the mode of working. If we attempt to
ascertain the changes in the cost of production of any commodity from
the changes in its money price, the conclusion will require to be
corrected by the best allowance we can make for the intermediate changes
in the cost of the production of money itself.

Adam Smith fancied that there were two commodities peculiarly Edition:
current; Page: [567] fitted to serve as a measure of value: corn, and
labour. Of corn, he said that although its value fluctuates much from
year to year, it does not vary greatly from century to century. This we
now know to be an error: corn tends to rise in cost of production with
every increase of population, and to fall with every improvement in
agriculture, either in the country itself, or in any foreign country
from which it draws a portion of its supplies. The supposed constancy of
the cost of the production of corn depends on the maintenance of a
complete equipoise between these antagonizing forces, an equipoise
which, if ever realized, can only be accidental. With respect to labour
as a measure of value, the language of Adam Smith is not uniform. He
sometimes speaks of it as a good measure only for short periods, saying
that the value of labour (or wages) does not vary much from year to
year, though it does from generation to generation. On other occasions
he speaks as if labour were intrinsically the most proper measure of
value, on the ground that one day’s ordinary muscular exertion of one
man, may be looked upon as always, to him, the same amount of effort or
sacrifice. But this proposition, whether in itself admissible or not,
discards the idea of exchange value altogether, substituting a totally
different idea, more analogous to value in use. If a day’s labour will
purchase in America twice as much of ordinary consumable articles as in
England, it seems a vain subtlety to insist on saying that labour is of
the same value in both countries, and that it is the value of the other
things which is different. Labour, in this case, may be correctly said
to be twice as valuable, both in the market and to the labourer himself,
in America as in England.

If the object were to obtain an approximate measure by which to estimate
value in use, perhaps nothing better could be chosen than one day’s
subsistence of an average man, reckoned in the ordinary food consumed by
the class of unskilled labourers. If in any country a pound of maize
flour will support a labouring man for a day, a thing might be deemed
more or less valuable in proportion to the number of pounds of maize
flour it exchanged for. If one thing, either by itself or by what it
would purchase, could maintain a labouring man for a day, and another
could maintain him for a week, there would be some reason in saying that
the one was worth, for ordinary human uses, seven times as much as the
other. But this would not measure the worth of the thing to its
possessor for his own purposes, which might be greater to any amount,
though it could not be less, than the worth of the food which the thing
would purchase.

Edition: current; Page: [568]
The idea of a Measure of Value must not be confounded with the idea of
the regulator, or determining principle, of value. When it is said by
Ricardo and others, that the value of a thing is regulated by quantity
of labour, they do not mean the quantity of labour for which the thing
will exchange, but the quantity required for producing it. This, they
mean to affirm, determines its value; causes it to be of the value it
is, and of no other. But when Adam Smith and Malthus say that labour is
a measure of value, they do not mean the labour by which the thing was
or can be made, but the quantity of labour which it will exchange for,
or purchase; in other words, the value of the thing estimated in labour.
And they do not mean that this regulates the general exchange value of
the thing, or has any effect in determining what that value shall be,
but only ascertains what it is, and whether and how much it varies from
time to time and from place to place. To confound these two ideas would
be much the same thing as to overlook the distinction between the
thermometer and the fire.

Edition: current; Page: [569]


CHAPTER XVI: of some peculiar cases of value

§ 1. The general laws of value, in all the more important cases of the
interchange of commodities in the same country, have now been
investigated. We examined, first, the case of monopoly, in which the
value is determined by either a natural or an artificial limitation of
quantity, that is, by demand and supply; secondly, the case of free
competition, when the article can be produced in indefinite quantity at
the same cost; in which case the permanent value is determined by the
cost of production, and only the fluctuations by supply and demand;
thirdly, a mixed case, that of the articles which can be produced in
indefinite quantity, but not at the same cost; in which case the
permanent value is determined by the greatest cost which it is necessary
to incur in order to obtain the required supply. And lastly, we have
found that money itself is a commodity of the third class; that its
value, in a state of freedom, is governed by the same laws as the values
of other commodities of its class; and that prices, therefore, follow
the same laws as values.

From this it appears that demand and supply govern the fluctuations of
values and prices in all cases, and the permanent values and prices of
all things of which the supply is determined by any agency other than
that of free competition: but that, under the régime of competition,
things are, on the average, exchanged for each other at such values, and
sold at such prices, as afford equal expectation of advantage to all
classes of producers; which can only be when things exchange for one
another in the ratio of their cost of production.

It is now, however, necessary to take notice of certain cases, to which,
from their peculiar nature, this law of exchange value is inapplicable.

It sometimes happens that two different commodities have what Edition:
current; Page: [570] may be termed a joint cost of production. They are
both products of the same operation, or set of operations, and the
outlay is incurred for the sake of both together, not part for one and
part for the other. The same outlay would have to be incurred for either
of the two, if the other were not wanted or used at all. There are not a
few instances of commodities thus associated in their production: for
example, coke and coal-gas are both produced from the same material, and
by the same operation. In a more partial sense, mutton and wool are an
example: beef, hides, and tallow: calves and dairy produce: chickens and
eggs. Cost of production can have nothing to do with deciding the value
of the associated commodities relatively to each other. It only decides
their joint value. The gas and the coke together have to repay the
expenses of their production, with the ordinary profit. To do this, a
given quantity of gas, together with the coke which is the residuum of
its manufacture, must exchange for other things in the ratio of their
joint cost of production. But how much of the remuneration of the
producer shall be derived from the coke, and how much from the gas,
remains to be decided. Cost of production does not determine their
prices, but the sum of their prices. A principle is wanting to apportion
the expenses of production between the two.

Since cost of production here fails us, we must revert to a law of value
anterior to cost of production, and more fundamental, the law of demand
and supply. The law is, that the demand for a commodity varies with its
value, and that the value adjusts itself so that the demand shall be
equal to the supply. This supplies the principle of repartition which we
are in quest of.

Suppose that a certain quantity of gas is produced and sold at a certain
price, and that the residuum of coke is offered at a price which,
together with that of the gas, repays the expenses with the ordinary
rate of profit. Suppose, too, that at the price put upon the gas and
coke respectively, the whole of the gas finds an easy market, without
either surplus or deficiency, but that purchasers cannot be found for
all the coke corresponding to it. The coke will be offered at a lower
price in order to force a market. But this lower price, together with
the price of the gas, will not be remunerating: the manufacture, as a
whole, will not pay its expenses with the ordinary profit, and will not,
on these terms, continue to be carried on. The gas, therefore, must be
sold at a higher price, to make up for the deficiency on the coke. The
demand consequently contracting, the production will be somewhat
reduced; and prices will become Edition: current; Page: [571] stationary
when, by the joint effect of the rise of gas and the fall of coke, so
much less of the first is sold, and so much more of the second, that
there is now a market for all the coke which results from the existing
extent of the gas manufacture.

Or suppose the reverse case; that more coke is wanted at the present
prices, than can be supplied by the operations required by the existing
demand for gas. Coke, being now in deficiency, will rise in price. The
whole operation will yield more than the usual rate of profit, and
additional capital will be attracted to the manufacture. The unsatisfied
demand for coke will be supplied; but this cannot be done without
increasing the supply of gas too; and as the existing demand was fully
supplied already, an increased quantity can only find a market by
lowering the price. The result will be that the two together will yield
the return required by their joint cost of production, but that more of
this return than before will be furnished by the coke, and less by the
gas. Equilibrium will be attained when the demand for each article fits
so well with the demand for the other, that the quantity required of
each is exactly as much as is generated in producing the quantity
required of the other. If there is any surplus or deficiency on either
side; if there is a demand for coke, and not a demand for all the gas
produced along with it, or vice versâ; the values and prices of the two
things will so readjust themselves that both shall find a market.

When, therefore, two or more commodities have a joint cost of
production, their natural values relatively to each other are those
which will create a demand for each, in the ratio of the quantities in
which they are sent forth by the productive process. This theorem is not
in itself of any great importance: but the illustration it affords of
the law of demand, and of the mode in which, when cost of production
fails to be applicable, the other principle steps in to supply the
vacancy, is worthy of particular attention, as we shall find in the next
chapter but one that something very similar takes place in cases of much
greater moment.

§ 2. Another case of value which merits attention, is that of the
different kinds of agricultural produce. This is rather a more complex
question that the last, and requires that attention should be paid to a
greater number of influencing circumstances.

The case would present nothing peculiar, if different agricultural
products were either grown indiscriminately and with equal advantage on
the same soils, or wholly on different soils. The difficulty Edition:
current; Page: [572] arises from two things: first, that most soils are
fitter for one kind of produce than another, without being absolutely
unfit for any; and secondly, the rotation of crops.

For simplicity we will confine our supposition to two kinds of
agricultural produce; for instance, wheat and oats. If all soils were
equally adapted for wheat and for oats, both would be grown
indiscriminately on all soils, and their relative cost of production,
being the same everywhere, would govern their relative value. If the
same labour which grows three quarters of wheat on any given soil, would
always grow on that soil five quarters of oats, the three and the five
quarters would be of the same value. If, again, wheat and oats could not
be grown on the same soil at all, the value of each would be determined
by its peculiar cost of production on the least favourable of the soils
adapted for it which the existing demand required a recourse to. The
fact, however, is that both wheat and oats can be grown on almost any
soil which is capable of producing either: but some soils, such as the
stiff clays, are better adapted for wheat, while others (the light sandy
soils) are more suitable for oats. There might be some soils which would
yield, to the same quantity of labour, only four quarters of oats to
three of wheat; others perhaps less than three of wheat to five quarters
of oats. Among these diversities, what determines the relative value of
the two things?

It is evident that each grain will be cultivated in preference, on the
soils which are better adapted for it than for the other; and if the
demand is supplied from these alone, the values of the two grains will
have no reference to one another. But when the demand for both is such
as to require that each should be grown not only on the soils peculiarly
fitted for it, but on the medium soils which, without being specifically
adapted to either, are about equally suited for both, the cost of
production on those medium soils will determine the relative value of
the two grains; while the rent of the soils specifically adapted to
each, will be regulated by their productive power, considered with
reference to that one alone to which they are peculiarly applicable.
Thus far the question presents no difficulty, to any one to whom the
general principles of value are familiar.

It may happen, however, that the demand for one of the two, as for
example wheat, may so outstrip the demand for the other, as not only to
occupy the soils specially suited for wheat, but to engross entirely
those equally suitable to both, and even encroach upon those which are
better adapted to oats. To create an inducement for this Edition:
current; Page: [573] unequal apportionment of the cultivation, wheat
must be relatively dearer, and oats cheaper, than according to the cost
of their production on the medium land. Their relative value must be in
proportion to the cost on that quality of land, whatever it may be, on
which the comparative demand for the two grains requires that both of
them should be grown. If, from the state of the demand, the two
cultivations meet on land more favourable to one than to the other, that
one will be cheaper and the other dearer, in relation to each other and
to things in general, than if the proportional demand were as we at
first supposed.

Here, then, we obtain a fresh illustration, in a somewhat different
manner, of the operation of demand, not as an occasional disturber of
value, but as a permanent regulator of it, conjoined with, or
supplementary to, cost of production.

The case of rotation of crops does not require separate analysis, being
a case of joint cost of production, like that of gas and coke. If it
were the practice to grow white and green crops on all lands in
alternate years, the one being necessary as much for the sake of the
other as for its own sake; the farmer would derive his remuneration for
two years' expenses from one white and one green crop, and the prices of
the two would so adjust themselves as to create a demand which would
carry off an equal breadth of white and of green crops.

There would be little difficulty in finding other anomalous cases of
value, which it might be a useful exercise to resolve: but it is neither
desirable nor possible, in a work like the present, to enter more into
details than is necessary for the elucidation of principles. I now
therefore proceed to the only part of the general theory of exchange
which has not yet been touched upon, that of International Exchanges,
or, to speak more generally, exchanges between distant places.

Edition: current; Page: [574]


CHAPTER XVII.: on international trade

§ 1. The causes which occasion a commodity to be brought from a
distance, instead of being produced, as convenience would seem to
dictate, as near as possible to the market where it is to be sold for
consumption, are usually conceived in a rather superficial manner. Some
things it is physically impossible to produce, except in particular
circumstances of heat, soil, water, or atmosphere. But there are many
things which, though they could be produced at home without difficulty,
and in any quantity, are yet imported from a distance. The explanation
which would be popularly given of this would be, that it is cheaper to
import than to produce them: and this is the true reason. But this
reason itself requires that a reason be given for it. Of two things
produced in the same place, if one is cheaper than the other, the reason
is that it can be produced with less labour and capital, or, in a word,
at less cost. Is this also the reason as between things produced in
different places? Are things never imported but from places where they
can be produced with less labour (or less of the other element of cost,
time) than in the place to which they are brought? Does the law, that
permanent value is proportioned to cost of production, hold good between
commodities produced in distant places, as it does between those
produced in adjacent places?

We shall find that it does not. A thing may sometimes be sold cheapest,
by being produced in some other place than that at which it can be
produced with the smallest amount of labour and abstinence. England
might import corn from Poland and pay for it in cloth, even though
England had a decided advantage over Poland in the production of both
the one and the other. England might send cottons to Portugal in
exchange for wine, although Portugal might be able to produce cottons
with a less amount of labour and capital than England could.

Edition: current; Page: [575]
This could not happen between adjacent places. If the north bank of the
Thames possessed an advantage over the south bank in the production of
shoes, no shoes would be produced on the south side; the shoemakers
would remove themselves and their capitals to the north bank, or would
have established themselves there originally; for being competitors in
the same market with those on the north side, they could not compensate
themselves for their disadvantage at the expense of the consumer: the
mount of it would fall entirely on their profits; and they would not
long content themselves with a smaller profit, when, by simply crossing
a river, they could increase it. But between distant places, and
especially between different countries, profits may continue different;
because persons do not usually remove themselves or their capitals to a
distant place, without a very strong motive. If capital removed to
remote parts of the world as readily, and for as small an inducement, as
it moves to another quarter of the same town; if people would transport
their manufactories to America or China whenever they could save a small
percentage in their expenses by it; profits would be alike (or
equivalent) all over the world, and all things would be produced in the
places where the same labour and capital would produce them in greatest
quantity and of best quality. A tendency may, even now, be observed
towards such a state of things; capital is becoming more and more
cosmopolitan; there is so much greater similarity of manners and
institutions than formerly, and so much less alienation of feeling,
among the more civilized countries, that both population and capital now
move from one of those countries to another on much less temptation than
heretofore. But there are still extraordinary differences, both of wages
and of profits, between different parts of the world. It needs but a
small motive to transplant capital, or even persons, from Warwickshire
to Yorkshire; but a much greater to make them remove to India, the
colonies, or Ireland. To France, Germany, or Switzerland, capital moves
perhaps almost as readily as to the colonies; the difference of language
and government being scarcely so great a hindrance as climate and
distance. To countries still barbarous, or, like Russia or Turkey, only
beginning to be civilized, capital will not migrate, unless under the
inducement of a very great extra profit.

Between all distant places therefore in some degree, but especially
between different countries (whether under the same supreme government
or not,) there may exist great inequalities in the return to labour and
capital, without causing them to move from one place Edition: current;
Page: [576] to the other in such quantity as to level those
inequalities. The capital belonging to a country will, to a great
extent, remain in the country, even if there be no mode of employing it
in which it would not be more productive elsewhere. Yet even a country
thus circumstanced might, and probably would, carry on trade with other
countries. It would export articles of some sort, even to places which
could make them with less labour than itself; because those countries,
supposing them to have an advantage over it in all productions, would
have a greater advantage in some things than in others, and would find
it their interest to import the articles in which their advantage was
smallest, that they might employ more of their labour and capital on
those in which it was greatest.

§ 2. As I have said elsewhere∗ after Ricardo (the thinker who has done
most towards clearing up this subject)† “it is not a difference in the
absolute cost of production, which determines the interchange, but a
difference in the comparative cost. It may be to our advantage to
procure iron from Sweden in exchange for cottons, even although the
mines of England as well as her manufactories should be more productive
than those of Sweden; for if we have an advantage of one-half in
cottons, and only an advantage of a quarter in iron, and could sell our
cottons to Sweden at the price which Sweden must pay for them if she
produced them herself, we should obtain our iron with an advantage of
one-half as well as our cottons. We may often, by trading with
foreigners, obtain their commodities at a smaller expense of labour and
capital than they cost to the foreigners themselves. The bargain is
still advantageous to the foreigner, because the commodity which he
receives in exchange, though it has cost us less, would have cost him
more.”

To illustrate the cases in which interchange of commodities will not,
and those in which it will, take place between two countries, Mr.
[James] Mill, in his Elements of Political Economy,‡ makes the
supposition that Poland has an advantage over England in the production
both of cloth and of corn. He first supposed the advantage Edition:
current; Page: [577] to be of equal amount in both commodities; the
cloth and the corn, each of which required 100 days' labour in Poland,
requiring each 150 days' labour in England. “It would follow, that the
cloth of 150 days' labour in England, if sent to Poland, would be equal
to the cloth of 100 days' labour in Poland; if exchanged for corn,
therefore, it would exchange for the corn of only 100 days' labour. But
the corn of 100 days' labour in Poland was supposed to be the same
quantity with that of 150 days' labour in England. With 150 days' labour
in cloth, therefore, England would only get as much corn in Poland, as
she could raise with 150 days' labour at home; and she would, in
importing it, have the cost of carriage besides. In these circumstances
no exchange would take place.” In this case the comparative cost of the
two articles in England and in Poland were supposed to be the same,
though the absolute costs were different; on which supposition we see
that there would be no labour saved to either country by confining its
industry to one of the two productions and importing the other.

It is otherwise when the comparative, and not merely the absolute costs
of the two articles are different in the two countries. “If,” continues
the same author, “while the cloth produced with 100 days' labour in
Poland was produced with 150 days' labour in England, the corn which was
produced in Poland with 100 days' labour could not be produced in
England with less than 200 days' labour; an adequate motive to exchange
would immediately arise. With a quantity of cloth which England produced
with 150 days' labour, she would be able to purchase as much corn in
Poland as was there produced with 100 days' labour; but the quantity
which was there produced with 100 days' labour, would be as great as the
quantity produced in England with 200 days' labour.” By importing corn,
therefore, from Poland, and paying for it with cloth, England would
obtain for 150 days' labour what would otherwise cost her 200; being a
saving of 50 days' labour on each repetition of the transaction: and not
merely a saving to England, but a saving absolutely; for it is not
obtained at the expense of Poland, who, with corn that costs her 100
days' labour, has purchased cloth which, if produced at home, would have
cost her the same. Poland, therefore, on this supposition, loses
nothing; but also she derives no advantage from the trade, the imported
cloth costing her as much as if it were made at home. To enable Poland
to gain anything by the interchange, something must be abated from the
gain of England: the corn produced in Poland by 100 days' labour must be
able to purchase from Edition: current; Page: [578] England more cloth
than Poland could produce by that amount of labour; more therefore than
England could produce by 150 days' labour, England thus obtaining the
corn which would have cost her 200 days, at a cost exceeding 150, though
short of 200. England therefore no longer gains the whole of the labour
which is saved to the two jointly by trading with one another.

§ 3. From this exposition we perceive in what consists the benefit of
international exchange, or in other words, foreign commerce. Setting
aside its enabling countries to obtain commodities which they could not
themselves produce at all; its advantage consists in a more efficient
employment of the productive forces of the world. If two countries which
trade together attempted, as far as was physically possible, to produce
for themselves what they now import from one another, the labour and
capital of the two countries would not be so productive, the two
together would not obtain from their industry so great a quantity of
commodities, as when each employs itself in producing, both for itself
and for the other, the things in which its labour is relatively most
efficient. The addition thus made to the produce of the two combined,
constitutes the advantage of the trade. It is possible that one of the
two countries may be altogether inferior to the other in productive
capacities, and that its labour and capital could be employed to
greatest advantage by being removed bodily to the other. The labour and
capital which have been sunk in rendering Holland habitable, would have
produced a much greater return if transported to America or Ireland. The
produce of the whole world would be greater, or the labour less, than it
is, if everything were produced where there is the greatest absolute
facility for its production. But nations do not, at least in modern
times, emigrate en masse; and while the labour and capital of a country
remain in the country, they are most beneficially employed in producing,
for foreign markets as well as for its own, the things in which it lies
under the least disadvantage, if there be none in which it possesses an
advantage.

§ 4. Before proceeding further, let us contrast this view of the
benefits of international commerce with other theories which have
prevailed, and which to a certain extent still prevail, on the same
subject.

According to the doctrine now stated, the only direct advantage of
foreign commerce consists in the imports. A country obtains Edition:
current; Page: [579] things which it either could not have produced at
all, or which it must have produced at a greater expense of capital and
labour than the cost of the things which it exports to pay for them. It
thus obtains a more ample supply of the commodities it wants, for the
same labour and capital; or the same supply, for less labour and
capital, leaving the surplus disposable to produce other things. The
vulgar theory disregards this benefit, and deems the advantage of
commerce to reside in the exports: as if not what a country obtains, but
what it parts with, by its foreign trade, was supposed to constitute the
gain to it. An extended market for its produce—an abundant consumption
for its goods—a vent for its surplus—are the phrases by which it has
been customary to designate the uses and recommendations of commerce
with foreign countries. This notion is intelligible, when we consider
that the authors and leaders of opinion on mercantile questions have
always hitherto been the selling class. It is in truth a surviving relic
of the Mercantile Theory, according to which, money being the only
wealth, selling, or, in other words, exchanging goods for money, was (to
countries without mines of their own) the only way of growing rich—and
importation of goods, that is to say, parting with money, was so much
subtracted from the benefit.

The notion that money alone is wealth, has been long defunct, but it has
left many of its progeny behind it; and even its destroyer, Adam Smith,
retained some opinions which it is impossible to trace to any other
origin. Adam Smith’s theory of the benefit of foreign trade, was that it
afforded an outlet for the surplus produce of a country, and enabled a
portion of the capital of the country to replace itself with a profit.
These expressions suggest ideas inconsistent with a clear conception of
the phenomena. The expression, surplus produce, seems to imply that a
country is under some kind of necessity of producing the corn or cloth
which it exports; so that the portion which it does not itself consume,
if not wanted and consumed elsewhere, would either be produced in sheer
waste, or, if it were not produced, the corresponding portion of capital
would remain idle, and the mass of productions in the country would be
diminished by so much. Either of these suppositions would be entirely
erroneous. The country produces an exportable article in excess of its
own wants from no inherent necessity, but as the cheapest mode of
supplying itself with other things. If prevented from exporting this
surplus, it would cease to produce it, and would no longer import
anything, being unable to give an equivalent; but the labour and capital
which had been employed in producing with a view to Edition: current;
Page: [580] exportation, would find employment in producing those
desirable objects which were previously brought from abroad: or, if some
of them could not be produced, in producing substitutes for them. These
articles would of course be produced at a greater cost than that of the
things with which they had previously been purchased from foreign
countries. But the value and price of the articles would rise in
proportion; and the capital would just as much be replaced, with the
ordinary profit from the returns, as it was when employed in producing
for the foreign market. The only losers (after the temporary
inconvenience of the change) would be the consumers of the heretofore
imported articles; who would be obliged either to do without them,
consuming in lieu of them something which they did not like as well, or
to pay a higher price for them than before.

There is much misconception in the common notion of what commerce does
for a country. When commerce is spoken of as a source of national
wealth, the imagination fixes itself upon the large fortunes acquired by
merchants, rather than upon the saving of price to consumers. But the
gains of merchants, when they enjoy no exclusive privilege, are no
greater than the profits obtained by the employment of capital in the
country itself. If it be said that the capital now employed in foreign
trade could not find employment in supplying the home market, I might
reply, that this is the fallacy of general over-production, discussed in
a former chapter: but the thing is in this particular case too evident
to require an appeal to any general theory. We not only see that the
capital of the merchant would find employment, but we see what
employment. There would be employment created, equal to that which would
be taken away. Exportation ceasing, importation to an equal value would
cease also, and all that part of the income of the country which had
been expended in imported commodities, would be ready to expend itself
on the same things produced at home, or on others instead of them.
Commerce is virtually a mode of cheapening production; and in all such
cases the consumer is the person ultimately benefited; the dealer, in
the end, is sure to get his profit, whether the buyer obtains much or
little for his money. This is said without prejudice to the effect
(already touched upon, and to be hereafter fully discussed) which the
cheapening of commodities may have in raising profits; in the case when
the commodity cheapened, being one of those consumed by labourers,
enters into the cost of labour, by which the rate of profits is
determined.

Edition: current; Page: [581]
§ 5. Such, then, is the direct economical advantage of foreign trade.
But there are, besides, indirect effects, which must be counted as
benefits of a high order. One is, the tendency of every extension of the
market to improve the processes of production. A country which produces
for a larger market than its own, can introduce a more extended division
of labour, can make greater use of machinery, and is more likely to make
inventions and improvements in the processes of production. Whatever
causes a greater quantity of anything to be produced in the same place,
tends to the general increase of the productive powers of the world.∗
There is another consideration, principally applicable to an early stage
of industrial advancement. A people may be in a quiescent, indolent,
uncultivated state, with all their tastes either fully satisfied or
entirely undeveloped, and they may fail to put forth the whole of their
productive energies for want of any sufficient object of desire. The
opening of a foreign trade, by making them acquainted with new objects,
or tempting them by the easier acquisition of things which they had not
previously thought attainable, sometimes works a sort of industrial
revolution in a country whose resources were previously undeveloped for
want of energy and ambition in the people: inducing those who were
satisfied with scanty comforts and little work, to work harder for the
gratification of their new tastes, and even to save, and accumulate
capital, for the still more complete satisfaction of those tastes at a
future time.

But the economical advantages of commerce are surpassed in importance by
those of its effects which are intellectual and moral. It is hardly
possible to overrate the value, in the present low state of human
improvement, of placing human beings in contact with persons dissimilar
to themselves, and with modes of thought and action unlike those with
which they are familiar. Commerce is now what war once was, the
principal source of this contact. Commercial adventurers from more
advanced countries have generally been the first civilizers of
barbarians. And commerce is the purpose of the far greater part of the
communication which takes place between civilized nations. Such
communication has always been, and is peculiarly in the present age, one
of the primary sources of progress. To human beings, who, as hitherto
educated, can scarcely cultivate even a good quality without running it
into a fault, it is indispensable to be perpetually comparing their own
notions and Edition: current; Page: [582] customs with the experience
and example of persons in different circumstances from themselves: and
there is no nation which does not need to borrow from others, not merely
particular arts or practices, but essential points of character in which
its own type is inferior. Finally, commerce first taught nations to see
with good will the wealth and prosperity of one another. Before, the
patriot, unless sufficiently advanced in culture to feel the world his
country, wished all countries weak, poor, and ill-governed, but his own:
he now sees in their wealth and progress a direct source of wealth and
progress to his own country. It is commerce which is rapidly rendering
war obsolete, by strengthening and multiplying the personal interests
which are in natural opposition to it. And it may be said without
exaggeration that the great extent and rapid increase of international
trade, in being the principal guarantee of the peace of the world, is
the great permanent security for the uninterrupted progress of the
ideas, the institutions, and the character of the human race.

Edition: current; Page: [583]


CHAPTER XVIII: of international values

§ 1. The values of commodities produced at the same place, or in places
sufficiently adjacent for capital to move freely between them—let us
say, for simplicity, of commodities produced in the same country—depend
(temporary fluctuations apart) upon their cost of production. But the
value of a commodity brought from a distant place, especially from a
foreign country, does not depend on its cost of production in the place
from whence it comes. On what, then, does it depend? The value of a
thing in any place depends on the cost of its acquisition in that place;
which, in the case of an imported article, means the cost of production
of the thing which is exported to pay for it.

Since all trade is in reality barter, money being a mere instrument for
exchanging things against one another, we will, for simplicity, begin by
supposing the international trade to be in form, what it always is in
reality, an actual trucking of one commodity against another. As far as
we have hitherto proceeded, we have found all the laws of interchange to
be essentially the same, whether money is used or not; money never
governing, but always obeying, those general laws.

If, then, England imports wine from Spain, giving for every pipe of wine
a bale of cloth, the exchange value of a pipe of wine in England will
not depend upon what the production of the wine may have cost in Spain,
but upon what the production of the cloth has cost in England. Though
the wine may have cost in Spain the equivalent of only ten days' labour,
yet, if the cloth costs in England twenty days' labour, the wine, when
brought to England, will exchange for the produce of twenty days'
English labour, plus the cost of carriage; including the usual profit on
the importer’s capital, during the time it is locked up, and withheld
from other employment.

Edition: current; Page: [584]
The value, then, in any country, of a foreign commodity, depends on the
quantity of home produce which must be given to the foreign country in
exchange for it. In other words, the values of foreign commodities
depend on the terms of international exchange. What, then, do these
depend upon? What is it which, in the case supposed, causes a pipe of
wine from Spain to be exchanged with England for exactly that quantity
of cloth? We have seen that it is not their cost of production. If the
cloth and the wine were both made in Spain, they would exchange at their
cost of production in Spain; if they were both made in England, they
would exchange at their cost of production in England: but all the cloth
being made in England, and all the wine in Spain, they are in
circumstances to which we have already determined that the law of cost
of production is not applicable. We must accordingly, as we have done
before in a similar embarrassment, fall back upon an antecedent law,
that of supply and demand: and in this we shall again find the solution
of our difficulty.

I have discussed this question in a separate Essay, already once
referred to; and a quotation of part of the exposition then given will
be the best introduction to my present view of the subject. I must give
notice that we are now in the region of the most complicated questions
which political economy affords; that the subject is one which cannot
possibly be made elementary; and that a more continuous effort of
attention than has yet been required will be necessary to follow the
series of deductions. The thread, however, which we are about to take in
hand, is in itself very simple and manageable; the only difficulty is in
following it through the windings and entanglements of complex
international transactions.

§ 2. “When the trade is established between the two countries, the two
commodities will exchange for each other at the same rate of interchange
in both countries—bating the cost of carriage, of which, for the
present, it will be more convenient to omit the consideration.
Supposing, therefore, for the sake of argument, that the carriage of the
commodities from one country to the other could be effected without
labour and without cost, no sooner would the trade be opened than the
value of the two commodities, estimated in each other, would come to a
level in both countries.

“Suppose that 10 yards of broadcloth cost in England as much labour as
15 yards of linen, and in Germany as much as 20.” In common with most of
my predecessors, I find it advisable, in Edition: current; Page: [585]
these intricate investigations, to give distinctness and fixity to the
conception by numerical examples. These examples must sometimes, as in
the present case, be purely supposititious. I should have preferred real
ones; but all that is essential is, that the numbers should be such as
admit of being easily followed through the subsequent combinations into
which they enter.

This supposition then being made, it would be the interest of England to
import linen from Germany, and of Germany to import cloth from England.
“When each country produced both commodities for itself, 10 yards of
cloth exchanged for 15 yards of linen in England, and for 20 in Germany.
They will now exchange for the same number of yards of linen in both.
For what number? If for 15 yards, England will be just as she was, and
Germany will gain all. If for 20 yards, Germany will be as before, and
England will derive the whole of the benefit. If for any number
intermediate between 15 and 20, the advantage will be shared between the
two countries. If, for example, 10 yards of cloth exchange for 18 of
linen, England will gain an advantage of 3 yards on every 15, Germany
will save 2 out of every 20. The problem is, what are the causes which
determine the proportion in which the cloth of England and the linen of
Germany will exchange for each other.

“As exchange value, in this case as in every other, is proverbially
fluctuating, it does not matter what we suppose it to be when we begin:
we shall soon see whether there be any fixed point about which it
oscillates, which it has a tendency always to approach to, and to remain
at. Let us suppose, then, that by the effect of what Adam Smith calls
the higgling of the market, 10 yards of cloth in both countries exchange
for 17 yards of linen.

“The demand for a commodity, that is, the quantity of it which can find
a purchaser, varies, as we have before remarked, according to the price.
In Germany the price of 10 yards of cloth is now 17 yards of linen, or
whatever quantity of money is equivalent in Germany to 17 yards of
linen. Now, that being the price, there is some particular number of
yards of cloth, which will be in demand, or will find purchasers, at
that price. There is some given quantity of cloth, more than which could
not be disposed of at that price; less than which, at that price, would
not fully satisfy the demand. Let us suppose this quantity to be 1000
times 10 yards.

“Let us now turn our attention to England. There, the price Edition:
current; Page: [586] of 17 yards of linen is 10 yards of cloth, or
whatever quantity of money is equivalent in England to 10 yards of
cloth. There is some particular number of yards of linen which, at that
price, will exactly satisfy the demand, and no more. Let us suppose that
this number is 1000 times 17 yards.

“As 17 yards of linen are to 10 yards of cloth, so are 1000 times 17
yards to 1000 times 10 yards. At the existing exchange value, the linen
which England requires will exactly pay for the quantity of cloth which,
on the same terms of interchange, Germany requires. The demand on each
side is precisely sufficient to carry off the supply on the other. The
conditions required by the principle of demand and supply are fulfilled,
and the two commodities will continue to be interchanged, as we supposed
them to be, in the ratio of 17 yards of linen for 10 yards of cloth.

“But our suppositions might have been different. Suppose that, at the
assumed rate of interchange, England has been disposed to consume no
greater quantity of linen than 800 times 17 yards: it is evident that,
at the rate supposed, this would not have sufficed to pay for the 1000
times 10 yards of cloth which we have supposed Germany to require at the
assumed value. Germany would be able to procure no more than 800 times
10 yards at that price. To procure the remaining 200, which she would
have no means of doing but by bidding higher for them, she would offer
more than 17 yards of linen in exchange for 10 yards of cloth: let us
suppose her to offer 18. At this price, perhaps, England would be
inclined to purchase a greater quantity of linen. She would consume,
possibly, at that price, 900 times 18 yards. On the other hand, cloth
having risen in price, the demand of Germany for it would probably have
diminished. If, instead of 1000 times 10 yards, she is now contented
with 900 times 10 yards, these will exactly pay for the 900 times 18
yards of linen which England is willing to take at the altered price:
the demand on each side will again exactly suffice to take off the
corresponding supply; and 10 yards for 18 will be the rate at which, in
both countries, cloth will exchange for linen.

“The converse of all this would have happened, if, instead of 800 times
17 yards, we had supposed that England, at the rate of 10 for 17, would
have taken 1200 times 17 yards of linen. In this case, it is England
whose demand is not fully supplied; it is England who, by bidding for
more linen, will alter the rate of interchange to her own disadvantage;
and 10 yards Edition: current; Page: [587] of cloth will fall, in both
countries, below the value of 17 yards of linen. By this fall of cloth,
or, what is the same thing, this rise of linen, the demand of Germany
for cloth will increase, and the demand of England for linen will
diminish, till the rate of interchange has so adjusted itself that the
cloth and the linen will exactly pay for one another; and when once this
point is attained, values will remain without further alteration.

“It may be considered, therefore, as established, that when two
countries trade together in two commodities, the exchange value of these
commodities relatively to each other will adjust itself to the
inclinations and circumstances of the consumers on both sides, in such
manner that the quantities required by each country, of the articles
which it imports from its neighbour, shall be exactly sufficient to pay
for one another. As the inclinations and circumstances of consumers
cannot be reduced to any rule, so neither can the proportions in which
the two commodities will be interchanged. We know that the limits within
which the variation is confined, are the ratio between their costs of
production in the one country, and the ratio between their costs of
production in the other. Ten yards of cloth cannot exchange for more
than 20 yards of linen, nor for less than 15. But they may exchange for
any intermediate number. The ratios, therefore, in which the advantage
of the trade may be divided between the two nations are various. The
circumstances on which the proportionate share of each country more
remotely depends, admit only of a very general indication.

“It is even possible to conceive an extreme case, in which the whole of
the advantage resulting from the interchange would be reaped by one
party, the other country gaining nothing at all. There is no absurdity
in the hypothesis that, of some given commodity, a certain quantity is
all that is wanted at any price; and that, when that quantity is
obtained, no fall in the exchange value would induce other consumers to
come forward, or those who are already supplied to take more. Let us
suppose that this is the case in Germany with cloth. Before her trade
with England commenced, when 10 yards of cloth cost her as much labour
as 20 yards of linen, she nevertheless consumed as much cloth as she
wanted under any circumstances, and, if she could obtain it at the rate
of 10 yards of cloth for 15 of linen, she would not consume more. Let
this fixed quantity be 1000 times 10 yards. At the rate, however, of 10
for 20, England would want more linen than Edition: current; Page: [588]
would be equivalent to this quantity of cloth. She would, consequently,
offer a higher value for linen; or, what is the same thing, she would
offer her cloth at a cheaper rate. But, as by no lowering of the value
could she prevail on Germany to take a greater quantity of cloth, there
would be no limit to the rise of linen or fall of cloth, until the
demand of England for linen was reduced by the rise of its value, to the
quantity which 1000 times 10 yards of cloth would purchase. It might be,
that to produce this diminution of the demand a less fall would not
suffice than that which would make 10 yards of cloth exchange for 15 of
linen. Germany would then gain the whole of the advantage, and England
would be exactly as she was before the trade commenced. It would be for
the interest, however, of Germany herself to keep her linen a little
below the value at which it could be produced in England, in order to
keep herself from being supplanted by the home producer. England,
therefore, would always benefit in some degree by the existence of the
trade, though it might be a very trifling one.”

In this statement, I conceive, is contained the first elementary
principle of International Values. I have, as is indispensable in such
abstract and hypothetical cases, supposed the circumstances to be much
less complex than they really are: in the first place, by suppressing
the cost of carriage; next, by supposing that there are only two
countries trading together; and lastly, that they trade only in two
commodities. To render the exposition of the principle complete it is
necessary to restore the various circumstances thus temporarily left out
to simplify the argument. Those who are accustomed to any kind of
scientific investigation will probably see, without formal proof, that
the introduction of these circumstances cannot alter the theory of the
subject. Trade among any number of countries, and in any number of
commodities, must take place on the same essential principles as trade
between two countries and in two commodities. Introducing a greater
number of agents precisely similar cannot change the law of their
action, no more than putting additional weights into the two scales of a
balance alters the law of gravitation. It alters nothing but the
numerical results. For more complete satisfaction, however, we will
enter into the complex cases with the same particularity with which we
have stated the simpler one.

§ 3. First, let us introduce the element of cost of carriage. The chief
difference will then be, that the cloth and the linen will Edition:
current; Page: [589] no longer exchange for each other at precisely the
same rate in both countries. Linen, having to be carried to England,
will be dearer there by its cost of carriage; and cloth will be dearer
in Germany by the cost of carrying it from England. Linen, estimated in
cloth, will be dearer in England than in Germany, by the cost of
carriage of both articles: and so will cloth in Germany, estimated in
linen. Suppose that the cost of carriage of each is equivalent to one
yard of linen; and suppose that, if they could have been carried without
cost, the terms of interchange would have been 10 yards of cloth for 17
of linen. It may seem at first that each country will pay its own cost
of carriage; that is, the carriage of the article it imports; that in
Germany 10 yards of cloth will exchange for 18 of linen, namely, the
original 17, and 1 to cover the cost of carriage of the cloth; while in
England, 10 yards of cloth will only purchase 16 of linen, 1 yard being
deducted for the cost of carriage of the linen. This, however, cannot be
affirmed with certainty; it will only be true, if the linen which the
English consumers would take at the price of 10 for 16, exactly pays for
the cloth which the German consumers would take at 10 for 18. The
values, whatever they are, must establish this equilibrium. No absolute
rule, therefore, can be laid down for the division of the cost, no more
than for the division of the advantage: and it does not follow that in
whatever ratio the one is divided, the other will be divided in the
same. It is impossible to say, if the cost of carriage could be
annihilated, whether the producing or the importing country would be
most benefited. This would depend on the play of international demand.

Cost of carriage has one effect more. But for it, every commodity would
(if trade be supposed free) be either regularly imported or regularly
exported. A country would make nothing for itself which it did not also
make for other countries. But in consequence of cost of carriage there
are many things, especially bulky articles, which every, or almost
every, country produces within itself. After exporting the things in
which it can employ itself most advantageously, and importing those in
which it is under the greatest disadvantage, there are many lying
between, of which the relative cost of production in that and in other
countries differs so little, that the cost of carriage would absorb more
than the whole saving in cost of production which would be obtained by
importing one and exporting another. This is the case with numerous
commodities of common consumption; including the coarser qualities
Edition: current; Page: [590] of many articles of food and manufacture,
of which the finer kinds are the subject of extensive international
traffic.

§ 4. Let us now introduce a greater number of commodities than the two
we have hitherto supposed. Let cloth and linen, however, be still the
articles of which the comparative cost of production in England and in
Germany differs the most; so that, if they were confined to two
commodities, these would be the two which it would be most their
interest to exchange. We will now again omit cost of carriage, which,
having been shown not to affect the essentials of the question, does but
embarrass unnecessarily the statement of it. Let us suppose, then, that
the demand of England for linen is either so much greater than that of
Germany for cloth, or so much more extensible by cheapness, that if
England had no commodity but cloth which Germany would take, the demand
of England would force up the terms of interchange to 10 yards of cloth
for only 16 of linen, so that England would gain only the difference
between 15 and 16, Germany the difference between 16 and 20. But let us
now suppose that England has also another commodity, say iron, which is
in demand in Germany, and that the quantity of iron which is of equal
value in England with 10 yards of cloth, (let us call this quantity a
hundredweight) will, if produced in Germany, cost as much labour as 18
yards of linen, so that if offered by England for 17 it will undersell
the German producer. In these circumstances, linen will not be forced up
to the rate of 16 yards for 10 of cloth, but will stop, suppose at 17;
for although, at that rate of interchange, Germany will not take enough
cloth to pay for all the linen required by England, she will take iron
for the reminder, and it is the same thing to England whether she gives
a hundredweight of iron or 10 yards of cloth, both being made at the
same cost. If we now superadd coals or cottons on the side of England,
and wine, or corn, or timber, on the side of Germany, it will make no
difference in the principle. The exports of each country must exactly
pay for the imports; meaning now the aggregate exports and imports, not
those of particular commodities taken singly. The produce of fifty days'
English labour, whether in cloth, coals, iron, or any other exports,
will exchange for the produce of forty, or fifty, or sixty days' German
labour, in linen, wine, corn, or timber, according to the international
demand. There is some proportion at which the demand of the two
countries for each other’s products will exactly correspond: so that the
things supplied by England to Germany Edition: current; Page: [591] will
be completely paid for, and no more, by those supplied by Germany to
England. This accordingly will be the ratio in which the produce of
English and the produce of German labour will exchange for one another.

If, therefore, it be asked what country draws to itself the greatest
share of the advantage of any trade it carries on, the answer is, the
country for whose productions there is in other countries the greatest
demand, and a demand the most susceptible of increase from additional
cheapness. In so far as the productions of any country possess this
property, the country obtains all foreign commodities at less cost. It
gets its imports cheaper, the greater the intensity of the demand in
foreign countries for its exports. It also gets its imports cheaper, the
less the extent and intensity of its own demand for them. The market is
cheapest to those whose demand is small. A country which desires few
foreign productions, and only a limited quantity of them, while its own
commodities are in great request in foreign countries, will obtain its
limited imports at extremely small cost, that is, in exchange for the
produce of a very small quantity of its labour and capital.

Lastly, having introduced more than the original two commodities into
the hypothesis, let us also introduce more than the original two
countries. After the demand of England for the linen of Germany has
raised the rate of interchange to 10 yards of cloth for 16 of linen,
suppose a trade opened between England and some other country which also
exports linen. And let us suppose that, if England had no trade but with
this third country, the play of international demand would enable her to
obtain from it, for 10 yards of cloth or its equivalent, 17 yards of
linen. She evidently would not go on buying linen from Germany at the
former rate: Germany would be undersold, and must consent to give 17
yards, like the other country. In this case, the circumstances of
production and of demand in the third country are supposed to be in
themselves more advantageous to England than the circumstances of
Germany; but this supposition is not necessary: we might suppose that if
the trade with Germany did not exist, England would be obliged to give
to the other country the same advantageous terms which she gives to
Germany; 10 yards of cloth for 16, or even less than 16, of linen. Even
so, the opening of the third country makes a great difference in favour
of England. There is now a double market for English export, while the
demand of England for linen is only what it was before. This necessarily
obtains for England more advantageous terms of interchange. The Edition:
current; Page: [592] two countries, requiring much more of her produce
than was required by either alone, must, in order to obtain it, force an
increased demand for their exports, by offering them at a lower value.

It deserves notice, that this effect in favour of England from the
opening of another market for her exports, will equally be produced even
though the country from which the demand comes should have nothing to
sell which England is willing to take. Suppose that the third country,
though requiring cloth or iron from England, produces no linen, nor any
other article which is in demand there. She however produces exportable
articles, or she would have no means of paying for imports: her exports,
though not suitable to the English consumer, can find a market
somewhere. As we are only supposing three countries, we must assume her
to find this market in Germany, and to pay for what she imports from
England by orders on her German customers. Germany, therefore, besides
having to pay for her own imports, now owes a debt to England on account
of the third country, and the means for both purposes must be derived
from her exportable produce. She must therefore tender that produce to
England on terms sufficiently favourable to force a demand equivalent to
this double debt. Everything will take place precisely as if the third
country had bought German produce with her own goods, and offered that
produce to England in exchange for hers. There is an increased demand
for English goods, for which German goods have to furnish the payment;
and this can only be done by forcing an increased demand for them in
England, that is, by lowering their value. Thus an increase of demand
for a country’s exports in any foreign country enables her to obtain
more cheaply even those imports which she procures from other quarters.
And conversely, an increase of her own demand for any foreign commodity
compels her, caeteris paribus, to pay dearer for all foreign
commodities.

The law which we have now illustrated, may be appropriately named, the
Equation of International Demand. It may be concisely stated as follows.
The produce of a country exchanges for the produce of other countries,
at such values as are required in order that the whole of her exports
may exactly pay for the whole of her imports. This law of International
Values is but an extension of the more general law of Value, which we
called the Equation of Supply and Demand.∗ We have seen that the value
of a commodity always so adjusts itself as to bring the demand to the
exact level of the supply. Edition: current; Page: [593] But all trade,
either between nations or individuals, is an interchange of commodities,
in which the things that they respectively have to sell constitute also
their means of purchase: the supply brought by the one constitutes his
demand for what is brought by the other. So that supply and demand are
but another expression for reciprocal demand: and to say that value will
adjust itself so as to equalize demand with supply, is in fact to say
that it will adjust itself so as to equalize the demand on one side with
the demand on the other.

§ 5. To trace the consequences of this law of International Values
through their wide ramifications, would occupy more space than can be
here devoted to such a purpose.1 But there is one of its applications
which I will notice, as being in itself not unimportant, as bearing on
the question which will occupy us in the next chapter, and especially as
conducing to the more full and clear understanding of the law itself.

We have seen that the value at which a country purchases a foreign
commodity does not conform to the cost of production in the country from
which the commodity comes. Suppose now a change in that cost of
production; an improvement, for example, in the process of manufacture.
Will the benefit of the improvement be fully participated in by other
countries? Will the commodity be sold as much cheaper to foreigners, as
it is produced cheaper at home? This question, and the considerations
which must be entered into in order to resolve it, are well adapted to
try the worth of the theory.

Let us first suppose, that the improvement is of a nature to create a
new branch of export: to make foreigners resort to the country for a
commodity which they had previously produced at home. On this
supposition, the foreign demand for the productions of the country is
increased; which necessarily alters the international values to its
advantage, and to the disadvantage of foreign countries, who, therefore,
though they participate in the benefit of the new product, must purchase
that benefit by paying for all the other Edition: current; Page: [594]
productions of the country at a dearer rate than before. How much
dearer, will depend on the degree necessary for re-establishing, under
these new conditions, the Equation of International Demand. These
consequences follow in a very obvious manner from the law of
international values, and I shall not occupy space in illustrating them,
but shall pass to the more frequent case, of an improvement which does
not create a new article of export, but lowers the cost of production of
something which the country already exported.

It being advantageous, in discussions of this complicated nature, to
employ definite numerical amounts, we shall return to our original
example. Ten yards of cloth, if produced in Germany, would require the
same amount of labour and capital as twenty yards of linen; but by the
play of international demand, they can be obtained from England for
seventeen. Suppose now, that by a mechanical improvement made in
Germany, and not capable of being transferred to England, the same
quantity of labour and capital which produced twenty yards of linen, is
enabled to produce thirty. Linen falls one-third in value in the German
market, as compared with other commodities produced in Germany. Will it
also fall one-third as compared with English cloth, thus giving to
England, in common with Germany, the full benefit of the improvement? Or
(ought we not rather to say), since the cost to England of obtaining
linen was not regulated by the cost to Germany of producing it, and
since England, accordingly, did not get the entire benefit even of the
twenty yards which Germany could have given for ten yards of cloth, but
only obtained seventeen—why should she now obtain more, merely because
this theoretical limit is removed ten degrees further off?

It is evident tha,t in the outset, the improvement will lower the value
of linen in Germany, in relation to all other commodities in the German
market, including, among the rest, even the imported commodity, cloth.
If 10 yards of cloth previously exchanged for 17 yards of linen, they
will now exchange for half as much more, or 25½ yards. But whether they
will continue to do so will depend on the effect which this increased
cheapness of linen produces on the international demand. The demand for
linen in England could scarcely fail to be increased. But it might be
increased either in proportion to the cheapness, or in a greater
proportion than the cheapness, or in a less proportion.

If the demand was increased in the same proportion with the cheapness,
England would take as many times 25½ yards of linen, as Edition:
current; Page: [595] the number of times 17 yards which she took
previously. She would expend in linen exactly as much of cloth, or of
the equivalents of cloth, as much in short of the collective income of
her people, as she did before. Germany, on her part, would probably
require, at that rate of interchange, the same quantity of cloth as
before, because it would in reality cost her exactly as much; 25½ yards
of linen being now of the same value in her market, as 17 yards were
before. In this case, therefore, 10 yards of cloth for 25½ of linen is
the rate of interchange which under these new conditions would restore
the equation of international demand; and England would obtain linen
one-third cheaper than before, being the same advantage as was obtained
by Germany.

It might happen, however, that this great cheapening of linen would
increase the demand for it in England in a greater ratio than the
increase of cheapness; and that if she before wanted 1000 times 17
yards, she would now require more than 1000 times 25½ yards to satisfy
her demand. If so, the equation of international demand cannot establish
itself at that rate of interchange; to pay for the linen England must
offer cloth on more advantageous terms; say, for example, 10 yards for
21 of linen; so that England will not have the full benefit of the
improvement in the production of linen, while Germany, in addition to
that benefit, will also pay less for cloth. But again, it is possible
that England might not desire to increase her consumption of linen in
even so great a proportion as that of the increased cheapness; she might
not desire so great a quantity as 1000 times 25½ yards: and in that case
Germany must force a demand by offering more than 25½ yards of linen for
10 of cloth; linen will be cheapened in England in a still greater
degree than in Germany; while Germany will obtain cloth on more
unfavourable terms; and at a higher exchange value than before.

After what has already been said, it is not necessary to particularize
the manner in which these results might be modified by introducing into
the hypothesis other countries and other commodities. There is a further
circumstance by which they may also be modified. In the case supposed
the consumers of Germany have had a part of their incomes set at liberty
by the increased cheapness of linen, which they may indeed expend in
increasing their consumption of that article, but which they may
likewise expend in other articles, and among others, in cloth or other
imported commodities. This would be an additional element in the
international demand, and would modify more or less the terms of
interchange.

Edition: current; Page: [596]
Of the three possible varieties in the influence of cheapness on demand,
which is the more probable—that the demand would be increased more than
the cheapness, as much as the cheapness, or less than the cheapness?
This depends on the nature of the particular commodity, and on the
tastes of purchasers. When the commodity is one in general request, and
the fall of its price brings it within reach of a much larger class of
incomes than before, the demand is often increased in a greater ratio
than the fall of price, and a larger sum of money is on the whole
expended in the article. Such was the case with coffee, when its price
was lowered by successive reductions of taxation; and such would
probably be the case with sugar, wine, and a large class of commodities
which, though not necessaries, are largely consumed, and in which many
consumers indulge when the articles are cheap and economize when they
are dear. But it more frequently happens that when a commodity falls in
price, less money is spent in it than before: a greater quantity is
consumed, but not so great a value. The consumer who saves money by the
cheapness of the article, will be likely to expend part of the saving in
increasing his consumption of other things: and unless the low price
attract a large class of new purchasers who were either not constomers
of the article at all, or only in small quantity and occasionally, a
less aggregate sum will be expended on it. Speaking generally,
therefore, the third of our three cases is the most probable: and an
improvement in an exportable article is likely to be as beneficial (if
not more beneficial) to foreign countries, as to the country where the
article is produced.

§ 6.1 Thus far had the theory of international values been carried in
the first and second editions of this work. But intelligent criticisms
(chiefly those of my friend Mr. William Thornton), and subsequent
further investigation, have shown that the doctrine stated in the
preceding pages, though correct as far as it goes, is not yet the
complete theory of the subject matter.

It has been shown that the exports and imports between the two countries
(or, if we suppose more than two, between each country and the world)
must in the aggregate pay for each other, and must therefore be
exchanged for one another at such values as will be compatible with the
equation of international demand. That this, however, does not furnish
the complete law of the phenomenon, appears from the following
consideration: that several different Edition: current; Page: [597]
rates of international value may all equally fulfil the conditions of
this law.

The supposition was, that England could produce 10 yards of cloth with
the same labour as 15 of linen, and Germany with the same labour as 20
of linen; that a trade was opened between the two countries; that
England thenceforth confined her production to cloth, and Germany to
linen; and, that if 10 yards of cloth should thenceforth exchange for 17
of linen, England and Germany would exactly supply each other’s demand:
that, for instance, if England wanted at that price 17,000 yards of
linen, Germany would want exactly the 10,000 yards of cloth, which, at
that price, England would be required to give for the linen. Under these
suppositions it appeared, that 10 cloth for 17 linen would be, in point
of fact, the international values.

But it is quite possible that some other rate, such as 10 cloth for 18
linen, might also fulfil the conditions of the equation of international
demand. Suppose that, at this last rate, England would want more linen
than at the rate of 10 for 17, but not in the ratio of the cheapness;
that she would not want the 18,000 which she could now buy with 10,000
yards of cloth, but would be content with 17,500, for which she would
pay (at the new rate of 10 for 18) 9722 yards of cloth. Germany, again,
having to pay dearer for cloth than when it could be bought at 10 for
17, would probably reduce her consumption to an amount below 10,000
yards, perhaps to the very same number, 9722. Under these conditions the
Equation of International Demand would still exist. Thus, the rate of 10
for 17, and that of 10 for 18, would equally satisfy the Equation of
Demand: and many other rates of interchange might satisfy it in like
manner. It is conceivable that the conditions might be equally satisfied
by every numerical rate which could be supposed. There is still
therefore a portion of indeterminateness in the rate at which the
international values would adjust themselves; showing that the whole of
the influencing circumstances cannot yet have been taken into account.

§ 7. It will be found that, to supply this deficiency, we must take into
consideration not only, as we have already done, the quantities demanded
in each country of the imported commodities; but also the extent of the
means of supplying that demand which are set at liberty in each country
by the change in the direction of its industry.

To illustrate this point it will be necessary to choose more Edition:
current; Page: [598] convenient numbers than those which we have
hitherto employed. Let it be supposed that in England 100 yards of
cloth, previously to the trade, exchanged for 100 of linen, but that in
Germany 100 of cloth exchanged for 200 of linen. When the trade was
opened, England would supply cloth to Germany, Germany linen to England,
at an exchange value which would depend partly on the element already
discussed, viz. the comparative degree in which, in the two countries,
increased cheapness operates in increasing the demand; and partly on
some other element not yet taken into account. In order to isolate this
unknown element, it will be necessary to make some definite and
invariable supposition in regard to the known element. Let us therefore
assume, that the influence of cheapness on demand conforms to some
simple law, common to both countries and to both commodities. As the
simplest and most convenient, let us suppose that in both countries any
given increase of cheapness produces an exactly proportional increase of
consumption or, in other words, that the value expended in the
commodity, the cost incurred for the sake of obtaining it, is always the
same, whether that cost affords a greater or a smaller quantity of the
commodity.

Let us now suppose that England, previously to the trade, required a
million of yards of linen, which were worth, at the English cost of
production, a million yards of cloth. By turning all the labour and
capital with which that linen was produced, to the production of cloth,
she would produce for exportation a million yards of cloth. Suppose that
this is the exact quantity which Germany is accustomed to consume.
England can dispose of all this cloth in Germany at the German price;
she must consent indeed to take a little less until she has driven the
German producer from the market, but as soon as this is effected, she
can sell her million of cloth for two millions of linen; being the
quantity that the German clothiers are enabled to make by transferring
their whole labour and capital from cloth to linen. Thus England would
gain the whole benefit of the trade, and Germany nothing. This would be
perfectly consistent with the equation of international demand: since
England (according to the hypothesis in the preceding paragraph) now
requires two millions of linen (being able to get them at the same cost
at which she previously obtained only one), while, the prices in Germany
not being altered, Germany requires as before exactly a million of
cloth, and can obtain it by employing the labour and capital set at
liberty from the production of cloth, in producing the two millions of
linen required by England.

Edition: current; Page: [599]
Thus far we have supposed that the additional cloth which England could
make, by transferring to cloth the whole of the capital previously
employed in making linen, was exactly sufficient to supply the whole of
Germany’s existing demand. But suppose next that it is more than
sufficient. Suppose that while England could make with her liberated
capital a million yards of cloth for exportation, the cloth which
Germany had heretofore required was 800,000 yards only, equivalent at
the German cost of production to 1,600,000 yards of linen. England
therefore could not dispose of a whole million of cloth in Germany at
the German prices. Yet she wants, whether cheap or dear (by our
supposition), as much linen as can be bought for a million of cloth: and
since this can only be obtained from Germany, or by the more expensive
process of production at home, the holders of the million of cloth will
be forced by each other’s competition to offer it to Germany on any
terms (short of the English cost of production) which will induce
Germany to take the whole. What terms these would be, the supposition we
have made enables us exactly to define. The 800,000 yards of cloth which
Germany consumed, cost her the equivalent of 1,600,000 linen, and that
invariable cost is what she is willing to expend in cloth, whether the
quantity it obtains for her be more or less. England therefore, to
induce Germany to take a million of cloth, must offer it for 1,600,000
of linen. The international values will thus be 100 cloth for 160 linen,
intermediate between the ratio of the costs of production in England,
and that of the costs of production in Germany: and the two countries
will divide the benefit of the trade, England gaining in the aggregate
600,000 yards of linen, and Germany being richer by 200,000 additional
yards of cloth.

Let us now stretch the last supposition still farther, and suppose that
the cloth previously consumed by Germany, was not only less than the
million yards which England is enabled to furnish by discontinuing her
production of linen, but less in the full proportion of England’s
advantage in the production, that is, that Germany only required half a
million. In this case, by ceasing altogether to produce cloth, Germany
can add a million, but a million only, to her production of linen, and
this million, being the equivalent of what the half million previously
cost her, is all that she can be induced by any degree of cheapness to
expend in cloth. England will be forced by her own competition to give a
whole million of cloth for this million of linen, just as she was forced
in the preceding case to give it for 1,600,000. But England could have
produced at Edition: current; Page: [600] the same cost a million yards
of linen for herself. England therefore derives, in this case, no
advantage from the international trade. Germany gains the whole;
obtaining a million of cloth instead of half a million, at what the half
million previously cost her. Germany, in short, is, in this third case,
exactly in the same situation as England was in the first case; which
may easily be verified by reversing the figures.

As the general result of the three cases, it may be laid down as a
theorem, that under the supposition we have made of a demand exactly in
proportion to the cheapness, the law of international values will be as
follows:—

The whole of the cloth which England can make with the capital
previously devoted to linen, will exchange for the whole of the linen
which Germany can make with the capital previously devoted to cloth.

Or, still more generally,

The whole of the commodities which the two countries can respectively
make for exportation, with the labour and capital thrown out of
employment by importation, will exchange against one another.

This law, and the three different possibilities arising from it in
respect to the division of the advantage, may be conveniently
generalized by means of algebraical symbols, as follows:—

Let the quantity of cloth which England can make with the labour and
capital withdrawn from the production of linen, be = n.

Let the cloth previously required by Germany (at the German cost of
production) be = m.

Then n of cloth will always exchange for exactly 2m of linen.

Consequently if n = m, the whole advantage will be on the side of
England.

If n = 2m, the whole advantage will be on the side of Germany.

If n be greater than m, but less than 2m, the two countries will share
the advantage; England getting 2m of linen where she before got only n;
Germany getting n of cloth where she before got only m.

It is almost superfluous to observe that the figure 2 stands where it
does only because it is the figure which expresses the advantage of
Germany over England in linen as estimated in cloth, and (what is the
same thing) of England over Germany in cloth as estimated in linen. If
we had supposed that in Germany, before the trade, 100 of cloth
exchanged for 1000 instead of 200 of linen, Edition: current; Page:
[601] then n (after the trade commenced) would have exchanged for 10m
instead of 2m. If instead of 1000 or 200 we had supposed only 150, n
would have exchanged for only 3/2 m. If (in fine) the cost value of
cloth (as estimated in linen) in Germany exceeds the cost value
similarly estimated in England, in the ratio of p to q, then will n,
after the opening of the trade, exchange for [lf0199_math_003.jpg] m.∗

§ 8. We have now arrived at what seems a law of International Values of
great simplicity and generality. But we have done so by setting out from
a purely arbitrary hypothesis respecting the relation between demand and
cheapness. We have assumed their relation to be fixed, though it is
essentially variable. We have supposed that every increase of cheapness
produces an exactly proportional extension of demand; in other words,
that the same invariable value is laid out in a commodity whether it be
cheap or dear; and the Edition: current; Page: [602] law which we have
investigated holds good only on this hypothesis, or some other
practically equivalent to it. Let us now, therefore, combine the two
variable elements of the question, the variations of each of which we
have considered separately. Let us suppose the relation between demand
and cheapness to vary, and to become such as would prevent the rule of
interchange laid down in the last theorem from satisfying the conditions
of the Equation of International Demand. Let it be supposed, for
instance, that the demand of England for linen is exactly proportional
to the cheapness, but that of Germany for cloth, not proportional. To
revert to the second of our three cases, the case in which England by
discontinuing the production of linen could produce for exportation a
million yards of cloth, and Germany by ceasing to produce cloth could
produce an additional 1,600,000 yards of linen. If the one of these
quantities exactly exchanged for the other, the demand of England would
on our present supposition be exactly satisfied, for she requires all
the linen which can be got for a million yards of cloth: but Germany
perhaps, though she required 800,000 cloth at a cost equivalent to
1,600,000 linen, yet when she can get a million of cloth at the same
cost, may not require the whole million; or may require more than a
million. First, let her not require so much; but only as much as she can
now buy for 1,500,000 linen. England will still offer a million for
these 1,500,000; but even this may not induce Germany to take so much as
a million; and if England continues to expend exactly the same aggregate
cost on linen whatever be the price, she will have to submit to take for
her million of cloth any quantity of linen (not less than a million)
which may be requisite to induce Germany to take a million of cloth.
Suppose this to be 1,400,000 yards. England has now reaped from the
trade a gain not of 600,000 but only of 400,000 yards; while Germany,
besides having obtained an extra 200,000 yards of cloth, has obtained it
with only seven-eighths of the labour and capital which she previously
expended in supplying herself with cloth, and may expend the remainder
in increasing her own consumption of linen, or of any other commodity.

Suppose on the contrary that Germany, at the rate of a million cloth for
1,600,000 linen, requires more than a million yards of cloth. England
having only a million which she can give without trenching upon the
quantity she previously reserved for herself, Germany must bid for the
extra cloth at a higher rate than 160 for 100, until she reaches a rate
(say 170 for 100) which will either bring down her own demand for cloth
to the limit of a million, or else Edition: current; Page: [603] tempt
England to part with some of the cloth she previously consumed at home.

Let us next suppose that the proportionality of demand to cheapness,
instead of holding good in one country but not in the other, does not
hold good in either country, and that the deviation is of the same kind
in both; that, for instance, neither of the two increases its demand in
a degree equivalent to the increase of cheapness. On this supposition,
at the rate of one million cloth for 1,600,000 linen, England will not
want so much as 1,600,000 linen, nor Germany so much as a million cloth:
and if they fall short of that amount in exactly the same degree: if
England only wants linen to the amount of nine-tenths of 1,600,000
(1,440,000), and Germany only nine hundred thousand of cloth, the
interchange will continue to take place at the same rate. And so if
England wants a tenth more than 1,600,000, and Germany a tenth more than
a million. This coincidence (which, it is to be observed, supposes
demand to extend cheapness in a corresponding, but not in an equal
degree∗) evidently could not exist unless by mere accident: and in any
other case, the equation of international demand would require a
different adjustment of international values.

The only general law, then, which can be laid down, is this. The values
at which a country exchanges its produce with foreign countries depend
on two things: first, on the amount and extensibility of their demand
for its commodities, compiled with its demand for theirs; and secondly,
on the capital which it has to spare from the production of domestic
commodities for its own consumption. The more the foreign demand for its
commodities exceeds its demand for foreign commodities, and the less
capital it can spare to produce for foreign markets, compared with what
foreigners spare to produce for its markets, the more favourable to it
will be the terms of interchange: that is, the more it will obtain of
foreign commodities in return for a given quantity of its own.

But these two influencing circumstances are in reality reducible to one:
for the capital which a country has to spare from the production of
domestic commodities for its own use is in proportion to its own demand
for foreign commodities: whatever proportion of its collective income it
expends in purchases from abroad, that Edition: current; Page: [604]
same proportion of its capital is left without a home market for its
productions. The new element, therefore, which for the sake of
scientific correctness we have introduced into the theory of
international values, does not seem to make any very material difference
in the practical result. It still appears, that the countries which
carry on their foreign trade on the most advantageous terms, are those
whose commodities are most in demand by foreign countries, and which
have themselves the least demand for foreign commodities. From which,
among other consequences, it follows, that the richest countries,
caeteris paribus,gain the least by a given amount of foreign commerce:
since, having a greater demand for commodities generally, they are
likely to have a greater demand for foreign commodities, and thus modify
the terms of interchange to their own disadvantage. Their aggregate
gains by foreign trade, doubtless, are generally greater than those of
poorer countries, since they carry on a greater amount of such trade,
and gain the benefit of cheapness on a larger consumption: but their
gain is less on each individual article consumed.

§ 9. We now pass to another essential part of the theory of the subject.
There are two senses in which a country obtains commodities cheaper by
foreign trade; in the sense of Value, and in the sense of Cost. It gets
them cheaper in the first sense, by their falling in value relatively to
other things: the same quantity of them exchanging, in the country, for
a smaller quantity than before of the other produce of the country. To
revert to our original figures; in England, all consumers of linen
obtained, after the trade was opened, 17 or some greater number of yards
for the same quantity of all other things for which they before obtained
only 15. The degree of cheapness, in this sense of the term, depends on
the laws of International Demand, so copiously illustrated in the
preceding sections. But in the other sense, that of Cost, a country gets
a commodity cheaper when it obtains a greater quantity of the commodity
with the same expenditure of labour and capital. In this sense of the
term, cheapness in a great measure depends upon a cause of a different
nature: a country gets its imports cheaper, in proportion to the general
productiveness of its domestic industry; to the general efficiency of
its labour. The labour of one country may be, as a whole, much more
efficient than that of another; all or most of the commodities capable
of being produced in both, may be produced in one at less absolute cost
than in the other; which, Edition: current; Page: [605] as we have seen,
will not necessarily prevent the two countries from exchanging
commodities. The things which the more favoured country will import from
others, are of course those in which it is least superior; but by
importing them it acquires, even in those commodities, the same
advantage which it possesses in the articles it gives in exchange for
them. Thus the countries which obtain their own productions at least
cost, also get their imports at least cost.

This will be made still more obvious if we suppose two competing
countries. England sends cloth to Germany, and gives 10 yards of it for
17 yards of linen, or for something else which in Germany is the
equivalent of those 17 yards. Another country, as for example France,
does the same. The one giving 10 yards of cloth for a certain quantity
of German commodities, so must the other: if, therefore, in England,
these 10 yards are produced by only half as much labour as that by which
they are produced in France, the linen or other commodities of Germany
will cost to England only half the amount of labour which they will cost
to France. England would thus obtain her imports at less cost than
France, in the ratio of the greater efficiency of her labour in the
production of cloth: which might be taken, in the case supposed, as an
approximate estimate of the efficiency of her labour generally; since
France, as well as England, by selecting cloth as her article of export,
would have shown that with her also it was the commodity in which labour
was relatively the most efficient. It follows, therefore, that every
country gets its imports at less cost, in proportion to the general
efficiency of its labour.

This proposition was first clearly seen and expounded by Mr. Senior,∗
but only as applicable to the importation of the precious metals. I
think it important to point out that the proposition holds equally true
of all other imported commodities; and further, that it is only a
portion of the truth. For, in the case supposed, the cost to England of
the linen which she pays for with ten yards of cloth, does not depend
solely upon the cost to herself of ten yards of cloth, but partly also
upon how many yards of linen she obtains in exchange for them. What her
imports cost to her is a function of two variables; the quantity of her
own commodities which she gives for them, and the cost of those
commodities. Of these, the last alone depends on the efficiency of her
labour: the first depends on the law of international values; that is,
on the intensity and extensibility Edition: current; Page: [606] of the
foreign demand for her commodities, compared with her demand for foreign
commodities.

In the case just now supposed, of a competition between England and
France, the state of international values affected both competitors
alike, since they were supposed to trade with the same country, and to
export and import the same commodities. The difference, therefore, in
what their imports cost them, depended solely on the other cause, the
unequal efficiency of their labour. They gave the same quantities; the
difference could only be in the cost of production. But if England
traded to Germany with cloth, and France with iron, the comparative
demand in Germany for those two commodities would bear a share in
determining the comparative cost, in labour and capital, with which
England and France would obtain German products. If iron were more in
demand in Germany than cloth, France would recover, through that
channel, part of her disadvantage; if less, her disadvantage would be
increased. The efficiency, therefore, of a country’s labour, is not the
only thing which determines even the cost at which that country obtains
imported commodities—while it has no share whatever in determining
either their exchange value, or, as we shall presently see, their
price.1

Edition: current; Page: [607]


CHAPTER XIX: of money, considered as an imported commodity

§ 1. The degree of progress which we have now made in the theory of
Foreign Trade, puts it in our power to supply what was previously
deficient in our view of the theory of Money; and this, when completed,
will in its turn enable us to conclude the subject of Foreign Trade.

Money, or the material of which it is composed, is, in Great Britain,
and in most other countries, a foreign commodity. Its value and
distribution must therefore be regulated, not by the law of value which
obtains in adjacent places, but by that which is applicable to imported
commodities—the law of International Values.

In the discussion into which we are now about to enter, I shall use the
terms Money and the Precious Metals indiscriminately. This may be done
without leading to any error; it having been shown that the value of
money, when it consists of the precious metals, or of a paper currency
convertible into them on demand, is entirely governed by the value of
the metals themselves: from which it never permanently differs, except
by the expense of coinage when this is paid by the individual and not by
the state.

Money is brought into a country in two different ways. It is imported
(chiefly in the form of bullion) like any other merchandize, as being an
advantageous article of commerce. It is also imported in its other
character of a medium of exchange, to pay some debt due to the country,
either for goods exported or on any other account. There are other ways
in which it may be introduced casually; these are the two in which it is
received in the ordinary course of business, and which determine its
value. The existence of these two distinct modes in which money flows
into a country, while other commodities are habitually introduced only
in the first of Edition: current; Page: [608] these modes, occasions
somewhat more of complexity and obscurity than exists in the case of
other commodities, and for this reason only is any special and minute
exposition necessary.

§ 2. In so far as the precious metals are imported in the ordinary way
of commerce, their value must depend on the same causes, and conform to
the same laws, as the value of any other foreign production. It is in
this mode chiefly that gold and silver diffuse themselves from the
mining countries into all other parts of the commercial world. They are
the staple commodities of those countries, or at least are among their
great articles of regular export; and are shipped on speculation, in the
same manner as other exportable commodities. The quantity, therefore,
which a country (say England) will give of its own produce, for a
certain quantity of bullion, will depend, if we suppose only two
countries and two commodities, upon the demand in England for bullion,
compared with the demand in the mining country (which we will call
Brazil) for what England has to give. They must exchange in such
proportions as will leave no unsatisfied demand on either side, to alter
values by its competition. The bullion required by England must exactly
pay for the cottons or other English commodities required by Brazil. If,
however, we substitute for this simplicity the degree of complication
which really exists, the equation of international demand must be
established not between the bullion wanted in England and the cottons or
broadcloth wanted in Brazil, but between the whole of the imports of
England and the whole of her exports. The demand in foreign countries
for English products must be brought into equilibrium with the demand in
England for the products of foreign countries; and all foreign
commodities, billion among the rest, must be exchanged against English
products in such proportions as will, by the effect they produce on the
demand, establish this equilibrium.

There is nothing in the peculiar nature or uses of the precious metals,
which should make them an exception to the general principles of demand.
So far as they are wanted for purposes of luxury or the arts, the demand
increases with the cheapness, in the same irregular way as the demand
for any other commodity. So far as they are required for money, the
demand increases with the cheapness in a perfectly regular way, the
quantity needed being always in inverse proportion to the value. This is
the only real difference, in respect to demand, between money and other
Edition: current; Page: [609] things; and for the present purpose it is
a difference altogether immaterial.

Money, then, if imported solely as a merchandize, will, like other
imported commodities, be of lowest value in the countries for whose
exports there is the greatest foreign demand, and which have themselves
the least demand for foreign commodities. To these two circumstances it
is however necessary to add two others, which produce their effect
through cost of carriage. The cost of obtaining bullion is compounded of
two elements; the goods given to purchase it, and the expense of
transport: of which last, the bullion countries will bear a part,
(though an uncertain part,) in the adjustment of international values.
The expense of transport is partly that of carrying the goods to the
bullion countries, and partly that of bringing back the bullion: both
these items are influenced by the distance from the mines; and the
former is also much affected by the bulkiness of the goods. Countries
whose exportable produce consists of the finer manufactures, obtain
bullion, as well as all other foreign articles, caeteris paribus, at
less expense than countries which export nothing but bulky raw produce.

To be quite accurate, therefore, we must say—The countries whose
exportable productions are most in demand abroad, and contain greatest
value in smallest bulk, which are nearest to the mines, and which have
least demand for foreign productions, are those in which money will be
of lowest value, or, in other words, in which prices will habitually
range the highest. If we are speaking not of the value of money, but of
its cost, (that is, the quantity of the country’s labour which must be
expended to obtain it,) we must add to these four conditions of
cheapness a fifth condition, namely, “whose productive industry is the
most efficient.” This last, however, does not at all affect the value of
money, estimated in commodities: it affects the general abundance and
facility with which all things, money and commodities together, can be
obtained.

Although, therefore, Mr. Senior is right in pointing out the great
efficiency of English labour as the chief cause why the precious metals
are obtained at less cost by England than by most other countries, I
cannot admit that it at all accounts for their being of less value; for
their going less far in the purchase of commodities. This, in so far as
it is a fact, and not an illusion, must be occasioned by the great
demand in foreign countries for the staple commodities of England, and
the generally unbulky character of those commodities, compared with the
corn, wine, timber, sugar, wool, hides, Edition: current; Page: [610]
tallow, hemp, flax, tobacco, raw cotton, &c., which form the exports of
other commercial countries. These two causes will account for a somewhat
higher range of general prices in England than elsewhere,
notwithstanding the counteracting influence of her own great demand for
foreign commodities. I am, however, strongly of opinion that the high
prices of commodities, and low purchasing power of money in England, are
more apparent than real. Food, indeed, is somewhat dearer; and food
composes so large a portion of the expenditure when the income is small
and the family large, that to such families England is a dear country.
Services, also, of most descriptions, are dearer than in the other
countries of Europe, from the less costly mode of living of the poorer
classes on the Continent. But manufactured commodities (except most of
those in which good taste is required) are decidedly cheaper; or would
be so if buyers would be content with the same quality of material and
of workmanship. What is called the dearness of living in England, is
mainly an affair not of necessity but of foolish custom; it being
thought imperative by all classes in England above the condition of a
day-labourer that the things they consume should either be of the same
quality with those used by much richer people, or at least should be as
nearly as possible undistinguishable from them in outward appearance.

§ 3. From the preceding considerations, it appears that those are
greatly in error who contend1 that the value of money, in countries
where it is an imported commodity, must be entirely regulated by its
value in the countries which produce it; and cannot be raised or lowered
in any permanent manner unless some change has taken place in the cost
of production at the mines. On the contrary, any circumstance which
disturbs the equation of international demand with respect to a
particular country, not only may, but must, affect the value of money in
that country—its value at the mines remaining the same. The opening of a
new branch of export trade from England; an increase in the foreign
demand for English products, either by the natural course of events, or
by the abrogation of duties; a check to the demand in England for
foreign commodities, by the laying on of import duties in England or of
export duties elsewhere; these and all other events of similar tendency,
would make the imports of England (bullion and other Edition: current;
Page: [611] things taken together) no longer an equivalent for the
exports; and the countries which take her exports would be obliged to
offer their commodities, and bullion among the rest, on cheaper terms,
in order to re-establish the equation of demand: and thus England would
obtain money cheaper, and would acquire a generally higher range of
prices. Incidents the reverse of these would produce effects the
reverse—would reduce prices; or, in other words, raise the value of the
precious metals. It must be observed, however, that money would be thus
raised in value only with respect to home commodities, in relation to
all imported articles it would remain as before, since their values
would be affected in the same way and in the same degree with its own. A
country which, from any of the causes mentioned, gets money cheaper,
obtains all its other imports cheaper likewise.

It is by no means necessary that the increased demand for English
commodities: which enables England to supply herself with bullion at a
cheaper rate, should be a demand in the mining countries. England might
export nothing whatever to those countries, and yet might be the country
which obtained bullion from them on the lowest terms, provided there
were a sufficient intensity of demand in other foreign countries for
English goods, which would be paid for circuitously with gold and silver
from the mining countries. The whole of its exports are what a country
exchanges against the whole of its imports, and not its exports and
imports to and from any one country; and the general foreign demand for
its productions will determine what equivalent it must give for imported
goods, in order to establish an equilibrium between its sales and
purchases generally; without regard to the maintenance of a similar
equilibrium between it and any country singly.

Edition: current; Page: [612]


CHAPTER XX: of the foreign exchanges

§ 1. We have thus far considered the precious metals as a commodity,
imported like other commodities in the common course of trade, and have
examined what are the circumstances which would in that case determine
their value. But those metals are also imported in another character,
that which belongs to them as a medium of exchange; not as an article of
commerce, to be sold for money, but as themselves money, to pay a debt,
or effect a transfer of property. It remains to consider whether the
liability of gold and silver to be transported from country to country
for such purposes, in any way modifies the conclusions we have already
arrived at, or places those metals under a different law of value from
that to which, in common with all other imported commodities, they would
be subject if international trade were an affair of direct barter.

Money is sent from one country to another for various purposes: such as
the payment of tributes or subsidies; remittances of revenue to or from
dependencies, or of rents or other incomes to their absent owners;
emigration of capital, or transmission of it for foreign investment. The
most usual purpose, however, is that of payment for goods. To show in
what circumstances money actually passes from country to country for
this or any of the other purposes mentioned, it is necessary briefly to
state the nature of the mechanism by which international trade is
carried on, when it takes place not by barter but through the medium of
money.

§ 2. In practice, the exports and imports of a country not only are not
exchanged directly against each other, but often do not even pass
through the same hands. Each is separately bought and paid for with
money. We have seen, however, that, even in the same country, money does
not actually pass from hand to hand Edition: current; Page: [613] each
time that purchases are made with it, and still less does this happen
between different countries. The habitual mode of paying and receiving
payment for commodities, between country and country, is by bills of
exchange.

A merchant in England, A, has exported English commodities, consigning
them to his correspondent B in France. Another merchant in France, C,
has exported French commodities, suppose of equivalent value, to a
merchant D in England. It is evidently unnecessary that B in France
should send money to A in England, and that D in England should send an
equal sum of money to C in France. The one debt may be applied to the
payment of the other, and the double cost and risk of carriage be thus
saved. A draws a bill on B for the amount which B owes to him: D, having
an equal amount to pay in France, buys this bill from A, and sends it to
C, who, at the expiration of the number of days which the bill has to
run, presents it to B for payment. Thus the debt due from France to
England, and the debt due from England to France, are both paid without
sending an ounce of gold or silver from one country to the other.

In this statement, however, it is supposed, that the sum of the debts
due from France to England, and the sum of those due from England to
France, are equal; that each country has exactly the same number of
ounces of gold or silver to pay and to receive. This implies (if we
exclude for the present any other international payments than those
occurring in the course of commerce), that the exports and imports
exactly pay for one another, or, in other words, that the equation of
international demand is established. When such is the fact, the
international transactions are liquidated without the passage of any
money from one country to the other. But if there is a greater sum due
from England to France, than is due from France to England, or vice
versâ, the debts cannot be simply written off against one another. After
the one has been applied, as far as it will go, towards covering the
other, the balance must be transmitted in the precious metals. In point
of fact, the merchant who has the amount to pay, will even then pay for
it by a bill. When a person has a remittance to make to a foreign
country, he does not himself search for some one who has money to
receive from that country, and ask him for a bill of exchange. In this,
as in other branches of business, there is a class of middlemen or
brokers, who bring buyers and sellers together, or stand between them,
buying bills from those who have money to receive, and Edition: current;
Page: [614] selling bills to those who have money to pay. When a
customer comes to a broker for a bill on Paris or Amsterdam, the broker
sells to him, perhaps the bill he may himself have bought that morning
from a merchant, perhaps a bill on his own correspondent in the foreign
city: and to enable his correspondent to pay, when due, all the bills he
has granted, he remits to him all those which he has bought and has not
resold. In this manner these brokers take upon themselves the whole
settlement of the pecuniary transactions between distant places, being
remunerated by a small commission or percentage on the amount of each
bill which they either sell or buy. Now, if the brokers find that they
are asked for bills on the one part, to a greater amount than bills are
offered to them on the other, they do not on this account refuse to give
them: but since, in that case, they have no means of enabling the
correspondents on whom their bills are drawn, to pay them when due,
except by transmitting part of the amount in gold or silver, they
require from those to whom they sell bills an additional price,
sufficient to cover the freight and insurance of the gold and silver,
with a profit sufficient to compensate them for their trouble and for
the temporary occupation of a portion of their capital. This premium (as
it is called) the buyers are willing to pay, because they must otherwise
go to the expense of remitting the precious metals themselves, and it is
done cheaper by those who make doing it a part of their especial
business. But though only some of those who have a debt to pay would
have actually to remit money, all will be obliged, by each other’s
competition, to pay the premium; and the brokers are for the same reason
obliged to pay it to those whose bills they buy. The reverse of all this
happens if, on the comparison of exports and imports, the country,
instead of having a balance to pay, has a balance to receive. The
brokers find more bills offered to them than are sufficient to cover
those which they are required to grant. Bills on foreign countries
consequently fall to a discount; and the competition among the brokers,
which is exceedingly active, prevents them from retaining this discount
as a profit for themselves, and obliges them to give the benefit of it
to those who buy the bills for purposes of remittance.

Let us suppose that all countries had the same currency, as in the
progress of political improvement they one day will have: and, as the
most familiar to the reader, though not the best, let us suppose this
currency to be the English. When England had the same number of pounds
sterling to pay to France, which France had to Edition: current; Page:
[615] pay to her, one set of merchants in England would want bills, and
another set would have bills to dispose of, for the very same number of
pounds sterling; and consequently a bill on France for 100l. would sell
for exactly 100l., or, in the phraseology of merchants, the exchange
would be at par. As France also, on this supposition, would have an
equal number of pounds sterling to pay and to receive, bills on England
would be at par in France, whenever bills on France were at par in
England.

If, however, England had a larger sum to pay to France than to receive
from her, there would be persons requiring bills on France for a greater
number of pounds sterling than there were bills drawn by persons to whom
money was due. A bill on France for 100l. would then sell for more than
100l., and bills would be said to be at a premium. The premium, however,
could not exceed the cost and risk of making the remittance in gold,
together with a trifling profit; because if it did, the debtor wouLd
send the gold itself, in preference to buying the bill.

If, on the contrary, England had more money to receive from France than
to pay, there would be bills offered for a greater number of pounds than
were wanted for remittance, and the price of bills would fall below par:
a bill for 100l. might be bought for somewhat less than 100l., and bills
would be said to be at a discount.

When England has more to pay than to receive, France has more to receive
than to pay, and vice versâ. When, therefore, in England, bills on
France bear a premium, then, in France, bills on England are at a
discount: and when bills on France are at a discount in England, bills
on England are at a premium in France. If they are at par in either
country, they are so, as we have already seen, in both.

Thus do matters stand between countries, or places, which have the same
currency. So much of barbarism, however, still remains in the
transactions of the most civilized nations, that almost all independent
countries choose to assert their nationality by having, to their own
inconvenience and that of their neighbours, a peculiar currency of their
own. To our present purpose this makes no other difference, than that
instead of speaking of equal sums of money, we have to speak of
equivalent sums. By equivalent sums, when both currencies are composed
of the same metal, are meant sums which contain exactly the same
quantity of the metal, in weight and fineness; but when, as in the case
of France and England, the metals are different, what is meant is that
the quantity Edition: current; Page: [616] of gold in the one sum, and
the quantity of silver in the other, are of the same value in the
general market of the world: there being no material difference between
one place and another in the relative value of these metals. Suppose 25
francs to be (as within a trifling fraction it is) the equivalent of a
pound sterling. The debts and credits of the two countries would be
equal, when the one owed as many times 25 francs, as the other owed
pounds. When this was the case, a bill on France for 2500 francs would
be worth in England 100l., and a bill on England for 100l. would be
worth in France 2500 francs. The exchange is then said to be at par: and
25 francs (in reality 25 francs and a trifle more)∗ is called the par of
exchange with France. When England owed to France more than the
equivalent of what France owed to her, a bill for 2500 francs would be
at a premium, that is, would be worth more than 100l. When France owed
to England more than the equivalent of what England owed to France, a
bill for 2500 francs would be worth less than 100l., or would be at a
discount.

When bills on foreign countries are at a premium, it is customary to say
that the exchanges are against the country, or unfavourable to it. In
order to understand these phrases, we must take notice of what “the
exchange,” in the language of merchants, really means. It means the
power which the money of the country has of purchasing the money of
other countries. Supposing 25 francs to be the exact par of exchange,
then when it requires more than 100l. to buy a bill for 2500 francs,
100l. of English money are worth less than their real equivalent of
French money: and this is called an exchange unfavourable to England.
The only persons in England, however, to whom it is really unfavourable
are those who have money to pay in France; for they come into the bill
market as buyers, and have to pay a premium: but to those who have money
to receive in France, the same state of things is favourable; for they
come as sellers, and receive the premium. The premium, however,
indicates that a balance is due by England, which might have to be
eventually liquidated in the precious metals: and since, according to
the old theory, the benefit of a trade consisted in bringing money into
the country, this prejudice introduced the practice of calling the
exchange favourable when it indicated a Edition: current; Page: [617]
balance to receive, and unfavourable when it indicated one to pay: and
the phrases in turn tended to maintain the prejudice.

§ 3. It might be supposed at first sight that when the exchange is
unfavourable, or, in other words, when bills are at a premium, the
premium must always amount to a full equivalent for the cost of
transmitting money: since, as there is really a balance to pay, and as
the full cost must therefore be incurred by some of those who have
remittances to make, their competition will compel all to submit to an
equivalent sacrifice. And such would certainly be the case, if it were
always necessary that whatever is destined to be paid should be paid
immediately. The expectation of great and immediate foreign payments
sometimes produces a most startling effect on the exchanges.∗ But a
small excess of imports above exports, or any other small amount of debt
to be paid to foreign countries, does not usually affect the exchanges
to the full extent of the cost and risk of transporting bullion. The
length of credit allowed generally permits, on the part of some of the
debtors, a postponement of payment, and in the mean time the balance may
turn the other way, and restore the equality of debts and credits
without any actual transmission of the metals. And this is the more
likely to happen, as there is a self-adjusting power in the variations
of the exchange itself. Bills are at a premium because a greater money
value has been imported than exported. But the premium is itself an
extra profit to those who export. Besides the price they obtain for
their goods, they draw for the amount and gain the premium. It is, on
the other hand, a diminution of profit to those who import. Besides the
price of the goods, they have to pay a premium for remittance. So that
what is called an unfavourable exchange is an encouragement to export,
and a discouragement to import. And if the balance due is of small
amount, and Edition: current; Page: [618] is the consequence of some
merely casual disturbance in the ordinary course of trade, it is soon
liquidated in commodities, and the account adjusted by means of bills,
without the transmission of any bullion. Not so, however, when the
excess of imports above exports, which has made the exchange
unfavourable, arises from a permanent cause. In that case, what
disturbed the equilibrium must have been the state of prices, and it can
only be restored by acting on prices. It is impossible that prices
should be such as to invite to an excess of imports, and yet that the
exports should be kept permanently up to the imports by the extra profit
on exportation derived from the premium on bills; for if the exports
were kept up to the imports, bills would not be at a premium, and the
extra profit would not exist. It is through the prices of commodities
that the correction must be administered.

Disturbances, therefore, of the equilibrium of imports and exports, and
consequent disturbances of the exchange, may be considered as of two
classes; the one casual or accidental, which, if not on too large a
scale, correct themselves through the premium on bills, without any
transmission of the precious metals; the other arising from the general
state of prices, which cannot be corrected without the subtraction of
actual money from the circulation of one of the counties, or an
annihilation of credit equivalent to it; since the mere transmission of
bullion (as distinguished from money), not having any effect on prices,
is of no avail to abate the cause from which the disturbance proceeded.

It remains to observe, that the exchanges do not depend on the balance
of debts and credits with each country separately, but with all counties
taken together. England may owe a balance of payments to France; but it
does not follow that the exchange with France will be against England,
and that bills on France will be at a premium; because a balance may be
due to England from Holland or Hamburg, and she may pay her debts to
France with bills on those places; which is technically called
arbitration of exchange. There is some little additional expense, partly
commission and partly loss of interest, in settling debts in this
circuitous manner, and to the extent of that small difference the
exchange with one country may vary apart from that with others; but in
the main, the exchanges with all foreign countries vary together,
according as the country has a balance to receive or to pay on the
general result of its foreign transactions.

Edition: current; Page: [619]


CHAPTER XXI: of the distribution of the precious metals through the commercial world

§ 1. Having now examined the mechanism by which the commercial
transactions between nations are actually conducted, we have next to
inquire whether this mode of conducting them makes any difference in the
conclusions respecting international values, which we previously arrived
at on the hypothesis of barter.

The nearest analogy would lead us to presume the negative. We did not
find that the intervention of money and its substitutes made any
difference in the law of value as applied to adjacent places. Things
which would have been equal in value if the mode of exchange had been by
barter, are worth equal sums of money. The introduction of money is a
mere addition of one more commodity, of which the value is regulated by
the same laws as that of all other commodities. We shall not be
surprised, therefore, if we find that international values also are
determined by the same causes under a money and bill system, as they
would be under a system of barter; and that money has little to do in
the matter, except to furnish a convenient mode of comparing values.

All interchange is, in substance and effect, barter: whoever sells
commodities for money, and with that money buys other goods, really buys
those goods with his own commodities. And so of nations: their trade is
a mere exchange of exports for imports; and whether money is employed or
not, things are only in their permanent state when the exports and
imports exactly pay for each other. When this is the case, equal sums of
money are due from each country to the other, the debts are settled by
bills, and there is no balance to be paid in the precious metals. The
trade is in a state like that which is called in mechanics a condition
of stable equilibrium.

But the process by which things are brought back to this state Edition:
current; Page: [620] when they happen to deviate from it, is, at least
outwardly, not the same in a barter system and in a money system. Under
the first, the country which wants more imports than its exports will
pay for, must offer its exports at a cheaper rate, as the sole means of
creating a demand for them sufficient to re-establish the equilibrium.
When money is used, the country seems to do a thing totally different.
She takes the additional imports at the same price as before, and as she
exports no equivalent, the balance of payments turns against her; the
exchange becomes unfavourable, and the difference has to be paid in
money. This is in appearance a very distinct operation from the former.
Let us see if it differs in its essence, or only in its mechanism.

Let the country which has the balance to pay be England, and the country
which receives it, France. By this transmission of the precious metals,
the quantity of the currency is diminished in England, and increased in
France. This I am at liberty to assume. As we shall see hereafter, it
would be a very erroneous assumption if made in regard to all payments
of international balances. A balance which has only to be paid once,
such as the payment made for an extra importation of corn in a season of
dearth, may be paid from hoards, or from the reserves of bankers,
without acting on the circulation. But we are now supposing that there
is an excess of imports over exports, arising from the fact that the
equation of international demand is not yet established: that there is
at the ordinary prices a permanent demand in England for more French
goods than the English goods required in France at the ordinary prices
will pay for. When this is the case, if a change were not made in the
prices, there would be a perpetually renewed balance to be paid in
money. The imports require to be permanently diminished, or the exports
to be increased; which can only be accomplished through prices; and
hence, even if the balances are at first paid from hoards, or by the
exportation of bullion, they will reach the circulation at last, for
until they do, nothing can stop the drain.

When, therefore, the state of prices is such that the equation of
international demand cannot establish itself, the country requiring more
imports than can be paid for by the exports; it is a sign that the
country has more of the precious metals or their substitutes in
circulation, than can permanently circulate, and must necessarily part
with some of them before the balance can be restored. The currency is
accordingly contracted: prices fall, and among the rest, the prices of
exportable articles; for which, accordingly, there Edition: current;
Page: [621] arises, in foreign countries, a greater demand: while
imported commodities have possibly risen in price, from the influx of
money into foreign countries, and at all events have not participated in
the general fall. But until the increased cheapness of English goods
induces foreign countries to take a greater pecuniary value, or until
the increased dearness (positive or comparative) of foreign goods makes
England take a less pecuniary value, the exports of England will be no
nearer to paying for the imports than before, and the stream of the
precious metals which had begun to flow out of England, will still flow
on. This efflux will continue, until the fall of prices in England
brings within reach of the foreign market some commodity which England
did not previously send thither; or until the reduced price of the
things which she did send, has forced a demand abroad for a sufficient
quantity to pay for the imports, aided, perhaps, by a reduction of the
English demand for foreign goods, through their enhanced price, either
positive or comparative.

Now this is the very process which took place on our original
supposition of barter. Not only, therefore, does the trade between
nations tend to the same equilibrium between exports and imports,
whether money is employed or not, but the means by which this
equilibrium is established are essentially the same. The country whose
exports are not sufficient to pay for her imports, offers them on
cheaper terms, until she succeeds in forcing the necessary demand: in
other words, the Equation of International Demand, under a money system
as well as under a barter system, is the law of international trade.
Every country exports and imports the very same things, and in the very
same quantity, under the one system as under the other. In a barter
system, the trade gravitates to the point at which the sum of the
imports exactly exchanges for the sum of the exports: in a money system,
it gravitates to the point at which the sum of the imports and the sum
of the exports exchange for the same quantity of money. And since things
which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another, the exports
and imports which are equal in money price, would, if money were not
used, precisely exchange for one another.∗

Edition: current; Page: [622]
§ 2. It thus appears that the law of international values, and,
consequently, the division of the advantages of trade among the nations
which carry it on, are the same, on the supposition of money, as they
would be in a state of barter. In international, as in ordinary domestic
interchanges, money is to commerce only what oil is to machinery, or
railways to locomotion—a contrivance to diminish friction. In order
still further to test these conclusions, let us proceed to re-examine,
on the supposition of money, a question which we have already
investigated on the hypothesis of barter, Edition: current; Page: [623]
namely, to what extent the benefit of an improvement in the production
of an exportable article is participated in by the countries importing
it.

The improvement may either consist in the cheapening of some article
which was already a staple production of the country, or in the
establishment of some new branch of industry, or of some process
rendering an article exportable which had not till then been exported at
all. It will be convenient to begin with the case of a new export, as
being somewhat the simpler of the two.

The first effect is that the article falls in price, and a demand
Edition: current; Page: [624] arises for it abroad. This new exportation
disturbs the balance, turns the exchanges, money flows into the country
(which we shall suppose to be England), and continues to flow until
prices rise. This higher range of prices will somewhat check the demand
in foreign countries for the new article of export; and will diminish
the demand which existed abroad for the other things which England was
in the habit of exporting. The exports will thus be diminished; while at
the same time the English public, having more money, will have a greater
power of purchasing foreign commodities. If they make use of this
increased power of purchase, there will be an increase of imports: and
by this, and the check to exportation, the equilibrium of imports and
exports will be restored. The result to foreign countries will be, that
they have to pay dearer than before for their other imports, and obtain
the new commodity cheaper than before, but not so much cheaper as
England herself does. I say this, being well aware that the article
would be actually at the very same price (cost of carriage excepted) in
England and in other countries. The cheapness, however, of the article
is not measured solely by the money-price, but by that price compared
with the money incomes of the consumers. The price is the same to the
English and to the foreign consumers; but the former pay that price from
money incomes which have been increased by the new distribution of the
precious metals; while the latter have had their money incomes probably
diminished by the same cause. The trade, therefore, has not imparted to
the foreign consumer the whole, but only a portion, of the benefit which
the English consumer has derived from the improvement; while England has
also benefited in the prices of foreign commodities. Thus, then, any
industrial improvement which leads to the opening of a new branch of
export trade, benefits a country not only by the cheapness of the
article in which the improvement has taken place, but by a general
cheapening of all imported products.

Let us now change the hypothesis, and suppose that the improvement,
instead of creating a new export from England, cheapens an existing one.
When we examined this case on the supposition of barter, it appeared to
us that the foreign consumers might either obtain the same benefit from
the improvement as England herself, or a less benefit, or even a greater
benefit, according to the degree in which the consumption of the
cheapened article is calculated to extend itself as the article
diminishes in price. The same conclusions will be found true on the
supposition of money.

Edition: current; Page: [625]
Let the commodity in which there is an improvement, be cloth. The first
effect of the improvement is that its price falls, and there is an
increased demand for it in the foreign market. But this demand is of
uncertain amount. Suppose the foreign consumers to increase their
purchases in the exact ratio of the cheapness, or, in other words, to
lay out in cloth the same sum of money as before; the same aggregate
payment as before will be due from foreign countries to England; the
equilibrium of exports and imports will remain undisturbed, and
foreigners will obtain the full advantage of the increased cheapness of
cloth. But if the foreign demand for cloth is of such a character as to
increase in a greater ratio than the cheapness, a larger sum than
formerly will be due to England for cloth, and when paid will raise
English prices, the price of cloth included; this rise, however, will
affect only the foreign purchaser, English incomes being raised in a
corresponding proportion; and the foreign consumer will thus derive a
less advantage than England from the improvement. If, on the contrary,
the cheapening of cloth does not extend the foreign demand for it in a
proportional degree, a less sum of debts than before will be due to
England for cloth, while there will be the usual sum of debts due from
England to foreign countries; the balance of trade will turn against
England, money will be exported, prices (that of cloth included) will
fall, and cloth will eventually be cheapened to the foreign purchaser in
a still greater ratio than the improvement has cheapened it to England.
These are the very conclusions which we deduced on the hypothesis of
barter.

The result of the preceding discussion cannot be better summed up than
in the words of Ricardo.∗ “Gold and silver having been chosen for the
general medium of circulation, they are, by the competition of commerce,
distributed in such proportions amongst the different countries of the
world as to accommodate themselves to the natural traffic which would
take place if no such metals existed, and the trade between countries
were purely a trade of barter.” Of this principle, so fertile in
consequences, previous to which the theory of foreign trade was an
unintelligible chaos, Mr. Ricardo, though he did not pursue it into its
ramifications, was the real originator. No writer who preceded him
appears to have had a glimpse of it: and few are those who even since
his time have had an adequate conception of its scientific value.

Edition: current; Page: [626]
§ 3. It is now necessary to inquire, in what manner this law of the
distribution of the precious metals by means of the exchanges, affects
the exchange value of money itself; and how it tallies with the law by
which we found that the value of money is regulated when imported as a
mere article of merchandize. For there is here a semblance of
contradiction, which has, I think, contributed more than anything else
to make some distinguished political economists resist the evidence of
the preceding doctrines. Money, they justly think, is no exception to
the general laws of value; it is a commodity like any other, and its
average or natural value must depend on the cost of producing, or at
least of obtaining it. That its distribution through the world,
therefore, and its different value in different places, should be liable
to be altered, not by causes affecting itself, but by a hundred causes
unconnected with it; by everything which affects the trade in other
commodities, so as to derange the equilibrium of exports and imports;
appears to these thinkers a doctrine altogether inadmissible.

But the supposed anomaly exists only in semblance. The causes which
bring money into or carry it out of a country through the exchanges, to
restore the equilibrium of trade, and which thereby raise its value in
some countries and lower it in others, are the very same causes on which
the local value of money would depend if it were never imported except
as a merchandize, and never except directly from the mines. When the
value of money in a country is permanently lowered by an influx of it
through the balance of trade, the cause, if it is not diminished cost of
production, must be one of those causes which compel a new adjustment,
more favourable to the country, of the equation of international demand:
namely, either an increased demand abroad for her commodities, or a
diminished demand on her part for those of foreign countries. Now an
increased foreign demand for the commodities of a country, or a
diminished demand in the country for imported commodities, are the very
causes which, on the general principles of trade, enable a country to
purchase all imports, and consequently the precious metals, at a lower
value. There is therefore no contradiction, but the most perfect
accordance in the results of the two different modes in which the
precious metals may be obtained. When money flows from country to
country in consequence of changes in the international demand for
commodities, and by so doing alters its own local value, it merely
realizes, by a more rapid process, the effect which would otherwise take
place more slowly, by an alteration in Edition: current; Page: [627] the
relative breadth of the streams by which the precious metals flow into
different regions of the earth from the mining countries. As, therefore
we before saw that the use of money as a medium of exchange does not in
the least alter the law on which the values of other things, either in
the same country or internationally, depend, so neither does it alter
the law of the value of the precious metal itself: and there is in the
whole doctrine of international values, as now laid down, a unity and
harmony which is a strong collateral presumption of truth.

§ 4. Before closing this discussion, it is fitting to point out in what
manner and degree the preceding conclusions are affected by the
existence of international payments not originating in commerce, and for
which no equivalent in either money or commodities is expected or
received; such as a tribute, or remittances of rent to absentee
landlords, or of interest to foreign creditors, or a government
expenditure abroad, such as England incurs in the management of some of
her colonial dependencies.

To begin with the case of barter. The supposed annual remittances being
made in commodities, and being exports for which there is to be no
return, it is no longer requisite that the imports and exports should
pay for one another: on the contrary, there must be an annual excess of
exports over imports, equal to the value of the remittance. If, before
the country became liable to the annual payment, foreign commerce was in
its natural state of equilibrium, it will now be necessary for the
purpose of effecting the remittance, that foreign countries should be
induced to take a greater quantity of exports than before: which can
only be done by offering those exports on cheaper terms, or, in other
words, by paying dearer for foreign commodities. The international
values will so adjust themselves that either by greater exports, or
smaller imports, or both, the requisite excess on the side of exports
will be brought about; and this excess will become the permanent state.
The result is that a country which makes regular payments to foreign
countries, besides losing what it pays, loses also something more, by
the less advantageous terms on which it is forced to exchange its
productions for foreign commodities.

The same results follow on the supposition of money. Commerce being
supposed to be in a state of equilibrium when the obligatory remittances
begin, the first remittance is necessarily made in money. This lowers
prices in the remitting country, and raises them in the Edition:
current; Page: [628] receiving. The natural effect is that more
commodities are exported than before, and fewer imported, and that, on
the score of commerce alone, a balance of money will be constantly due
from the receiving to the paying country. When the debt thus annually
due to the tributary country becomes equal to the annual tribute or
other regular payment due from it, no further transmission of money
takes place; the equilibrium of exports and imports will no longer
exist, but that of payments will; the exchange will be at par, the two
debts will be set off against one another, and the tribute or remittance
will be virtually paid in goods. The result to the interest of the two
countries will be as already pointed out: the paying country will give a
higher price for all that it buys from the receiving country, while the
latter, besides receiving the tribute, obtains the exportable produce of
the tributary country at a lower price.

Edition: current; Page: [629]


CHAPTER XXII: influence of the currency on the exchanges and on foreign trade

§ 1. In our inquiry into the laws of international trade, we commenced
with the principles which determine international exchanges and
international values on the hypothesis of barter. We next showed that
the introduction of money as a medium of exchange makes no difference in
the laws of exchanges and of values between country and country, no more
than between individual and individual: since the precious metals, under
the influence of those same laws, distribute themselves in such
proportions among the different countries of the world, as to allow the
very same exchanges to go on, and at the same values, as would be the
case under a system of barter. We lastly considered how the value of
money itself is affected, by those alterations in the state of trade
which arises from alterations either in the demand and supply of
commodities, or in their cost of production. It remains to consider the
alterations in the state of trade which originate not in commodities but
in money.

Gold and silver may vary like other things, though they are not so
likely to vary as other things, in their cost of production. The demand
for them in foreign countries may also vary. It may increase, by
augmented employment of the metals for purposes of art and ornament, or
because the increase of production and of transactions has created a
greater amount of business to be done by the circulating medium. It may
diminish, for the opposite reasons; or from the extension of the
economizing expedients by which the use of metallic money is partially
dispensed with. These changes act upon the trade between other countries
and the mining countries, and upon the value of the precious metals,
according to the general laws of the value of imported commodities:
which have been set forth in the previous chapters with sufficient
fulness.

Edition: current; Page: [630]
What I propose to examine in the present chapter, is not those
circumstances affecting money, which alter the permanent conditions of
its value; but the effects produced on international trade by casual or
temporary variations in the value of money, which have no connexion with
any causes affecting its permanent value. This is a subject of
importance, on account of its bearing upon the practical problem which
has excited so much discussion for sixty years past, the regulation of
the currency.

§ 2. Let us suppose in any country a circulating medium purely metallic,
and a sudden casual increase made to it; for example, by bringing into
circulation hoards of treasure, which had been concealed in a previous
period of foreign invasion or internal disorder. The natural effect
would be a rise of prices. This would check exports, and encourage
imports; the imports would exceed the exports, the exchanges would
become unfavourable, and the newly acquired stock of money would diffuse
itself over all countries with which the supposed country carried on
trade, and from them, progressively, through all parts of the commercial
world. The money which thus overflowed would spread itself to an equal
depth over all commercial countries. For it would go on flowing until
the exports and imports again balanced one another: and this (as no
change is supposed in the permanent circumstances of international
demand) could only be, when the money had diffused itself so equally
that prices had risen in the same ratio in all countries, so that the
alteration of price would be for all practical purposes ineffective, and
the exports and imports, though at a higher money valuation, would be
exactly the same as they were originally. This diminished value of money
throughout the world (at least, if the diminution was considerable)
would cause a suspension, or at least a diminution, of the annual supply
from the mines: since the metal would no longer command a value
equivalent to its highest cost of production. The annual waste would,
therefore, not be fully made up, and the usual causes of destruction
would gradually reduce the aggregate quantity of the precious metals to
its former amount; after which their production would recommence on its
former scale. The discovery of the treasure would thus produce only
temporary effects; namely, a brief disturbance of international trade
until the treasure had disseminated itself through the world, and then a
temporary depression in the value of the metal, below that which
corresponds to the cost of producing or of obtaining it; which Edition:
current; Page: [631] depression would gradually be corrected, by a
temporarily diminished production in the producing countries, and
importation in the importing countries.

The same effects which would thus arise from the discovery of a
treasure, accompany the process by which bank notes, or any of the other
substitutes for money, take the place of the precious metals. Suppose
that England possessed a currency wholly metallic of twenty millions
sterling, and that suddenly twenty millions of bank notes were sent into
circulation. If these were issued by bankers, they would be employed in
loans, or in the purchase of securities, and would therefore create a
sudden fall in the rate of interest, which would probably send a great
part of the twenty millions of gold out of the country as capital to
seek a higher rate of interest elsewhere, before there had been time for
any action on prices. But we will suppose that the notes are not issued
by bankers, or money-lenders of any kind, but by manufacturers, in the
payment of wages and purchase of materials, or by the government in its
ordinary expenses, so that the whole amount would be rapidly carried
into the markets for commodities. The following would be the natural
order of consequences. All prices would rise greatly. Exportation would
almost cease; importation would be prodigiously stimulated. A great
balance of payments would become due, the exchanges would turn against
England, to the full extent of the cost of exporting money; and the
surplus coin would pour itself rapidly forth, over the various countries
of the world, in the order of their proximity, geographically and
commercially, to England. The efflux would continue until the currencies
of all countries had come to a level; by which I do not mean, until
money became of the same value everywhere, but until the differences
were only those which existed before, and which corresponded to
permanent differences in the cost of obtaining it. When the rise of
prices had extended itself in an equal degree to all countries, exports
and imports would everywhere revert to what they were at first, would
balance one another, and the exchanges would return to par. If such a
sum of money as twenty millions, when spread over the whole surface of
the commercial world, were sufficient to raise the general level in a
perceptible degree, the effect would be of no long duration. No
alteration having occurred in the general conditions under which the
metals were procured, either in the world at large or in any part of it,
the reduced value would no longer be remunerating and the supply from
the mines would cease partially or wholly, until the Edition: current;
Page: [632] twenty millions were absorbed;∗ after which absorption, the
currencies of all countries would be, in quantity and in value, nearly
at their original level. I say nearly, for in strict accuracy there
would be a slight difference. A somewhat smaller annual supply of the
precious metals would now be required, there being in the world twenty
millions less of metallic money undergoing waste. The equilibrium of
payments, consequently, between the mining countries and the rest of the
world, would thenceforth require that the mining countries should either
export rather more of something else, or import rather less of foreign
commodities; which implies a somewhat lower range of prices than
previously in the mining countries, and a somewhat higher in all others;
a scantier currency in the former, and rather fuller currencies in the
latter. This effect, which would be too trifling to require notice
except for the illustration of a principle, is the only permanent change
which would be produced on international trade, or on the value or
quantity of the currency of any country.

Effects of another kind, however, will have been produced. Twenty
millions, which formerly existed in the unproductive form of metallic
money, have been converted into what is, or is capable of becoming,
productive capital. This gain is at first made by England at the expense
of other countries, who have taken her superfluity of this costly and
unproductive article off her hands, giving for it an equivalent value in
other commodities. By degrees the loss is made up to those countries by
diminished influx from the mines, and finally the world has gained a
virtual addition of twenty millions to its productive resources. Adam
Smith’s illustration, though so well known, deserves for its extreme
aptness to be once more repeated. He compares the substitution of paper
in the room of the precious metals, to the construction of a highway
through the air, by which the ground now occupied by roads would become
available for agriculture. As in that case a portion of the soil, so in
this a part of the accumulated wealth of the country, would be relieved
from a function in which it was only employed in rendering other soils
and capitals productive, and would itself become applicable to
production; the office it previously fulfilled being equally well
discharged by a medium which costs nothing.

Edition: current; Page: [633]
The value saved to the community by thus dispensing with metallic money,
is a clear gain to those who provide the substitute. They have the use
of twenty millions of circulating medium which have cost them only the
expense of an engraver’s plate. If they employ this accession to their
fortunes as productive capital, the produce of the country is increased,
and the community benefited, as much as by any other capital of equal
amount. Whether it is so employed or not, depends, in some degree, upon
the mode of issuing it. If issued by the government, and employed in
paying off debt, it would probably become productive capital. The
government, however, may prefer employing this extraordinary resource in
its ordinary expenses; may squander it uselessly, or make it a mere
temporary substitute for taxation to an equivalent amount; in which last
case the amount is saved by the taxpayers at large, who either add it to
their capital or spend it as income. When paper currency is supplied, as
in our own country, by bankers and banking companies, the amount is
almost wholly turned into productive capital: for the issuers, being at
all times liable to be called upon to refund the value, are under the
strongest inducements not to squander it, and the only cases in which it
is not forthcoming are cases of fraud or mismanagement. A banker’s
profession being that of a money-lender, his issue of notes is a simple
extension of his ordinary occupation. He lends the amount to farmers,
manufacturers, or dealers, who employ it in their several businesses. So
employed, it yields, like any other capital, wages of labour and profits
of stock. The profit is shared between the banker, who receives
interest, and a succession of borrowers, mostly for short periods, who
after paying the interest, gain a profit in addition, or a convenience
equivalent to profit. The capital itself in the long run becomes
entirely wages, and when replaced by the sale of the produce, becomes
wages again; thus affording a perpetual fund, of the value of twenty
millions, for the maintenance of productive labour, and increasing the
annual produce of the country by all that can be produced through the
means of a capital of that value. To this gain must be added a further
saving to the country, of the annual supply of the precious metals
necessary for repairing the wear and tear, and other waste, of a
metallic currency.

The substitution, therefore, of paper for the precious metals, should
always be carried as far as is consistent with safety; no greater amount
of metallic currency being retained than is necessary to maintain, both
in fact and in public belief, the convertibility of the paper. A country
with the extensive commercial relations of Edition: current; Page: [634]
England is liable to be suddenly called upon for large foreign payments,
sometimes in loans, or other investments of capital abroad, sometimes as
the price of some unusual importation of goods, the most frequent case
being that of large importations of food consequent on a bad harvest. To
meet such demands it is necessary that there should be, either in
circulation or in the coffers of the banks, coin or bullion to a very
considerable amount, and that this, when drawn out by any emergency,
should be allowed to return after the emergency is past. But since gold
wanted for exportation is almost invariably drawn from the reserves of
the banks, and is never likely to be taken directly from the circulation
while the banks remain solvent, the only advantage which can be obtained
from retaining partially a metallic currency for daily purposes is that
the banks may occasionally replenish their reserves from it.

§ 3. When metallic money had been entirely superseded and expelled from
circulation, by the substitution of an equal amount of bank notes, any
attempt to keep a still further quantity of paper in circulation must,
if the notes are convertible, be a complete failure. The new issue would
again set in motion the same train of consequences by which the gold
coin had already been expelled. The metals would, as before, be required
for exportation, and would be for that purpose demanded from the banks,
to the full extent of the superfluous notes; which thus could not
possibly be retained in circulation. If, indeed, the notes were
inconvertible, there would be no such obstacle to the increase of their
quantity. An inconvertible paper acts in the same way as a convertible,
while there remains any coin for it to supersede: the difference begins
to manifest itself when all the coin is driven from circulation (except
what may be retained for the convenience of small change), and the
issues still go on increasing. When the paper begins to exceed in
quantity the metallic currency which it superseded, prices of course
rise; things which were worth 5l. in metallic money, become worth 6l. in
inconvertible paper, or more, as the case may be. But this rise of price
will not, as in the cases before examined, stimulate import, and
discourage export. The imports and exports are determined by the
metallic prices of things, not by the paper prices: and it is only when
the paper is exchangeable at pleasure for the metals that paper prices
and metallic prices must correspond.

Let us suppose that England is the country which has the depreciated
paper. Suppose that some English production could be Edition: current;
Page: [635] bought, while the currency was still metallic, for 5l., and
sold in France for 5l. 10s., the difference covering the expense and
risk, and affording a profit to the merchant. On account of the
depreciation this commodity will now cost in England 6l., and cannot be
sold in France for more than 5l. 10s., and yet it will be exported as
before. Why? Because the 5l. 10s., which the exporter can get for it in
France, is not depreciated paper, but gold or silver: and since in
England bullion has risen, in the same proportion with other things—if
the merchant brings the gold or silver to England, he can sell his 5l.
10s. for 6l. 12s., and obtain as before 10 per cent for profit and
expenses.

It thus appears, that a depreciation of the currency does not affect the
foreign trade of the country: this is carried on precisely as if the
currency maintained its value. But though the trade is not affected, the
exchanges are. When the imports and exports are in equilibrium, the
exchange, in a metallic currency, would be at par; a bill on France for
the equivalent of five sovereigns, would be worth five sovereigns. But
five sovereigns, or the quantity of gold contained in them, having come
to be worth in England 6l., it follows that a bill on France for 5l.
will be worth 6l. When, therefore, the real exchange is at par, there
will be a nominal exchange against the country, of as much per cent as
the amount of the depreciation. If the currency is depreciated 10, 15,
or 20 per cent, then in whatever way the real exchange, arising from the
variations of international debts and credits, may vary, the quoted
exchange will always differ 10, 15, or 20 per cent from it. However high
this nominal premium may be, it has no tendency to send gold out of the
country, for the purpose of drawing a bill against it and profiting by
the premium; because the gold so sent must be procured, not from the
banks and at par, as in the case of a convertible currency, but in the
market at an advance of price equal to the premium. In such cases,
instead of saying that the exchange is unfavourable, it would be a more
correct representation to say that the par has altered, since there is
now required a larger quantity of English currency to be equivalent to
the same quantity of foreign. The exchanges, however, continue to be
computed according to the metallic par. The quoted exchanges, therefore,
when there is a depreciated currency, are compounded of two elements or
factors; the real exchange, which follows the variations of
international payments, and the nominal exchange, which varies with the
depreciation of the currency, but which, while there is any depreciation
at all, must always be unfavourable. Since the Edition: current; Page:
[636] amount of depreciation is exactly measured by the degree in which
the market price of bullion exceeds the Mint valuation, we have a sure
criterion to determine what portion of the quoted exchange, being
referable to depreciation, may be struck off as nominal; the result so
corrected expressing the real exchange.

The same disturbance of the exchanges and of international trade, which
is produced by an increased issue of convertible bank notes, is in like
manner produced by those extensions of credit, which, as was so fully
shown in a preceding chapter, have the same effect on prices as an
increase of the currency. Whenever circumstances have given such an
impulse to the spirit of speculation as to occasion a great increase of
purchases on credit, money prices rise, just as much as they would have
risen if each person who so buys on credit had bought with money. All
the effects, therefore, must be similar. As a consequence of high
prices, exportation is checked and importation stimulated; though in
fact the increase of importation seldom waits for the rise of prices
which is the consequence of speculation, inasmuch as some of the great
articles of import are usually among the things in which speculative
overtrading first shows itself. There is, therefore, in such periods,
usually a great excess of imports over exports; and when the time comes
at which these must be paid for, the exchanges become unfavourable, and
gold flows out of the country. In what precise manner this efflux of
gold takes effect on prices, depends on circumstances of which we shall
presently speak more fully; but that its effect is to make them recoil
downwards, is certain and evident. The recoil, once begun, generally
becomes a total rout, and the unusual extension of credit is rapidly
exchanged for an unusual contraction of it. Accordingly, when credit has
been imprudently stretched, and the speculative spirit carried to
excess, the turn of the exchanges, and consequent pressure on the banks
to obtain gold for exportation, are generally the proximate cause of the
catastrophe. But these phenomena, though a conspicuous accompaniment,
are no essential part of the collapse of credit called a commercial
crisis; which, as we formerly showed,∗ might happen to as great an
extent, and is quite as likely to happen, in a country, if any such
there were, altogether destitute of foreign trade.

Edition: current; Page: [637]


CHAPTER XXIII: of the rate of interest

§ 1. The present seems the most proper place for discussing the
circumstances which determine the rate of interest. The interest of
loans, being really a question of exchange value, falls naturally into
the present division of our subject: and the two topics of Currency and
Loans, though in themselves distinct, are so intimately blended in the
phenomena of what is called the money market, that it is impossible to
understand the one without the other, and in many minds the two subjects
are mixed up in the most inextricable confusion.

In the preceding Book∗ we defined the relation in which interest stands
to profit. We found that the gross profit of capital might be
distinguished into three parts, which are respectively the remuneration
for risk, for trouble, and for the capital itself, and may be termed
insurance, wages of superintendence, and interest. After making
compensation for risk, that is, after covering the average losses to
which capital is exposed either by the general circumstances of society
or by the hazards of the particular employment, there remains a surplus,
which partly goes to repay the owner of the capital for his abstinence,
and partly the employer of it for his time and trouble. How much goes to
the one and how much to the other, is shown by the amount of the
remuneration which, when the two functions are separated, the owner of
capital can obtain from the employer for its use. This is evidently a
question of demand and supply. Nor have demand and supply any different
meaning or effect in this case from what they have in all others. The
rate of interest will be such as to equalize the demand for loans with
the supply of them. It will be such, that exactly as much as some people
are desirous to borrow at that rate, others shall be willing Edition:
current; Page: [638] to lend. If there is more offered than demanded,
interest will fall; if more is demanded than offered, it will rise; and
in both cases, to the point at which the equation of supply and demand
is re-established.

Both the demand and supply of loans fluctuate more incessantly than any
other demand or supply whatsoever. The fluctuations in other things
depend on a limited number of influencing circumstances; but the desire
to borrow, and the willingness to lend, are more or less influenced by
every circumstance which affects the state or prospects of industry or
commerce, either generally or in any of their branches. The rate of
interest, therefore, on good security, which alone we have here to
consider (for interest in which considerations of risk bear a part may
swell to any amount) is seldom, in the great centres of money
transactions, precisely the same for two days together; as is shown by
the never-ceasing variations in the quoted prices of the funds and other
negotiable securities. Nevertheless, there must be, as in other cases of
value, some rate which (in the language of Adam Smith and Ricardo) may
be called the natural rate; some rate about which the market rate
oscillates, and to which it always tends to return. This rate partly
depends on the amount of accumulation going on in the hands of persons
who cannot themselves attend to the employment of their savings, and
partly on the comparative taste existing in the community for the active
pursuits of industry, or for the leisure, ease, and independence of an
annuitant.

§ 2. To exclude casual fluctuations, we will suppose commerce to be in a
quiescent condition, no employment being unusually prosperous, and none
particularly distressed. In these circumstances, the more thriving
producers and traders have their capital fully employed, and many are
able to transact business to a considerably greater extent than they
have capital for. These are naturally borrowers: and the amount which
they desire to borrow, and can obtain credit for, constitutes the demand
for loans on account of productive employment. To these must be added
the loans required by Government, and by landowners, or other
unproductive consumers who have good security to give. This constitutes
the mass of loans for which there is an habitual demand.

Now it is conceivable that there might exist, in the hands of persons
disinclined or disqualified for engaging personally in business, a mass
of capital equal to, and even exceeding, this demand. In that Edition:
current; Page: [639] case there would be an habitual excess of
competition on the part of lenders, and the rate of interest would bear
a low proportion to the rate of profit. Interest would be forced down to
the point which would either tempt borrowers to take a greater amount of
loans than they had a reasonable expectation of being able to employ in
their business, or would so discourage a portion of the lenders, as to
make them either forbear to accumulate, or endeavour to increase their
income by engaging in business on their own account, and incurring the
risks, if not the labours, of industrial employment.

On the other hand, the capital owned by persons who prefer lending it at
interest, or whose avocations prevent them from personally
superintending its employment, may be short of the habitual demand for
loans. It may be in great part absorbed by the investments afforded by
the public debt and by mortgages, and the remainder may not be
sufficient to supply the wants of commerce. If so, the rate of interest
will be raised so high as in some way to re-establish the equilibrium.
When there is only a small difference between interest and profit, many
borrowers may no longer be willing to increase their responsibilities
and involve their credit for so small a remuneration: or some who would
otherwise have engaged in business, may prefer leisure, and become
lenders instead of borrowers, or others, under the inducement of high
interest and easy investment for their capital, may retire from business
earlier, and with smaller fortunes, than they otherwise would have done.
Or, lastly, there is another process by which, in England and other
commercial countries, a large portion of the requisite supply of loans
is obtained. Instead of its being afforded by persons not in business,
the affording it may itself become a business. A portion of the capital
employed in trade may be supplied by a class of professional money
lenders. These money lenders, however, must have more than a mere
interest; they must have the ordinary rate of profit on their capital,
risk and all other circumstances being allowed for. But it can never
answer to any one who borrows for the purposes of his business, to pay a
full profit for capital from which he will only derive a full profit:
and money-lending, as an employment, for the regular supply of trade,
cannot, therefore, be carried on except by persons who, in addition to
their own capital, can lend their credit, or, in other words, the
capital of other people: that is, bankers, and persons (such as
bill-brokers) who are virtually bankers, since they receive money in
deposit. A bank which lends its notes, lends capital which it borrows
Edition: current; Page: [640] from the community, and for which it pays
no interest. A bank of deposit lends capital which it collects from the
community in small parcels; sometimes without paying any interest, as is
the case with the London private bankers; and if, like the Scotch, the
joint stock, and most of the country banks, it does pay interest, it
still pays much less than it receives; for the depositors, who in any
other way could mostly obtain for such small balances no interest worth
taking any trouble for, are glad to receive even a little. Having this
subsidiary resource, bankers are enabled to obtain, by lending at
interest, the ordinary rate of profit on their own capital. In any other
manner, money-lending could not be carried on as a regular mode of
business, except upon terms on which none would consent to borrow but
persons either counting on extraordinary profits, or in urgent need:
unproductive consumers who have exceeded their means, or merchants in
fear of bankruptcy. The disposable capital deposited in banks; that
represented by bank notes; the capital of bankers themselves, and that
which their credit, in any way in which they use it, enables them to
dispose of; these, together with the funds belonging to those who,
either from necessity or preference, live upon the interest of their
property, constitute the general loan fund of the country: and the
amount of this aggregate fund, when set against the habitual demands of
producers and dealers, and those of the Government and of unproductive
consumers, determines the permanent or average rate of interest; which
must always be such as to adjust these two amounts to one another.∗ But
while the whole of this mass of lent capital takes effect upon the
permanent rate of interest, the fluctuations depend almost entirely upon
the portion which is in the hands of bankers; for it is that portion
almost exclusively which, being lent for short times only, is
continually in the market seeking an investment. The capital of those
who live on the interest of their own fortunes, has generally sought and
found some fixed investment, such as the public funds, mortgages, or the
Edition: current; Page: [641] bonds of public companies, which
investment, except under peculiar temptations or necessities, is not
changed.

§ 3. Fluctuations in the rate of interest arise from variations either
in the demand for loans or in the supply. The supply is liable to
variation, though less so than the demand. The willingness to lend is
greater than usual at the commencement of a period of speculation, and
much less than usual during the revulsion which follows. In speculative
times, money-lenders as well as other people are inclined to extend
their business by stretching their credit; they lend more than usual
(just as other classes of dealers and producers employ more than usual)
of capital which does not belong to them. Accordingly, these are the
times when the rate of interest is low; though for this too (as we shall
hereafter see) there are other causes. During the revulsion, on the
contrary, interest always rises inordinately, because, while there is a
most pressing need on the part of many persons to borrow, there is a
general disinclination to lend. This disinclination, when at its extreme
point, is called a panic. It occurs when a succession of unexpected
failures has created in the mercantile, and sometimes also in the
non-mercantile public, a general distrust in each other’s solvency;
disposing every one not only to refuse fresh credit, except on very
onerous terms, but to call in, if possible, all credit which he has
already given. Deposits are withdrawn from banks; notes are returned on
the issuers in exchange for specie; bankers raise their rate of
discount, and withhold their customary advances; merchants refuse to
renew mercantile bills. At such times the most calamitous consequences
were formerly experienced from the attempt of the law to prevent more
than a certain limited rate of interest from being given or taken.
Persons who could not borrow at five per cent, had to pay, not six or
seven, but ten or fifteen per cent, to compensate the lender for risking
the penalties of the law: or had to sell securities or goods for ready
money at a still greater sacrifice.

In the intervals between commercial crises, there is usually a tendency
in the rate of interest to a progressive decline, from the gradual
process of accumulation: which process, in the great commercial
countries, is sufficiently rapid to account for the almost periodical
recurrence of these fits of speculation; since, when a few years have
elapsed without a crisis, and no new and tempting channel for investment
has been opened in the meantime, there is always found to have occurred
in those few years so large an increase Edition: current; Page: [642] of
capital seeking investment, as to have lowered considerably the rate of
interest, whether indicated by the prices of securities or by the rate
of discount on bills; and this diminution of interest tempts the
possessor to incur hazards in hopes of a more considerable return.

1 The rate of interest is, at times, affected more or less permanently
by circumstances, though not of frequent, yet of occasional occurrence,
which tend to alter the proportion between the class of
interest-receiving and that of profit-receiving capitalists. Two causes
of this description, operating in contrary ways, have manifested
themselves of late years, and are now producing considerable effects in
England. One is the gold discoveries. The masses of the precious metals
which are constantly arriving from the gold countries, are, it may
safely be said, wholly added to the funds that supply the loan market.
So great an additional capital, not divided between the two classes of
capitalists, but aggregated bodily to the capital of the
interest-receiving class, disturbs the pre-existing ratio between the
two, and tends to depress interest relatively to profit. Another
circumstance of still more recent date, but tending to the contrary
effect, is the legalization of joint-stock associations with limited
liability. The shareholders in these associations, now so rapidly
multiplying, are drawn almost exclusively from the lending class; from
those who either left their disposable funds in deposit, to be lent out
by bankers, or invested them in public or private securities, and
received the interest. To the extent of their shares in any of these
companies (with the single exception of banking companies) they have
become traders on their own capital; they have ceased to be lenders, and
have even, in most cases, passed over to the class of borrowers. Their
subscriptions have been abstracted from the funds which feed the loan
market, and they themselves have become competitors for a share of the
remainder of those funds: of all which, the natural effect is a rise of
interest. And it would not be surprising if, for a considerable time to
come, the ordinary rate of interest in England should bear a higher
proportion to the common rate of mercantile profit, than it has borne at
any time since the influx of new gold set in.∗

Edition: current; Page: [643]
The demand for loans varies much more largely than the supply, and
embraces longer cycles of years in its aberrations. A time of war, for
example, is a period of unusual drafts on the loan market. The
Government, at such times, generally incurs new loans, and as these
usually succeed each other rapidly as long as the war lasts, the general
rate of interest is kept higher in war than in peace, without reference
to the rate of profit, and productive industry is stinted of its usual
supplies. During part of the last war with France, the Government could
not borrow under six per cent, and of course all other borrowers had to
pay at least as much. Nor does the influence of these loans altogether
cease when the Government ceases to contract others; for those already
contracted continue to afford an investment for a greatly increased
amount of the disposable capital of the country, which if the national
debt were paid off, would be added to the mass of capital seeking
investment, and (independently of temporary disturbance) could not but,
to some extent, permanently lower the rate of interest.

The same effect on interest which is produced by Government loans for
war expenditure, is produced by the sudden opening of any new and
generally attractive mode of permanent investment. The only instance of
the kind in recent history on a scale comparable to that of the war
loans, is the absorption of capital in the construction of railways.
This capital must have been principally drawn from the deposits in
banks, or from savings which would have gone into deposit, and which
were destined to be ultimately employed in buying securities from
persons who would have employed the purchase money in discounts or other
loans at interest: in either case, it was a draft on the general loan
fund. It is, in fact, evident, that unless savings were made expressly
to be employed in railway adventure, the amount thus employed must have
been derived either from the actual capital of persons in business, or
from capital which would have been lent to persons in business. In the
first case, the subtraction, by crippling their means, obliges them to
be larger borrowers; in the second, it leaves less for them to borrow;
in either case it equally tends to raise the rate of interest.

Edition: current; Page: [644]
§ 4.1 I have, thus far, considered loans, and the rate of interest, as a
matter which concerns capital in general, in direct opposition to the
popular notion, according to which it only concerns money. In loans, as
in all other money transactions, I have regarded the money which passes,
only as the medium, and commodities as the thing really transferred—the
real subject of the transaction. And this is, in the main, correct:
because the purpose for which, in the ordinary course of affairs, money
is borrowed, is to acquire a purchasing power over commodities. In an
industrious and commercial country, the ulterior intention commonly is,
to employ the commodities as capital: but even in the case of loans for
unproductive consumption, as those of spendthrifts, or of the
Government, the amount borrowed is taken from a previous accumulation,
which would otherwise have been lent to carry on productive industry; it
is, therefore, so much subtracted from what may correctly be called the
amount of loanable capital.

There is, however, a not unfrequent case, in which the purpose of the
borrower is different from what I have here supposed. He may borrow
money, neither to employ it as capital nor to spend it unproductively,
but to pay a previous debt. In this case, what he wants is not
purchasing power, but legal tender, or something which a creditor will
accept as equivalent to it. His need is specifically for money, not for
commodities or capital. It is the demand arising from this cause, which
produces almost all the great and sudden variations of the rate of
interest. Such a demand forms one of the earliest features of a
commercial crisis. At such a period, many persons in business who have
contracted engagements, have been prevented by a change of circumstances
from obtaining in time the means on which they calculated for fulfilling
them. These means they must obtain at any sacrifice, or submit to
bankruptcy; and what they must have is money. Other capital, however
much of it they may possess, cannot answer the purpose unless money can
first be obtained for it; while, on the contrary, without any increase
of the capital of the country, a mere increase of circulating
instruments of credit (be they of as little worth for any other purpose
as the box of one pound notes discovered in the vaults of the Bank of
England during the panic of 1825) will effectually serve their turn if
only they are allowed to make use of it. An increased issue of notes, in
the form of loans, is all that is required to satisfy the Edition:
current; Page: [645] demand, and put an end to the accompanying panic.
But although, in this case, it is not capital, or purchasing power, that
the borrower needs, but money as money, it is not only money that is
transferred to him. The money carries its purchasing power with it
wherever it goes; and money thrown into the loan market really does,
through its purchasing power, turn over an increased portion of the
capital of the country into the direction of loans. Though money alone
was wanted, capital passes; and it may still be said with truth that it
is by an addition to loanable capital that the rise of the rate of
interest is met and corrected.

Independently of this, however, there is a real relation, which it is
indispensable to recognise, between loans and money. Loanable capital is
all of it in the form of money. Capital destined directly for production
exists in many forms; but capital destined for lending exists normally
in that form alone. Owing to this circumstance, we should naturally
expect that among the causes which affect more or less the rate of
interest, would be found not only causes which act through capital, but
some causes which act, directly at least, only through money.

1 The rate of interest bears no necessary relation to the quantity or
value of the money in circulation. The permanent amount of the
circulating medium, whether great or small, affects only prices; not the
rate of interest. A depreciation of the currency, when it has become an
accomplished fact, affects the rate of interest in no manner whatever.
It diminishes indeed the power of money to buy commodities, but not the
power of money to buy money. If a hundred pounds will buy a perpetual
annuity of four pounds a year, a depreciation which makes the hundred
pounds worth only half as much as before, has precisely the same effect
on the four pounds, and cannot therefore alter the relation between the
two. The greater or smaller number of counters which must be used to
express a given amount of real wealth, makes no difference in the
position or interests of lenders or borrowers, and therefore makes no
difference in the demand and supply of loans. There is the same amount
of real capital lent and borrowed; and if the capital in the hands of
lenders is represented by a greater number of pounds sterling, the same
greater number of pounds sterling will, in consequence of the rise of
prices, be now required for the purposes to which the borrowers intend
to apply them.

Edition: current; Page: [646]
But though the greater or less quantity of money makes in itself no
difference in the rate of interest, a change from a less quantity to a
greater, or from a greater to a less, may and does make a difference in
it.

Suppose money to be in process of depreciation by means of an
inconvertible currency, issued by a government in payment of its
expenses. This fact will in no way diminish the demand for real capital
on loan; but it will diminish the real capital loanable, because, this
existing only in the form of money, the increase of quantity depreciates
it. Estimated in capital, the amount offered is less, while the amount
required is the same as before. Estimated in currency, the amount
offered is only the same as before, while the mount required, owing to
the rise of prices, is greater. Either way, the rate of interest must
rise. So that in this case increase of currency really affects the rate
of interest, but in the contrary way to that which is generally
supposed; by raising, not by lowering it.

The reverse will happen as the effect of calling in, or diminishing in
quantity, a depreciated currency. The money in the hands of lenders, in
common with all other money, will be enhanced in value, that is, there
vill be a greater amount of real capital seeking borrowers; while the
real capital wanted by borrowers will be only the same as before, and
the money amount less: the rate of interest, therefore, will tend to
fall.

We thus see that depreciation, merely as such, while in process of
taking place, tends to raise the rate of interest: and the expectation
of further depreciation adds to this effect; because lenders who expect
that their interest will be paid and the principal perhaps redeemed, in
a less valuable currency than they lent, of course require a rate of
interest sufficient to cover this contingent loss.

But this effect is more than counteracted by a contrary one, when the
additional money is thrown into circulation not by purchases but by
loans. In England, and in most other commercial countries, the paper
currency in common use, being a currency provided by bankers, is all
issued in the way of loans, except the part employed in the purchase of
gold and silver. The same operation, therefore, which adds to the
currency also adds to the loans: the whole increase of currency in the
first instance swells the loan market. Considered as an addition to
loans it tends to lower interest, more than in its character of
depreciation it tends to raise it; for Edition: current; Page: [647] the
former effect depends on the ratio which the new money bears to the
money lent, while the latter depends on its ratio to all the money in
circulation. An increase, therefore, of currency issued by banks, tends,
while the process continues, to bring down or to keep down the rate of
interest. A similar effect is produced by the increase of money arising
from the gold discoveries; almost the whole of which, as already
noticed, is, when brought to Europe, added to the deposits in banks, and
consequently to the amount of loans; and when drawn out and invested in
securities, liberates an equivalent amount of other loanable capital.
The newly-arrived gold can only get itself invested, in any given state
of business, by lowering the rate of interest; and as long as the influx
continues, it cannot fail to keep interest lower than, all other
circumstances being supposed the same, would otherwise have been the
case.

As the introduction of additional gold and silver, which goes into the
loan market, tends to keep down the rate of interest, so any
considerable abstraction of them from the country invariably raises it;
even when occurring in the course of trade, as in paying for the extra
importations caused by a bad harvest, or for the high-priced cotton
which, under the influence of the American civil war, was imported from
so many parts of the world. The money required for these payments is
taken in the first instance from the deposits in the hands of bankers,
and to that extent starves the fund that supplies the loan market.

The rate of interest, then, depends essentially and permanently on the
comparative amount of real capital offered and demanded in the way of
loan; but is subject to temporary disturbances of various sorts from
increase and diminution of the circulating medium; which derangements
are somewhat intricate, and sometimes in direct opposition to first
appearances. All these distinctions are veiled over and confounded, by
the unfortunate misapplication of language which designates the rate of
interest by a phrase (“the value of money”) which properly expresses the
purchasing power of the circulating medium. The public, even mercantile,
habitually fancies that ease in the money market, that is, facility of
borrowing at low interest, is proportional to the quantity of money in
circulation. Not only, therefore, are bank notes supposed to produce
effects as currency, which they only produce as loans, but attention is
habitually diverted from effects similar in kind and much greater in
degree, when produced by an action on loans which does not happen to be
accompanied by any action on the currency.

Edition: current; Page: [648]
For example, in considering the effect produced by the proceedings of
banks in encouraging the excesses of speculation, an immense effect is
usually attributed to their issues of notes, but until of late hardly
any attention was paid to the management of their deposits; though
nothing is more certain than that their imprudent extensions of credit
take place more frequently by means of their deposits than of their
issues. “There is no doubt,” says Mr. Tooke,∗ “that banks, whether
private or joint stock, may, if imprudently conducted, minister to an
undue extension of credit for the purpose of speculations, whether in
commodities, or in over-trading in exports or imports, or in building or
mining operations, and that they have so ministered not unfrequently,
and in some cases to an extent ruinous to themselves, and without
ultimate benefit to the parties to whose views their resources were made
subservient.” But, “supposing all the deposits received by a banker to
be in coin, is he not, just as much as the issuing banker, exposed to
the importunity of customers, whom it may be impolitic to refuse, for
loans or discounts, or to be tempted by a high interest? and may he not
be induced to encroach so much upon his deposits as to leave him, under
not improbable circumstances, unable to meet the demands of his
depositors? In what respect, indeed, would the case of a banker in a
perfectly metallic circulation differ from that of a London banker at
the present day? He is not a creator of money, he cannot avail himself
of his privilege as an issuer in aid of his other business, and yet
there have been lamentable instances of London bankers issuing money in
excess.”

In the discussions, too, which have been for so many years carried on
respecting the operations of the Bank of England, and the effects
produced by those operations on the state of credit, though for nearly
half a century there never has been a commercial crisis which the Bank
has not been strenuously accused either of producing or of aggravating,
it has been almost universally assumed that the influence of its acts
was felt only through the amount of its notes in circulation, and that
if it could be prevented from exercising any discretion as to that one
feature in its position, it would no longer have any power liable to
abuse. This at least is an error which, after the experience of the year
1847, we may hope has been committed for the last time. During that year
the hands of the bank were absolutely tied, in its character of a bank
of issue; but through its Edition: current; Page: [649] operations as a
bank of deposit it exercised as great an influence, or apparent
influence, on the rate of interest and the state of credit, as at any
former period; it was exposed to as vehement accusations of abusing that
influence; and a crisis occurred, such as few that preceded it had
equalled, and none perhaps surpassed, in intensity.

§ 5. Before quitting the general subject of this chapter, I will make
the obvious remark, that the rate of interest determines the value and
price of all those saleable articles which are desired and bought, not
for themselves, but for the income which they are capable of yielding.
The public funds, shares in joint-stock companies, and all descriptions
of securities, are at a high price in proportion as the rate of interest
is low. They are sold at the price which will give the market rate of
interest on the purchase money, with allowance for all differences in
the risk incurred, or in any circumstance of convenience. Exchequer
bills, for example, usually sell at a higher price than consols,
proportionally to the interest which they yield; because, though the
security is the same, yet the former being annually paid off at par
unless renewed by the holder, the purchaser (unless obliged to sell in a
moment of general emergency), is in no danger of losing anything by the
resale, except the premium he may have paid.

The price of land, mines, and all other fixed sources of income, depends
in like manner on the rate of interest. Land usually sells at a higher
price, in proportion to the income afforded by it, than the public
funds, not only because it is thought, even in this country, to be
somewhat more secure, but because ideas of power and dignity are
associated with its possession. But these differences are constant, or
nearly so; and in the variations of price, land follows, caeteris
paribus, the permanent (though of course not the daily) variations of
the rate of interest. When interest is low, land will naturally be dear;
when interest is high, land will be cheap. The last long war presented a
striking exception to this rule, since the price of land as well as the
rate of interest was then remarkably high. For this, however, there was
a special cause. The continuance of a very high average price of corn
for many years had raised the rent of land even more than in proportion
to the rise of interest and fall of the selling price of fixed incomes.
Had it not been for this accident, chiefly dependent on the seasons,
land must have sustained as great a depreciation in value as the public
funds: which it probably Edition: current; Page: [650] would do, were a
similar war to break out hereafter; to the signal disappointment of
those landlords and farmers who, generalizing from the casual
circumstances of a remarkable period, so long persuaded themselves that
a state of war was peculiarly advantageous, and a state of peace
disadvantageous, to what they chose to call the interests of
agriculture.

Edition: current; Page: [651]


CHAPTER XXIV: of the regulation of a convertible paper currency

§ 1. The frequent recurrence during the last half century of the painful
series of phenomena called a commercial crisis, has directed much of the
attention both of economists and of practical politicians to the
contriving of expedients for averting, or, at the least, mitigating its
evils. And the habit which grew up during the era of the Bank
restriction, of ascribing all alterations of high and low prices to the
issues of banks, has caused inquirers in general to fix their hopes of
success in moderating those vicissitudes upon schemes for the regulation
of bank notes. A scheme of this nature, after having obtained the
sanction of high authorities, so far established itself in the public
mind, as to be, with general approbation, converted into a law, at the
renewal of the Charter of the Bank of England in 1844: and the
regulation is still in force, though with a great abatement of its
popularity, and with its prestige impaired by three1 temporary
suspensions, on the responsibility of the executive, the earliest little
more than three years after its enactment. It is proper that the merits
of this plan for the regulation of a convertible bank note currency
should be here considered. Before touching upon the practical provisions
of Sir Robert Peel’s Act of 1844, I shall briefly state the nature, and
examine the grounds, of the theory on which it is founded.

It is believed by many, that banks of issue universally, or the Bank of
England in particular, have a power of throwing their notes into
circulation, and thereby raising prices, arbitrarily; that this power is
only limited by the degree of moderation with which they think fit to
exercise it; that when they increase their issues beyond the usual
amount, the rise of prices, thus produced, generates a spirit of
speculation in commodities, which carries prices still higher, Edition:
current; Page: [652] and ultimately causes a reaction and recoil,
mounting in extreme cases to a commercial crisis; and that every such
crisis which has occurred in this country within mercantile memory, has
been either originally produced by this cause, or greatly aggravated by
it. To this extreme length the currency theory has not been carried by
the eminent political economists who have given to a more moderate form
of the same theory the sanction of their names. But I have not
overstated the extravagance of the popular version; which is a
remarkable instance to what lengths a favourite theory will hurry, not
the closet students whose competency in such questions is often treated
with so much contempt, but men of the world and of business, who pique
themselves on the practical knowledge which they have at least had ample
opportunities of acquiring. Not only has this fixed idea of the currency
as the prime agent in the fluctuations of price made them shut their
eyes to the multitude of circumstances which, by influencing the
expectation of supply, are the true causes of almost all speculations,
and of almost all fluctuations of price; but in order to bring about the
chronological agreement required by their theory between the variations
of bank issues and those of prices, they have played such fantastic
tricks with facts and dates as would be thought incredible, if an
eminent practical authority had not taken the trouble of meeting them,
on the ground of mere history, with an elaborate exposure. I refer, as
all conversant with the subject must be aware, to Mr. Tooke’s History of
Prices. The result of Mr. Tooke’s investigations was thus stated by
himself, in his examination before the Commons' Committee on the Bank
Charter question in 1832; and the evidences of it stand recorded in his
book: “In point of fact, and historically, as far as my researches have
gone, in every signal instance of a rise or fall of prices, the rise or
fall has preceded, and therefore could not be the effect of, an
enlargement or contraction of the bank circulation.”

The extravagance of the currency theorists, in attributing almost every
rise or fall of prices to an enlargement or contraction of the issues of
bank notes, has raised up, by reaction, a theory the extreme opposite of
the former, of which, in scientific discussion, the most prominent
representatives are Mr. Tooke and Mr. Fullarton. This counter-theory
denies to bank notes, so long as their convertibility is maintained, any
power whatever of raising prices, and to banks any power of increasing
their circulation, except as a consequence of, and in proportion to, an
increase of the business to be done. This last statement is supported by
the unanimous assurances of all the Edition: current; Page: [653]
country bankers who have been examined before successive Parliamentary
Committees on the subject. They all bear testimony that (in the words of
Mr. Fullarton∗) “the amount of their issues is exclusively regulated by
the extent of local dealings and expenditure in their respective
districts, fluctuating with the fluctuations of production and price,
and that they neither can increase their issues beyond the limits which
the range of such dealings and expenditure prescribes, without the
certainty of having their notes immediately returned to them, nor
diminish them, but at an almost equal certainty of the vacancy being
filled up from some other source.” From these premises it is argued by
Mr. Tooke and Mr. Fullarton, that bank issues, since they cannot be
increased in amount unless there be an increased demand, cannot possibly
raise prices; cannot encourage speculation, nor occasion a commercial
crisis; and that the attempt to guard against that evil by an artificial
management of the issue of notes is of no effect for the intended
purpose, and liable to produce other consequences extremely calamitous.

§ 2. As much of this doctrine as rests upon testimony, and not upon
inference, appears to me incontrovertible. I give complete credence to
the assertion of the country bankers very clearly and correctly
condensed into a small compass in the sentence just quoted from Mr.
Fullarton. I am convinced that they cannot possibly increase their issue
of notes in any other circumstances than those which are there stated. I
believe, also, that the theory, grounded by Mr. Fullarton upon this
fact, contains a large portion of truth, and is far nearer to being the
expression of the whole truth than any form whatever of the currency
theory.

There are two states of the markets: one which may be termed the
quiescent state, the other the expectant, or speculative, state. The
first is that in which there is nothing tending to engender in any
considerable portion of the mercantile public a desire to extend their
operations. The producers produce and the dealers purchase only their
usual stocks, having no expectation of a more than usually rapid vent
for them. Each person transacts his ordinary amount of business, and no
more; or increases it only in correspondence with the increase of his
capital or connexion, or with the gradual growth of the demand for his
commodity, occasioned by the public prosperity. Edition: current; Page:
[654] Not meditating any unusual extension of their own operations,
producers and dealers do not need more than the usual accommodation from
bankers and other money lenders; and as it is only by extending their
loans that bankers increase their issues, none but a momentary
augmentation of issues is in these circumstances possible. If at a
certain time of the year a portion of the public have larger payments to
make than at other times, or if an individual, under some peculiar
exigency, requires an extra advance, they may apply for more bank notes,
and obtain them; but the notes will no more remain in circulation than
the extra quantity of Bank of England notes which are issued once in
every three months in payment of the dividends. The person to whom,
after being borrowed, the notes are paid away, has no extra payments to
make, and no peculiar exigency, and he keeps them by him unused, or
sends them into deposit, or repays with them a previous advance made to
him by some banker: in any case he does not buy commodities with them,
since by the supposition there is nothing to induce him to lay in a
larger stock of commodities than before. 1 Even if we suppose, as we may
do, that bankers create an artificial increase of the demand for loans
by offering them below the market rate of interest, the notes they issue
will not remain in circulation; for when the borrower, having completed
the transaction for which he availed himself of them, has paid them
away, the creditor or dealer who receives them, having no demand for the
immediate use of an extra quantity of notes, sends them into deposit. In
this case, therefore, there can be no addition, at the discretion of
bankers, to the general circulating medium: any increase of their issues
either comes back to them, or remains idle in the hands of the public,
and no rise takes place in prices.

But there is another state of the markets, strikingly contrasted with
the preceding, and to this state it is not so obvious that the theory of
Mr. Tooke and Mr. Fullarton is applicable; namely, when an impression
prevails, whether well founded or groundless, that the supply of one or
more great articles of commerce is likely to fall short of the ordinary
consumption. In such circumstances all persons connected with those
commodities desire to extend their operations. The producers or
importers desire to produce or import a larger quantity, speculators
desire to lay in a stock in order to profit by the expected rise of
price, and holders of the commodity desire Edition: current; Page: [655]
additional advances to enable them to continue holding. All these
classes are disposed to make a more than ordinary use of their credit,
and to this desire it is not denied that bankers very often unduly
administer. Effects of the same kind may be produced by anything which,
exciting more than usual hopes of profit, gives increased briskness to
business: for example, a sudden foreign demand for commodities on a
large scale, or the expectation of it; such as occurred on the opening
of Spanish America to English trade, and has occurred on various
occasions in the trade with the United States. Such occurrences produce
a tendency to a rise of price in exportable articles, and generate
speculations, sometimes of a reasonable, and (as long as a large
proportion of men in business prefer excitement to safety) frequently of
an irrational or immoderate character. In such cases there is a desire
in the mercantile classes, or in some portion of them, to employ their
credit, in a more than usual degree, as a power of purchasing. This is a
state of business which, when pushed to an extreme length, brings on the
revulsion called a commercial crisis; and it is a known fact that such
periods of speculation hardly ever pass off without having been
attended, during some part of their progress, by a considerable increase
of bank notes.

To this, however, it is replied by Mr. Tooke and Mr. Fullarton, that the
increase of the circulation always follows instead of preceding the rise
of prices, and is not its cause, but its effect. That in the first
place, the speculative purchases by which prices are raised, are not
effected by bank notes but by cheques, or still more commonly on a
simple book credit: and secondly, even if they were made with bank notes
borrowed for that express purpose from bankers, the notes, after being
used for that purpose, would, if not wanted for current transactions, be
returned into deposit by the persons receiving them. In this I fully
concur, and I regard it as proved, both scientifically and historically,
that during the ascending period of speculation, and as long as it is
confined to transactions between dealers, the issues of bank notes are
seldom materially increased, nor contribute anything to the speculative
rise of prices. It seems to me, however, that this can no longer be
affirmed when speculation has proceeded so far as to reach the
producers. Speculative orders given by merchants to manufacturers induce
them to extend their operations, and to become applicants to bankers for
increased advances, which, if made in notes, are not paid away to
persons who return them into deposit, but are partially Edition:
current; Page: [656] expended in paying wages, and pass into the various
channels of retail trade, where they become directly effective in
producing a further rise of prices. I cannot but think that this
employment of bank notes must have been powerfully operative on prices
at the time when notes of one and two pounds' value were permitted by
law. Admitting, however, that the prohibition of notes below five pounds
has now rendered this part of their operation comparatively
insignificant by greatly limiting their applicability to the payment of
wages, there is another form of their instrumentality which comes into
play in the latter stages of speculation, and which forms the principal
argument of the more moderate supporters of the currency theory. Though
advances by bankers are seldom demanded for the purpose of buying on
speculation, they are largely demanded by unsuccessful speculators for
the purpose of holding on; and the competition of these speculators for
a share of the loanable capital makes even those who have not speculated
more dependent than before on bankers for the advances they require.
Between the ascending period of speculation and the revulsion, there is
an interval extending to weeks and sometimes months, of struggling
against a fall. The tide having shown signs of turning, the speculative
holders are unwilling to sell in a falling market, and in the meantime
they require funds to enable them to fulfil even their ordinary
engagements. It is this stage that is ordinarily marked by a
considerable increase in the amount of the bank-note circulation. That
such an increase does usually take place is denied by no one. And I
think it must be admitted that this increase tends to prolong the
duration of the speculations; that it enables the speculative prices to
be kept up for some time after they would otherwise have collapsed; and
therefore prolongs and increases the drain of the precious metals for
exportation, which is the leading feature of this stage in the progress
of a commercial crisis: the continuance of which drain at last
endangering the power of the banks to fulfil their engagement of paying
their notes on demand, they are compelled to contract their credit more
suddenly and severely than would have been necessary if they had been
prevented from propping up speculation by increased advances, after the
time when the recoil had become inevitable.

§ 3. To prevent this retardation of the recoil, and ultimate aggravation
of its severity, is the object of the scheme for regulating the
currency, of which Lord Overstone, Mr. Norman, and Colonel Edition:
current; Page: [657] Torrens, were the first promulgators, and which
has, in a slightly modified form, been enacted into law.∗

According to the scheme in its original purity, the issue of promissory
notes for circulation was to be confined to one body. In the form
adopted by Parliament, all existing issuers were permitted to retain
this privilege, but none were to be hereafter admitted to it, even in
the place of those who might discontinue their issues: and, for all
except the Bank of England, a maximum of issues was prescribed, on a
scale intentionally low. To the Bank of England no maximum was fixed for
the aggregate amount of its notes, but only for the portion issued on
securities, or, in other words, on loan. These were never to exceed a
certain limit, fixed in the first instance at fourteen millions.† All
issues beyond that amount must be in exchange for bullion; of which the
Bank is bound to purchase, at a trifle below the Mint valuation, any
quantity which is offered to it, giving its notes in exchange. In
regard, therefore, to any issue of notes beyond the limit of fourteen
millions, the Bank is purely passive, having no function but the
compulsory one of giving its notes for gold at 3l. 17s. 9d., and gold
for its notes at Edition: current; Page: [658] 3l. 17s. 10½d., whenever
and by whomsoever it is called upon to do so.

The object for which this mechanism is intended is that the bank-note
currency may vary in its amount at the exact times, and in the exact
degree, in which a purely metallic currency would vary. And the precious
metals being the commodity that has hitherto approached nearest to that
invariability, in all the circumstances influencing value, which fits a
commodity for being adopted as a medium of exchange, it seems to be
thought that the excellence of the Act of 1844 is fully made out, if
under its operation the issues conform in all their variations of
quantity, and therefore, as is inferred, of value, to the variations
which would take place in a currency wholly metallic.

1 Now, all reasonable opponents of the Act, in common with its
supporters, acknowledge as an essential requisite of any substitute for
the precious metals, that it should conform exactly in its permanent
value to a metallic standard. And they say, that so long as it is
convertible into specie on demand, it does and must so conform. But when
the value of a metallic or of any other currency is spoken of, there are
two points to be considered; the permanent or average value, and the
fluctuations. It is to the permanent value of a metallic currency that
the value of a paper currency ought to conform. But there is no obvious
reason why it should be required to conform to the fluctuations too. The
only object of its conforming at all is steadiness of value; and with
respect to fluctuations the sole thing desirable is that they should be
the smallest possible. Now the fluctuations in the value of the currency
are determined, not by its quantity, whether it consist of gold or of
paper, but by the expansions and contractions of credit. To discover,
therefore, what currency will conform the most nearly to the permanent
value of the precious metals, we must find under what currency the
variations in credit are least frequent and least extreme. Now, whether
this object is best attained by a metallic currency (and therefore by a
paper currency exactly conforming in quantity to it) is precisely the
question to be decided. If it should prove that a paper currency which
follows all the fluctuations in quantity of a metallic, leads to more
violent revulsions of credit than one which is not held to this rigid
conformity, it will follow that the currency which agrees most exactly
in quantity with a metallic currency is not that which adheres closest
to its value; that is Edition: current; Page: [659] to say, its
permanent value, with which alone agreement is desirable.

Whether this is really the case or not we will now inquire. And first,
let us consider whether the Act effects the practical object chiefly
relied on in its defence by the more sober of its advocates, that of
arresting speculative extensions of credit at an earlier period, with a
less drain of gold, and consequently by a milder and more gradual
process. I think it must be admitted that to a certain degree it is
successful in this object.

I am aware of what may be urged, and reasonably urged, in opposition to
this opinion. It may be said, that when the time arrives at which the
banks are pressed for increased advances to enable speculators to fulfil
their engagements, a limitation of the issue of notes will not prevent
the banks, if otherwise willing, from making these advances; that they
have still their deposits as a source from which loans may be made
beyond the point which is consistent with prudence as bankers; and that
even if they refused to do so, the only effect would be that the
deposits themselves would be drawn out to supply the wants of the
depositors; which would be just as much an addition to the bank notes
and coin in the hands of the public, as if the notes themselves were
increased. This is true, and is a sufficient answer to those who think
that the advances of banks to prop up failing speculations are
objectionable chiefly as an increase of the currency. But the mode in
which they are really objectionable, is as an extension of credit. 1 If,
instead of increasing their discounts, the banks allow their deposits to
be drawn out, there is the same increase of currency (for a short time
at least), but there is not an increase of loans, at the time when there
ought to be a diminution. If they do increase their discounts, not by
means of notes, but at the expense of the deposits alone, their deposits
(properly so called) are definite and exhaustible, while notes may be
increased to any amount, or, after being returned, may be reissued
without limit. It is true that a bank, if willing to add indefinitely to
its liabilities, has the power of making its nominal deposits as
Edition: current; Page: [660] unlimited a fund as its issues could be;
it has only to make its advances in a book credit, which is creating
deposits out of its own liabilities, the money for which it has made
itself responsible becoming a deposit in its hands, to be drawn against
by cheques; and the cheques when drawn may be liquidated (either at the
same bank or at the clearing house) without the aid of notes, by a mere
transfer of credit from one account to another. I apprehend it is
chiefly in this way that undue extensions of credit, in periods of
speculation, are commonly made. But the banks are not likely to persist
in this course when the tide begins to turn. It is not when their
deposits have already begun to flow out, that they are likely to create
deposit accounts which represent, instead of funds placed in their
hands, fresh liabilities of their own. But experience proves that
extension of credit, when in the form of notes, goes on long after the
recoil from over-speculation has commenced. When this mode of resisting
the revulsion is made impossible, and deposits and book credits are left
as the only sources from which undue advances can be made, the rate of
interest is not so often, or so long, prevented from rising, after the
difficulties consequent on excess of speculation begin to be felt. On
the contrary, the necessity which the banks feel of diminishing their
advances to maintain their solvency, when they find their deposits
flowing out, and cannot supply the vacant place by their own notes,
accelerates the rise of the rate of interest. Speculative holders are
therefore obliged to submit earlier to that loss by resale, which could
not have been prevented from coming on them at last: the recoil of
prices and collapse of general credit take place sooner.

To appreciate the effects which this acceleration of the crisis has in
mitigating its intensity, let us advert more particularly to the nature
and effects of that leading feature in the period just preceding the
collapse, the drain of gold. A rise of prices produced by a speculative
extension of credit, even when bank notes have not been the instrument,
is not the less effectual (if it lasts long enough) in turning the
exchanges: and when the exchanges have turned from this cause, they can
only be turned back, and the drain of gold stopped, either by a fall of
prices or by a rise of the rate of interest. A fall of prices will stop
it by removing the cause which produced it, and by rendering goods a
more advantageous remittance than gold, even for paying debts already
due. A rise of the rate of interest, and consequent fall of the prices
of securities, will accomplish the purpose still more rapidly, by
inducing foreigners, instead of taking Edition: current; Page: [661]
away the gold which is due to them, to leave it for investment within
the country, and even send gold into the country to take advantage of
the increased rate of interest. Of this last mode of stopping a drain of
gold, the year 1847 afforded signal examples. But until one of these two
things takes place—until either prices fall, or the rate of interest
rises—nothing can possibly arrest, or even moderate, the efflux of gold.
Now, neither will prices fall nor interest rise, so long as the unduly
expanded credit is upheld by the continued advances of bankers. It is
well known that when a drain of gold has set in, even if bank notes have
not increased in quantity, it is upon them that the contraction first
falls, the gold wanted for exportation being always obtained from the
Bank of England in exchange for its notes. But under the system which
preceded 1844, the Bank of England, being subjected, in common with
other banks, to the importunities for fresh advances which are
characteristic of such a time, could, and often did, immediately
re-issue the notes which had been returned to it in exchange for
bullion. It is a great error, certainly, to suppose that the mischief of
this re-issue chiefly consisted in preventing a contraction of the
currency. It was, however, quite as mischievous as it has ever been
supposed to be. As long as it lasted, the efflux of gold could not
cease, since neither would prices fall nor interest rise while these
advances continued. Prices, having risen without any increase of bank
notes, could well have fallen without a diminution of them; but having
risen in consequence of an extension of credit, they could not fall
without a contraction of it. As long, therefore, as the Bank of England
and the other banks persevered in this course, so long gold continued to
flow out, until so little was left that the Bank of England, being in
danger of suspension of payments, was compelled at last to contract its
discounts so greatly and suddenly as to produce a much more extreme
variation in the rate of interest, inflict much greater loss and
distress on individuals, and destroy a much greater amount of the
ordinary credit of the country, than any real necessity required.

I acknowledge (and the experience of 1847 has proved to those who
overlooked it before) that the mischief now described may be wrought,
and in large measure, by the Bank of England, through its deposits
alone. It may continue or even increase its discounts and advances, when
it ought to contract them: with the ultimate effect of making the
contraction much more severe and sudden than necessary. I cannot but
think, however, that banks which commit this error with their deposits,
would commit it still more if they were Edition: current; Page: [662] at
liberty to make increased loans with their issues as well as their
deposits. I am compelled to think that the being restricted from
increasing their issues, is a real impediment to their making those
advances which arrest the tide at its turn, and make it rush like a
torrent afterwards1: and when the Act is blamed for interposing
obstacles at a time when not obstacles but facilities are needed, it
must in justice receive credit for interposing them when they are an
acknowledged benefit. In this particular, therefore, I think it cannot
be denied, that the new system is a real improvement upon the old.

§ 4. But however this may be, it seems to me certain that these
advantages, whatever value may be put on them, are purchased by still
greater disadvantages.

In the first place, a large extension of credit by bankers, though most
hurtful when, credit being already in an inflated state, it can only
serve to retard and aggravate the collapse, is most salutary when the
collapse has come, and when credit instead of being in excess is in
distressing deficiency, and increased advances by bankers, instead of
being an addition to the ordinary amount of floating credit, serve to
replace a mass of other credit which has been suddenly destroyed.
Antecedently to 1844, if the Bank of England occasionally aggravated the
severity of a commercial revulsion by rendering the collapse of credit
more tardy and hence more violent than necessary, it in return rendered
invaluable services during the revulsion itself, by coming forward with
advances to support solvent firms, at a time when all other paper and
almost all mercantile credit Edition: current; Page: [663] had become
comparatively valueless. This service was eminently conspicuous in the
crisis of 1825–6, the severest probably ever experienced; during which
the Bank increased what is called its circulation by many millions, in
advances to those mercantile firms of whose ultimate solvency it felt no
doubt; advances which if it had been obliged to withhold, the severity
of the crisis would have been still greater than it was. If the Bank, it
is justly remarked by Mr. Fullarton,∗ complies with such applications,
“it must comply with them by an issue of notes, for notes constitute the
only instrumentality through which the Bank is in the practice of
lending its credit. But those notes are not intended to circulate, nor
do they circulate. There is no more demand for circulation than there
was before. On the contrary, the rapid decline of prices which the case
in supposition presumes, would necessarily contract the demand for
circulation. The notes would either be returned to the Bank of England
as fast as they were issued, in the shape of deposits, or would be
locked up in the drawers of the private London bankers, or distributed
by them to their correspondents in the country, or intercepted by other
capitalists, who, during the fervour of the previous excitement, had
contracted liabilities which they might be imperfectly prepared on the
sudden to encounter. In such emergencies, every man connected with
business, who has been trading on other means than his own, is placed on
the defensive, and his whole object is to make himself as strong as
possible, an object which cannot be more effectually answered than by
keeping by him as large a reserve as possible in paper which the law has
made a legal tender. The notes themselves never find their way into the
produce market; and if they at all contribute to retard” (or, as I
should rather say, to moderate) “the fall of prices, it is not by
promoting in the slightest degree the effective demand for commodities,
not by enabling consumers to buy more largely for consumption, and so
giving briskness to commerce, but by a process exactly the reverse, by
enabling the holders of commodities to hold on, by obstructing traffic
and repressing consumption.”

The opportune relief thus afforded to credit, during the excessive
contraction which succeeds to an undue expansion, is consistent with the
principle of the new system; for an extraordinary contraction of credit,
and fall of prices, inevitably draw gold into the country, and the
principle of the system is that the bank-note currency shall be
permitted, and even compelled, to enlarge itself, in all cases in
Edition: current; Page: [664] which a metallic currency would do the
same. But, what the principle of the law would encourage, its provisions
in this instance preclude, by not suffering the increased issues to take
place until the gold has actually arrived: which is never until the
worst part of the crisis has passed, and almost all the losses and
failures attendant on it are consummated. The machinery of the system
withholds, until for many purposes it comes too late, the very medicine
which the theory of the system prescribes as the appropriate remedy.∗

This function of banks in filling up the gap made in mercantile credit
by the consequences of undue speculation and its revulsion, is so
entirely indispensable, that if the Act of 1844 continues unrepealed,
there can be no difficulty in foreseeing that its provisions must be
suspended, as they were in 1847, in every period of great commercial
difficulty, as soon as the crisis has really and completely set in.†
Were this all, there would be no absolute inconsistency in maintaining
the restriction as a means of preventing a crisis, and relaxing it for
the purpose of relieving one. But there is another objection, of a still
more radical and comprehensive character, to the new system.

Professing, in theory, to require that a paper currency shall vary in
its amount in exact conformity to the variations of a metallic currency,
it provides, in fact, that in every case of an efflux of gold, a
corresponding diminution shall take place in the quantity of bank notes;
in other words, that every exportation of the precious metals shall be
virtually drawn from the circulation; it being assumed that this would
be the case if the currency were wholly metallic. This theory, and these
practical arrangements, are adapted to the case in which the drain of
gold originates in a rise of prices produced by an undue expansion of
currency or credit; but they are adapted to no case beside.

When the efflux of gold is the last stage of a series of effects arising
from an increase of the currency, or from an expansion of credit
tantamount in its effect on prices to an increase of currency, Edition:
current; Page: [665] it is in that case a fair assumption that in a
purely metallic system the gold exported would be drawn from the
currency itself; because such a drain, being in its nature unlimited,
will necessarily continue as long as currency and credit are
undiminished. But an exportation of the precious metals often arises
from no causes affecting currency or credit, but simply from an unusual
extension of foreign payments, arising either from the state of the
markets for commodities, or from some circumstance not commercial. In
this class of causes, four, of powerful operation, are included, of each
of which the last fifty years of English history afford repeated
instances. The first is that of an extraordinary foreign expenditure by
government, either political or military; as in the revolutionary war,
and, as long as it lasted, during the Crimean war. The second is the
case of a large exportation of capital for foreign investment; such as
the loans and mining operations which partly contributed to the crisis
of 1825, and the American speculations which were the principal cause of
the crisis of 1839. The third is a failure of crops in the countries
which supply the raw material of important manufactures; such as the
cotton failure in America, which compelled England, in 1847, to incur
unusual liabilities for the purchase of that commodity at an advanced
price. The fourth is a bad harvest, and a great consequent importation
of food; of which the years 1846 and 1847 presented an example
surpassing all antecedent experience.

In none of these cases, if the currency were metallic, would the gold or
silver exported for the purposes in question be necessarily, or even
probably, drawn wholly1 from the circulation. It would be drawn from the
hoards, which under a metallic currency always exist to a very large
amount; in uncivilized countries, in the hands of all who can afford it;
in civilized countries chiefly in the form of bankers' reserves. Mr.
Tooke, in his Inquiry into the Currency Principle, bears testimony to
this fact; but it is to Mr. Fullarton that the public are indebted for
the clearest and most satisfactory elucidation of it. As I am not aware
that this part of the theory of currency has been set forth by any other
writer with anything like the same degree of completeness, I shall quote
somewhat largely from this able production.

“No person who has ever resided in an Asiatic country, where hoarding is
carried on to a far larger extent in proportion to the existing stock of
wealth, and where the practice has become much more deeply engrafted in
the habits of the people, by traditionary Edition: current; Page: [666]
apprehensions of insecurity and the difficulty of finding safe and
remunerative investments, than in any European community—no person who
has had personal experience of this state of society, can be at a loss
to recollect innumerable instances of large metallic treasures extracted
in times of pecuniary difficulty from the coffers of individuals by the
temptation of a high rate of interest, and brought in aid of the public
necessities, nor, on the other hand, of the facility with which those
treasures have been absorbed again, when the inducements which had drawn
them into light were no longer in operation. In countries more advanced
in civilization and wealth than the Asiatic principalities, and where no
man is in fear of attracting the cupidity of power by an external
display of riches, but where the interchange of commodities is still
almost universally conducted through the medium of a metric circulation,
as is the case with most of the commercial countries on the Continent of
Europe, the motives for amassing the precious metals may be less
powerful than in the majority of Asiatic principalities; but the ability
to accumulate being more widely extended, the absolute quantity amassed
will be found probably to bear a considerably larger proportion to the
population.∗ In those states which lie exposed to hostile invasion, or
whose social condition is unsettled and menacing, the motive indeed must
still be very strong; and in a nation carrying on an extensive commerce,
both foreign and internal, without any considerable aid from any of the
banking substitutes for money, the reserves of gold and silver
indispensably required to secure the regularity of payments, must of
themselves engross a share of the circulating coin which it would not be
easy to estimate.

“In this country, where the banking system has been carried to an extent
and perfection unknown in any other part of Europe, and may be said to
have entirely superseded the use of coin, except for retail dealings and
the purposes of foreign commerce, the incentives to private hoarding
exist no longer, and the hoards have all been transferred to the banks,
or rather, I should say, to the Bank of England. But in France, where
the bank-note circulation is still comparatively limited, the quantity
of gold and silver coin in existence I find now currently estimated, on
what are described as Edition: current; Page: [667] the latest
authorities, at the enormous sum of 120 millions sterling; nor is the
estimate at all at variance with the reasonable probabilities of the
case. Of this vast treasure there is every reason to presume that a very
large proportion, probably by much the greater part, is absorbed in the
hoards. If you present for payment a bill for a thousand francs to a
French banker, he brings you the silver in a sealed bag from his strong
room. And not the banker only, but every merchant and trader, according
to his means, is under the necessity of keeping by him a stock of cash
sufficient not only for his ordinary disbursements, but to meet any
unexpected demands. That the quantity of specie accumulated in these
innumerable depôts, not in France only, but all over the Continent,
where banking institutions are still either entirely wanting or very
imperfectly organized, is not merely immense in itself, but admits of
being largely drawn upon, and transferred even in vast masses from one
country to another, with very little, if any, effect on prices, or other
material derangements, we have had some remarkable proofs:” among
others, “the signal success which attended the simultaneous efforts of
some of the principal European powers (Russia, Austria, Prussia, Sweden,
and Denmark) to replenish their treasuries, and to replace with coin a
considerable portion of the depreciated paper which the necessities of
the war had forced upon them, and this at the very time when the
available stock of the precious metals over the world had been reduced
by the exertions of England to recover her metallic currency.... There
can be no doubt that these combined operations were on a scale of very
extraordinary magnitude, that they were accomplished without any
sensible injury to commerce or public prosperity, or any other effect
than some temporary derangement of the exchanges, and that the private
hoards of treasure accumulated throughout Europe during the war must
have been the principal source from which all this gold and silver was
collected. And no person, I think, can fairly contemplate the vast
superflux of metallic wealth thus proved to be at all times in
existence, and, though in a dormant and inert state, always ready to
spring into activity on the first indication of a sufficiently intense
demand, without feeling themselves compelled to admit the possibility of
the mines being even shut up for years together, and the production of
the metals altogether suspended, while there might be scarcely a
perceptible alteration in the exchangeable value of the metal.”∗

Edition: current; Page: [668]
Applying this to the currency doctrine and its advocates, “one might
imagine,” says Mr. Fullarton,∗ “that they supposed the gold which is
drained off for exportation from a country using a currency exclusively
metallic, to be collected by driblets at the fairs and markets, or from
the tills of the grocers and mercers. They never even allude to the
existence of such a thing as a great hoard of the metals, though upon
the action of the hoards depends the whole economy of international
payments between specie-circulating communities, while any operation of
the money collected in hoards upon prices must, even according to the
currency hypothesis, be wholly impossible. We know from experience what
enormous payments in gold and silver specie-circulating countries are
capable, at times, of making, without the least disturbance of their
internal prosperity; and whence is it supposed that these payments come,
but from their hoards? let us think how the money market of a country
transacting all its exchanges through the medium of the precious metals
only, would be likely to be affected by the necessity of making a
foreign payment of several millions. Of course the necessity could only
be satisfied by a transmission of capital; and would not the competition
for the possession of capital for transmission which the occasion would
call forth, necessarily raise the market rate of interest? If the
payment was to be made by the government, would not the government, in
all probability, have to open a new loan on terms more than usually
favourable to the lender?” If made by merchants, would it not be drawn
either from the deposits in banks, or from the reserves which merchants
keep by them in default of banks, or would it not oblige them to obtain
the necessary amount of specie by going into the money market as
borrowers? “And would not all this inevitably act upon the hoards, and
draw forth into activity a portion of the gold and silver which the
money-dealers had been accumulating, and some of them with the express
view of watching such opportunities for turning their treasures to
advantage?...

“To come to the present time [1844], the balance of payments with nearly
all Europe has for about four years past been in favour of this country,
and gold has been pouring in till the influx amounts to the unheard-of
sum of about fourteen millions sterling. Yet, in all this time, has any
one heard a complaint of any serious suffering inflicted on the people
of the Continent? Have prices there been Edition: current; Page: [669]
greatly depressed beyond their range in this country? Have wages fallen,
or have merchants been extensively ruined by the universal depreciation
of their stock? There has occurred nothing of the kind. The tenor of
commercial and monetary affairs has been everywhere even and tranquil;
and in France more particularly, an improving revenue and extended
commerce bear testimony to the continued progress of internal
prosperity. It may be doubted, indeed, if this great efflux of gold has
withdrawn, from that portion of the metallic wealth of the nation which
really circulates, a single napoleon. And it has been equally obvious,
from the undisturbed state of credit, that not only has the supply of
specie indispensable for the conduct of business in the retail market
been all the while uninterrupted, but that the hoards have continued to
furnish every facility requisite for the regularity of mercantile
payments. It is of the very essence of the metallic system, that the
hoards, in all cases of probable occurrence, should be equal to both
objects; that they should, in the first place, supply the bullion
demanded for exportation, and in the next place, should keep up the home
circulation to its legitimate complement. Every man trading under that
system, who, in the corse of his business, may have frequent occasion to
remit large sums in specie to foreign countries, must either keep by him
a sufficient treasure of his own or must have the means of borrowing
enough from his neighbours, not only to make up when wanted the amount
of his remittances, but to enable him, moreover, to carry on his
ordinary transactions at home without interruption.”

In a country in which credit is carried to so great an extent as in
England, one great reserve, in a single establishment, the Bank of
England, supplies the place, as far as the precious metals are
concerned, of the multitudinous reserves of other countries. The
theoretical principle, therefore, of the currency doctrine would
require, that all those drains of the metal which, if the currency were
purely metallic, would be taken from the hoards, should be allowed to
operate freely upon the reserve in the coffers of the Bank of England,
without any attempt to stop it either by a diminution of the currency or
by a contraction of credit. Nor to this would there be any well-grounded
objection, unless the drain were so great as to threaten the exhaustion
of the reserve, and a consequent stoppage of payments; a danger against
which it is possible to take adequate precautions, because in the cases
which we are considering, the drain is for foreign payments of definite
amount, and stops of Edition: current; Page: [670] itself as soon as
these are effected. And in all systems it is admitted that the habitual
reserve of the Bank should exceed the utmost amount to which experience
warrants the belief that such a drain may extend; which extreme limit
Mr. Fullarton affirms to be seven millions, but Mr. Tooke recommends an
average reserve of ten, and in his last publication, of twelve millions.
1 Under these circumstances, the habitual reserve, which would never be
employed in discounts, but kept to be paid out exclusively in exchange
for cheques or bank notes, would be sufficient for a crisis of this
description; which therefore would pass off without having its
difficulties increased by a contraction either of credit or of the
circulation. But this, the most advantageous dénouement that the case
admits of, and not only consistent with but required by the professed
principle of the system, the panegyrists of the system claim for it as a
great merit that it prevents. They boast, that on the first appearance
of a drain for exportation—whatever may be its cause, and whether, under
a metallic currency, it would involve a contraction of credit or not—the
Bank is at once obliged to curtail its advances. And this, be it
remembered, when there has been no speculative rise of prices which it
is indispensable to correct, no unusual extension of credit requiring
contraction; but the demand for gold is solely occasioned by foreign
payments on account of government, or large corn importations consequent
on a bad harvest.

2 Even supposing that the reserve is insufficient to meet the foreign
payments, and that the means wherewith to make them have to be taken
from the loanable capital of the country, the consequence of which is a
rise of the rate of interest; in such circumstances some pressure on the
money market is unavoidable, but that pressure is much increased in
severity by the separation of the Banking from the Issue Department. The
case is generally stated as if the Act only operated in one way, namely,
by preventing the Bank, when it has Edition: current; Page: [671] parted
with (say) three millions of bullion in exchange for three millions of
its notes, from again lending those notes, in discounts or other
advances. But the Act really does much more than this. It is well known,
that the first operation of a drain is always on the Banking Department.
The bank deposits constitute the bulk of the unemployed and disposable
capital of the country; and capital wanted for foreign payments is
almost always obtained mainly by drawing out deposits. Supposing three
millions to be the amount wanted, three millions of notes are drawn from
the Banking Department (either directly or through the private bankers,
who keep the bulk of their reserves with the Bank of England), and the
three millions of notes, thus obtained, are presented at the Issue
Department, and exchanged against gold for exportation. Thus a drain
upon the country at large of only three millions is a drain upon the
Bank virtually of six millions. The deposits have lost three millions,
and the reserve of the Issue Department has lost an equal amount. As the
two departments, so long as the Act remains in operation, cannot even in
the utmost extremity help one another, each must take its separate
precautions for its own safety. Whatever measures, therefore, on the
part of the Bank, would have been required under the old system by a
drain of six millions, are now rendered necessary by a drain only of
three. The Issue Department protects itself in the manner prescribed by
the Act, by not re-issuing the three millions of notes which have been
returned to it. But the Banking Department must take measures to
replenish its reserve, which has been reduced by three millions. Its
liabilities having also decreased three millions, by the loss of that
amount of deposits, the reserve, on the ordinary banking principle of a
third of the liabilities, will bear a reduction of one million. But the
other two millions it must procure by letting that amount of advances
run out, and not renewing them. Not only must it raise its rate of
interest, but it must effect, by whatever means, a diminution of two
millions in the total amount of its discounts: or it must sell
securities to an equal amount. This violent action on the money market
for the purpose of replenishing the Banking reserve, is wholly
occasioned by the Act of 1844. If the restrictions of that Act did not
exist, the Bank, instead of contracting its discounts, would simply
transfer two millions, either in gold or in notes, from the Issue to the
Banking Department; not in order to lend them to the public, but to
secure the solvency of the Banking Department in the event of further
unexpected demands by the depositors. And unless the drain continued,
and reached Edition: current; Page: [672] so great an amount as to seem
likely to exceed the whole of the gold in the reserves of both
departments, the Bank would be under no necessity, while the pressure
lasted, of withholding from commerce its accustomed amount of
accommodation, at a rate of interest corresponding to the increased
demand.∗

I am aware it will be said that by allowing drains of this character to
operate freely upon the Bank reserve until they cease of themselves, a
contraction of the currency and of credit would not be prevented, but
only postponed; since if a limitation of issues were not resorted to for
the purpose of checking the drain in its commencement, the same or a
still greater limitation must take place afterwards, in order, by acting
on prices, to bring back this large quantity of gold, for the
indispensable purpose of replenishing the Bank reserve. But in this
argument several things are overlooked. In the first place, the gold
might be brought back, not by a fall of prices, but by the much more
rapid and convenient medium of a rise of the rate of interest, involving
no fall of any prices except the price of securities. Either English
securities would be bought on account of foreigners, or foreign
securities held in England would be sent abroad for sale, both which
operations took place largely during the mercantile difficulties of
1847, and not only checked the efflux of gold, but turned the tide and
brought the metal back. It was not, therefore, brought back by a
contraction of the currency, though Edition: current; Page: [673] in
this case it certainly was so by a contraction of loans. But even this
is not always indispensable. For in the second place, it is not
necessary that the gold should return with the same suddenness with
which it went out. A great portion would probably return in the ordinary
way of commerce, in payment for exported commodities. The extra gains
made by dealers and producers in foreign countries through the extra
payments they receive from this country, are very likely to be partly
expended in increased purchases of English commodities, either for
consumption or on speculation, though the effect may not manifest itself
with sufficient rapidity to enable the transmission of gold to be
dispensed with in the first instance. These extra purchases would turn
the balance of payments in favour of the country, and gradually restore
a portion of the exported gold; and the remainder would probably be
brought back, without any considerable rise of the rate of interest in
England, by the fall of it in foreign countries, occasioned by the
addition of some millions of gold to the loanable capital of those
countries. Indeed, in the state of things consequent on the gold
discoveries, when the enormous quantity of gold annually produced in
Australia, and much of that from California, is distributed to other
countries through England, and a month seldom passes without a large
arrival, the Bank reserves can replenish themselves without any
re-importation of the gold previously carried off by a drain. All that
is needful is an intermission, and a very brief intermission is
sufficient, of the exportation.

For these reasons it appears to me, that notwithstanding the beneficial
operation of the Act of 1844 in the first stages of one kind of
commercial crisis (that produced by over-speculation), it on the whole
materially aggravates the severity of commercial revulsions. And not
only are contractions of credit made more severe by the Act, they are
also made greatly more frequent. “Suppose,” says Mr. George Walker, in a
clear, impartial, and conclusive series of papers in the Aberdeen
Herald, forming one of the best existing discussions of the present
question—”suppose that, of eighteen millions of gold, ten are in the
Issue Department and eight are in the Banking Department. The result is
the same as under a metallic currency with only eight millions in
reserve, instead of eighteen.... The effect of the Bank Act is, that the
proceedings of the Bank under a drain are not determined by the amount
of gold within its vaults, but are, or ought to be, determined by the
portion of it belonging to the Banking Department. With the whole of the
gold at its disposal, it may find it unnecessary to interfere with
credit, or force down prices, Edition: current; Page: [674] if a drain
leave a fair reserve behind. With only the banking reserve at its
disposal, it must, from the narrow margin it has to operate on, meet all
drains by counteractives more or less strong, to the injury of the
commercial world; and if it fail to do so, as it may fail, the
consequence is destruction. Hence the extraordinary and frequent
variations of the rate of interest under the Bank Act. Since 1847, when
the eyes of the Bank were opened to its true position, it has felt it
necessary, as a precautionary measure, that every variation in the
reserve should be accompanied by an alteration in the rate of interest.”
To make the Act innocuous, therefore, it would be necessary that the
Bank, in addition to the whole of the gold in the Issue Department,
should retain as great a reserve in gold or notes in the Banking
Department alone, as would suffice under the old system for the security
both of the issues and of the deposits.

§ 5. There remain two questions respecting a bank-note currency, which
have also been a subject of considerable discussion of late years:
whether the privilege of providing it should be confined to a single
establishment, such as the Bank of England, or a plurality of issuers
should be allowed; and in the latter case, whether any peculiar
precautions are requisite or advisable, to protect the holders of notes
against losses occasioned by the insolvency of the issuers.

The course of the preceding speculations has led us to attach so much
less of peculiar importance to bank notes, as compared with other forms
of credit, than accords with the notions generally current, that
questions respecting the regulation of so very small a part of the
general mass of credit cannot appear to us of such momentous import as
they are sometimes considered. Bank notes, however, have so far a real
peculiarity, that they are the only form of credit sufficiently
convenient for all the purposes of circulation to be able entirely to
supersede the use of metallic money for internal purposes. Though the
extension of the use of cheques has a tendency more and more to diminish
the number of bank notes, as it would that of the sovereigns or other
coins which would take their place if they were abolished; there is
sure, for a long time to come, to be a considerable supply of them,
wherever the necessary degree of commercial confidence exists, and their
free use is permitted. The exclusive privilege, therefore, of issuing
them, if reserved to the Government or to some one body, is a source of
great pecuniary gain. That this gain should be obtained for the nation
at large is both practicable and desirable: and if the management of a
bank-note currency Edition: current; Page: [675] ought to be so
completely mechanical, so entirely a thing of fixed rule, as it is made
by the Act of 1844, there seems no reason why this mechanism should be
worked for the profit of any private issuer, rather than for the public
treasury. If, however, a plan be preferred which leaves the variations
in the amount of issues in any degree whatever to the discretion of the
issuers, it is not desirable that to the ever-growing attributions of
the Government so delicate a function should be superadded; and that the
attention of the heads of the state should be diverted from larger
objects, by their being besieged with the applications, and made a mark
for all the attacks, which are never spared to those deemed to be
responsible for any acts, however minute, connected with the regulation
of the currency. It would be better that treasury notes, exchangeable
for gold on demand, should be issued to a fixed amount, not exceeding
the minimum of a bank-note currency; the remainder of the notes which
may be required being left to be supplied either by one or by a number
of private banking establishments. Or an establishment like the Bank of
England might supply the whole country, on condition of lending fifteen
or twenty millions of its notes to the government without interest;
which would give the same pecuniary advantage to the state as if it
issued that number of its own notes.

The reason ordinarily alleged in condemnation of the system of plurality
of issuers which existed in England before the Act of 1844, and under
certain limitations still subsists, is that the competition of these
different issuers induces them to increase the amount of their notes to
an injurious extent. But we have seen that the power which bankers have
of augmenting their issues, and the degree of mischief which they can
produce by it, are quite trifling compared with the current
over-estimate. As remarked by Mr. Fullarton,∗ the extraordinary increase
of banking competition occasioned by the establishment of the
joint-stock banks, a competition often of the most reckless kind, has
proved utterly powerless to enlarge the aggregate mass of the bank-note
circulation; that aggregate circulation having, on the contrary,
actually decreased. In the absence of any special case for an exception
to freedom of industry, the general rule ought to prevail. It appears
desirable, however, to maintain one great establishment like the Bank of
England, distinguished from other banks of issue in this, that it alone
is required to pay in gold, the others being at liberty to pay their
notes with notes of the central establishment. The object of this is
that there may be one body Edition: current; Page: [676] responsible for
maintaining a reserve of the precious metals sufficient to meet any
drain that can reasonably be expected to take place. By disseminating
this responsibility among a number of banks, it is prevented from
operating efficaciously upon any: or if it be still enforced against
one, the reserves of the metals retained by all the others are capital
kept idle in pure waste, which may be dispensed with by allowing them at
their option to pay in Bank of England notes.

§ 6. The question remains whether, in case of a plurality of issuers,
any peculiar precautions are needed to protect the holders of notes from
the consequences of failure of payment. Before 1826, the insolvency of
banks of issue was a frequent and very serious evil, often spreading
distress through a whole neighbourhood, and at one blow depriving
provident industry of the results of long and painful saving. This was
one of the chief reasons which induced Parliament, in that year, to
prohibit the issue of bank notes of a denomination below five pounds,
that the labouring classes at least might be as little as possible
exposed to participate in this suffering. As an additional safeguard, it
has been suggested to give the holders of notes a priority over other
creditors, or to require bankers to deposit stock or other public
securities as a pledge for the whole amount of their issues. The
insecurity of the former bank-note currency of England was partly the
work of the law, which, in order to give a qualified monopoly of banking
business to the Bank of England, had actually made the formation of safe
banking establishments a punishable offence, by prohibiting the
existence of any banks, in town or country, whether of issue or deposit,
with a number of partners exceeding six. This truly characteristic
specimen of the old system of monopoly and restriction Was done away
with in 1826, both as to issues and deposits, everywhere but in a
district of sixty-five miles radius round London, and in 1833 in that
district also, as far as relates to deposits. 1 It was hoped that the
numerous Edition: current; Page: [677] joint-stock banks since
established would have furnished a more trustworthy currency, and that
under their influence the banking system of England would have been
almost as secure to the public as that of Scotland (where banking was
always free) has been for two centuries past. But the almost incredible
instances of reckless and fraudulent mismanagement which these
institutions have of late afforded (though in some of the most notorious
cases the delinquent establishments have not been banks of issue), have
shown only too clearly that, south of the Tweed at least, the
joint-stock principle applied to banking is not the adequate safeguard
it was so confidently supposed to be: and it is difficult now to resist
the conviction, that if plurality of issuers is allowed to exist, some
kind of special security in favour of the holders of notes should be
exacted as an imperative condition.1

Edition: current; Page: [678]


CHAPTER XXV: of the competition of different countries in the same market

§ 1. In the phraseology of the Mercantile System, the language and
doctrines of which are still the basis of what may be called the
political economy of the selling classes, as distinguished from the
buyers or consumers, there is no word of more frequent recurrence or
more perilous import than the word underselling. To undersell other
countries—not to be undersold by other countries—were spoken of, and are
still very often spoken of, almost as if they were the sole purposes for
which production and commodities exist. The feelings of rival tradesmen,
prevailing among nations, overruled for centuries all sense of the
general community of advantage which commercial countries derive from
the prosperity of one another: and that commercial spirit which is now
one of the strongest obstacles to wars, was during a certain period of
European history their principal cause.

Even in the more enlightened view now attainable of the nature and
consequences of international commerce, some, though a comparatively
small, space must still be made for the fact of commercial rivality.
Nations may, like individual dealers, be competitors, with opposite
interests, in the markets of some commodities, while in others they are
in the more fortunate relation of reciprocal customers. The benefit of
commerce does not consist, as it was once thought to do, in the
commodities sold; but, since the commodities sold are the means of
obtaining those which are bought, a nation would be cut off from the
real advantage of commerce, the imports, if it could not induce other
nations to take any of its commodities in exchange; and in proportion as
the competition of other counties compels it to offer its commodities on
cheaper terms, on pain of not selling them at all, the imports which it
obtains by its foreign trade are procured at greater cost.

Edition: current; Page: [679]
These points have been adequately, though incidentally, frustrated in
some of the preceding chapters. But the great space which the topic has
filled, and continues to fill, in economical speculations, and in the
practical anxieties both of politicians and of dealers and
manufacturers, makes it desirable, before quitting the subject of
international exchange, to subjoin a few observations on the things
which do, and on those which do not, enable countries to undersell one
another.

One country can only undersell another in a given market, to the extent
of entirely expelling her from it, on two conditions. In the first
place, she must have a greater advantage than the second country in the
production of the article exported by both; meaning by a greater
advantage (as has been already so fully explained) not absolutely, but
in comparison with other commodities; and in the second place, such must
be her relation with the customer country in respect to the demand for
each other’s products, and such the consequent state of international
values, as to give away to the customer country more than the whole
advantage possessed by the rival country; otherwise the rival will still
be able to hold her ground in the market.

Let us revert to the imaginary hypothesis of a trade between England and
Germany in cloth and linen: England being capable of producing 10 yards
of cloth at the same cost with 15 yards of linen, Germany at the same
cost with 20, and the two commodities being exchanged between the two
countries (cost of carriage apart) at some intermediate rate, say 10 for
17. Germany could not be permanently undersold in the English market,
and expelled from it, unless by a country which offered not merely more
than 17, but more than 20 yards of linen for 10 of cloth. Short of that,
the competition would only oblige Germany to pay dearer for cloth, but
would not disable her from exporting linen. The country, therefore,
which could undersell Germany, must, in the first place, be able to
produce linen at less cost, compared with cloth, than Germany herself;
and in the next place, must have such a demand for cloth, or other
English commodities, as would compel her, even when she became sole
occupant of the market, to give a greater advantage to England than
Germany could give by resigning the whole of hers; to give, for example,
21 yards for 10. For if not—if, for example, the equation of
international demand, after Germany was excluded, gave a ratio of 18 for
10, Germany could again enter into the competition; Germany would be now
the underselling nation; and Edition: current; Page: [680] there would
be a point, perhaps 19 for 10, at which both countries would be able to
maintain their ground, and to sell in England enough linen to pay for
the cloth, or other English commodities, for which, on these
newly-adjusted terms of interchange, they had a demand. In like manner,
England, as an exporter of cloth, could only be driven from the German
market by some rival whose superior advantages in the production of
cloth enabled her, and the intensity of whose demand for German produce
compelled her, to offer 10 yards of cloth, not merely for less than 17
yards of linen, but for less than 15. In that case, England could no
longer carry on the trade without loss; but in any case short of this,
she would merely be obliged to give to Germany more cloth for less linen
than she had previously given.

It thus appears that the alarm of being permanently undersold may be
taken much too easily; may be taken when the thing really to be
anticipated is not the loss of the trade, but the minor inconvenience of
carrying it on at a diminished advantage; an inconvenience chiefly
falling on the consumers of foreign commodities, and not on the
producers or sellers of the exported article. It is no sufficient ground
of apprehension to the English producers to find that some other country
can sell cloth in foreign markets at some particular time, a trifle
cheaper than they can themselves afford to do in the existing state of
prices in England. Suppose them to be temporarily undersold, and their
exports diminished; the imports will exceed the exports, there will be a
new distribution of the precious metals, prices will fall, and as all
the money expenses of the English producers will be diminished, they
will be able (if the case falls short of that stated in the preceding
paragraph) again to compete with their rivals. The loss which England
will incur, will not fall upon the exporters, but upon those who consume
imported commodities; who, with money incomes reduced in amount, will
have to pay the same or even an increased price for all things produced
in foreign countries.

§ 2. Such, I conceive, is the true theory, or rationale, of
underselling. It will be observed that it takes no account of some
things which we hear spoken of, oftener perhaps than any others, in the
character of causes exposing a country to be undersold.

According to the preceding doctrine, a country cannot be undersold in
any commodity, unless the rival country has a stronger inducement than
itself for devoting its labour and capital to the Edition: current;
Page: [681] production of the commodity; arising from the fact that by
doing so it occasions a greater saving of labour and capital, to be
shared between itself and its customers—a greater increase of the
aggregate produce of the world. The underselling, therefore, though a
loss to the undersold country, is an advantage to the world at large;
the substituted commerce being one which economizes more of the labour
and capital of mankind, and adds more to their collective wealth, than
the commerce superseded by it. The advantage, of course, consists in
being able to produce the commodity of better quality, or with less
labour (compared with other things); or perhaps not with less labour,
but in less time; with a less prolonged detention of the capital
employed. This may arise from greater natural advantages (such as soil,
climate, richness of mines); superior capability, either natural or
acquired, in the labourers; better division of labour, and better tools,
or machinery. But there is no place left in this theory for the case of
lower wages. This, however, in the theories commonly current, is a
favourite cause of underselling. We continually hear of the disadvantage
under which the British producer labours, both in foreign markets and
even in his own, through the lower wages paid by his foreign rivals.
These lower wages, we are told, enable, or are always on the point of
enabling them to sell at lower prices, and to dislodge the English
manufacturer from all markets in which he is not artificially protected.

Before examining this opinion on grounds of principle, it is worth while
to bestow a moment’s consideration upon it as a question of fact. Is it
true, that the wages of manufacturing labour are lower in foreign
countries than in England, in any sense in which low wages are an
advantage to the capitalist? The artisan of Ghent or Lyons may earn less
wages in a day, but does he not do less work? Degrees of efficiency
considered, does his labour cost less to his employer? Though wages may
be lower on the Continent, is not the Cost of Labour, which is the real
element in the competition, very nearly the same? That it is so seems
the opinion of competent judges, and is confirmed by the very little
difference in the rate of profit between England and the Continental
countries. But if so, the opinion is absurd that English producers can
be undersold by their Continental rivals from this cause. It is only in
America that the supposition is primâ facie admissible. In America,
wages are much higher than in England, if we mean by wages the daily
earnings of a labourer: but the productive power of American labour is
so great—its efficiency, combined with the favourable circumstances
Edition: current; Page: [682] in which it is exerted, makes it worth so
much to the purchaser, that the Cost of Labour is lower in America than
in England; as is indicated by the fact that the general rate of profits
and of interest is higher.1

§ 3. But is it true that low wages, even in the sense of low Cost of
Labour, enable a country to sell cheaper in the foreign market? I mean,
of course, low wages which are common to the whole productive industry
of the country.

If wages, in any of the departments of industry which supply exports,
are kept, artificially, or by some accidental cause, below the general
rate of wages in the country, this is a real advantage in the foreign
market. It lessens the comparative cost of production of those articles,
in relation to others; and has the same effect as if their production
required so much less labour. Take, for instance, the case of the United
States in respect to certain commodities, prior to the civil war.2
Tobacco and cotton, two great articles of export, were produced by slave
labour, while food and manufactures generally were produced by free
labourers, neither working on their own account or paid by wages. In
spite of the inferior efficiency of slave labour, there can be no
reasonable doubt that in a country where the wages of free labour were
so high, the work executed by slaves was a better bargain to the
capitalist. To whatever extent it was so, this smaller cost of labour,
being not general, but limited to those employments, was just as much a
cause of cheapness in the products, both in the home and in the foreign
market, as if they had been made by a less quantity of labour. If, when
the slaves in the Southern States were emancipated, their wages rose to
the general level of the earnings of free labour in America, that
country might have been obliged to erase some of the slave-grown
articles from the catalogue of its exports, and would certainly be
unable to sell any of them in the foreign market at the accustomed
price. Accordingly, American cotton is now habitually at a much higher
price than before the war. Its previous cheapness was partly an
artificial cheapness, which may be compared to that produced by a bounty
on production or on exportation: or, considering the Edition: current;
Page: [683] means by which it was obtained, an apter comparison would be
with the cheapness of stolen goods.

An advantage of a similar economical, though of a very different moral
character, is that possessed by domestic manufactures; fabrics produced
in the leisure hours of families partially occupied in other pursuits,
who, not depending for subsistence on the produce of the manufacture,
can afford to sell it at any price, however low, for which they think it
worth while to take the trouble of producing. In an account of the
Canton of Zurich, to which I have had occasion to refer on another
subject, it is observed,∗ “The workman of Zurich is to-day a
manufacturer, to-morrow again an agriculturist, and changes his
occupations with the seasons, in a continual round. Manufacturing
industry and tillage advance hand in hand, in inseparable alliance, and
in this union of the two occupations the secret may be found, why the
simple and unlearned Swiss manufacturer can always go on competing, and
increasing in prosperity, in the face of those extensive establishments
fitted out with great economic, and (what is still more important)
intellectual, resources. Even in those parts of the Canton where
manufactures have extended themselves the most widely, only one-seventh
of all the families belong to manufactures alone; four-sevenths combine
that employment with agriculture. The advantage of this domestic or
family manufacture consists chiefly in the fact, that it is compatible
with all other avocations, or rather that it may in part be regarded as
only a supplementary employment. In winter, in the dwellings of the
operatives, the whole family employ themselves in it: but as soon as
spring appears, those on whom the early field labours devolve abandon
the in-door work; many a shuttle stands still; by degrees, as the
field-work increases, one member of the family follows another, till at
last, at the harvest, and during the so-called ‘great works,’ all hands
seize the implements of husbandry; but in unfavourable weather, and in
all otherwise vacant hours, the work in the cottage is resumed, and when
the ungenial season again recurs, the people return in the same gradual
order to their home occupation, until they have all resumed it.”

In the case of these domestic manufactures, the comparative cost of
production, on which the interchange between countries depends, is much
lower than in proportion to the quantity of labour employed. The
workpeople, looking to the earnings of their loom Edition: current;
Page: [684] for a part only, if for any part, of their actual
maintenance, can afford to work for a less remuneration than the lowest
rate of wages which can permanently exist in the employments by which
the labourer has to support the whole expense of the family. Working, as
they do, not for an employer but for themselves, they may be said to
carry on the manufacture at no cost at all, except the small expense of
a loom and of the material; and the limit of possible cheapness is not
the necessity of living by their trade but that of earning enough by the
work to make that social employment of their leisure hours not
disagreeable.

§ 4. These two cases, of slave labour and of domestic manufactures,
exemplify the conditions under which low wages enable a country to sell
its commodities cheaper in foreign markets, and consequently to
undersell its rivals, or to avoid being undersold by them. But no such
advantage is conferred by low wages when common to all branches of
industry. General low wages never caused any country to undersell its
rivals, nor did general high wages ever hinder it from doing so.

To demonstrate this, we must return to an elementary principle which was
discussed in a former chapter.∗ General low wages do not cause low
prices, nor high wages high prices, within the country itself. General
prices are not raised by a rise of wages, any more than they would be
raised by an increase of the quantity of labour required in all
production. Expenses which affect all commodities equally, have no
influence on prices. If the maker of broadcloth or cutlery, and nobody
else, had to pay higher wages, the price of his commodity would rise,
just as it would if he had to employ more labour; because otherwise he
would gain less profit than other producers, and nobody would engage in
the employment. But if everybody has to pay higher wages, or everybody
to employ more labour, the loss must be submitted to; as it affects
everybody alike, no one can hope to get rid of it by a change of
employment, each therefore resigns himself to a diminution of profits,
and prices remain as they were. In like manner, general low wages, or a
general increase in the productiveness of labour, does not make prices
low, but profits high. If wages fall, (meaning here by wages the cost of
labour,) why, on that account, should the producer lower his price? He
will be forced, it may be said, by the competition of other capitalists
who will crowd into his employment. But other capitalists Edition:
current; Page: [685] are also paying lower wages, and by entering into
competition with him they would gain nothing but what they are gaining
already. The rate then at which labour is paid, as well as the quantity
of it which is employed, affects neither the value nor the price of the
commodity produced, except in so far as it is peculiar to that
commodity, and not common to commodities generally.

Since low wages are not a cause of low prices in the country itself, so
neither do they cause it to offer its commodities in foreign markets at
a lower price. It is quite true that if the cost of labour is lower in
America than in England, America could sell her cottons to Cuba at a
lower price than England, and still gain as high a profit as the English
manufacturer. But it is not with the profit of the English manufacturer
that the American cotton spinner will make his comparison; it is with
the profits of other American capitalists. These enjoy, in common with
himself, the benefit of a low cost of labour, and have accordingly a
high rate of profit. This high profit the cotton spinner must also have:
he will not content himself with the English profit. It is true he may
go on for a time at that lower rate, rather than change his employment;
and a trade may be carried on, sometimes for a long period, at a much
lower profit than that for which it would have been originally engaged
in. Countries which have a low cost of labour, and high profits, do not
for that reason undersell others, but they do oppose a more obstinate
resistance to being undersold, because the producers can often submit to
a diminution of profit without being unable to live, and even to thrive,
by their business. But this is all which their advantage does for them:
and in this resistance they will not long persevere, when a change of
times which may give them equal profits with the rest of their
countrymen has become manifestly hopeless.

§ 5. There is a class of trading and exporting communities, on which a
few words of explanation seem to be required. These are hardly to be
looked upon as countries, carrying on an exchange of commodities with
other countries, but more properly as outlying agricultural or
manufacturing establishments belonging to a larger community. Our West
India colonies, for example, cannot be regarded as countries, with a
productive capital of their own. If Manchester, instead of being where
it is, were on a rock in the North Sea, (its present industry
nevertheless continuing,) it would still be but a town of England, not a
country trading with England; it would be merely, as now, a place where
England finds it Edition: current; Page: [686] convenient to carry on
her cotton manufacture. The West Indies, in like manner, are the place
where England finds it convenient to carry on the production of sugar,
coffee, and a few other tropical commodities. All the capital employed
is English capital; almost all the industry is carried on for English
uses; there is little production of anything except the staple
commodities, and these are sent to England, not to be exchanged for
things exported to the colony and consumed by its inhabitants, but to be
sold in England for the benefit of the proprietors there. The trade with
the West Indies is therefore hardly to be considered as external trade,
but more resembles the traffic between town and country, and is amenable
to the principles of the home trade. The rate of profit in the colonies
will be regulated by English profits; the expectation of profit must be
about the same as in England, with the addition of compensation for the
disadvantages attending the more distant and hazardous employment; and
after allowance is made for those disadvantages, the value and price of
West India produce in the English market must be regulated, (or rather
must have been regulated formerly,) like that of any English commodity,
by the cost of production. For the last twelve or fifteen years1 this
principle has been in abeyance: the price was first kept up beyond the
ratio of the cost of production by deficient supplies, which could not,
owing to the deficiency of labour, be increased; and more recently the
admission of foreign competition has introduced another element, and
some of2 the West India Islands are undersold, not so much because wages
are higher than in Cuba and Brazil, as because they are higher than in
England: for were they not so, Jamaica could sell her sugars at Cuban
prices, and still obtain, though not a Cuban, an English rate of profit.

It is worth while also to notice another class of small, but in this
case mostly independent communities, which have supported and enriched
themselves almost without any productions of their own, (except ships
and marine equipments,) by a mere carrying trade, and commerce of
entrepôt; by buying the produce of one country, to sell it at a profit
in another. Such were Venice and the Hanse Towns. The case of these
communities is very simple. They made themselves and their capital the
instruments, not of production, but of accomplishing exchanges between
the productions of other countries. These exchanges are attended with an
advantage to those countries Edition: current; Page: [687] —an increase
of the aggregate returns to industry—part of which went to indemnify the
agents for the necessary expenses of transport, and another part to
remunerate the use of their capital and mercantile skill. The countries
themselves had not capital disposable for the operation. When the
Venetians became the agents of the general commerce of Southern Europe,
they had scarcely any competitors: the thing would not have been done at
all without them, and there was really no limit to their profits except
the limit to what the ignorant feudal nobility could and would give for
the unknown luxuries then first presented to their sight. At a later
period competition arose, and the profit of this operation, like that of
others, became amenable to natural laws. The carrying trade was taken up
by Holland, a country with productions of its own and a large
accumulated capital. The other nations of Europe also had now capital to
spare, and were capable of conducting their foreign trade for
themselves: but Holland, having, from a variety of circumstances, a
lower rate of profit at home, could afford to carry for other countries
at a smaller advance on the original cost of the goods, than would have
been required by their own capitalists; and Holland, therefore,
engrossed the greatest part of the carrying trade of all those countries
which did not keep it to themselves by Navigation Laws, constructed,
like those of England, for that express purpose.

Edition: current; Page: [688]


CHAPTER XXVI: of distribution, as affected by exchange

§ 1. We have now completed, as far as is compatible with our purposes
and limits, the exposition of the machinery through which the produce of
a country is apportioned among the different classes of its inhabitants;
which is no other than the machinery of Exchange, and has for the
exponents of its operation the laws of Value and of Price. We shall now
avail ourselves of the light thus acquired, to cast a retrospective
glance at the subject of Distribution. The division of the produce among
the three classes, Labourers, Capitalists, and Landlords, when
considered without any reference to Exchange, appeared to depend on
certain general laws. It is fit that we should now consider whether
these same laws still operate, when the distribution takes place through
the complex mechanism of exchange and money; or whether the properties
of the mechanism interfere with and modify the presiding principles.

The primary division of the produce of human exertion and frugality is,
as we have seen, into three shares, wages, profits, and rent; and these
shares are portioned out to the persons entitled to them, in the form of
money, and by a process of exchange; or rather, the capitalist, with
whom in the usual arrangements of society the produce remains, pays in
money, to the other two sharers, the market value of their labour and
land. If we examine, on what the pecuniary value of labour, and the
pecuniary value of the use of land, depend, we shall find that it is on
the very same causes by which we found that wages and rent would be
regulated if there were no money and no exchange of commodities.

It is evident, in the first place, that the law of Wages is not affected
by the existence or non-existence of Exchange or Money. Wages depend on
the ratio between population and capital; and would do so if all the
capital in the world were the property of one association, or if the
capitalists among whom it is shared maintained each Edition: current;
Page: [689] an establishment for the production of every article
consumed in the community, exchange of commodities having no existence.
As the ratio between capital and population, in all old countries,
depends on the strength of the checks by which the too rapid increase of
population is restrained, it may be said, popularly speaking, that wages
depend on the checks to population; that when the check is not death, by
starvation or disease, wages depend on the prudence of the labouring
people; and that wages in any country are habitually at the lowest rate
to which in that country the labourer will suffer them to be depressed
rather than put a restraint upon multiplication.

What is here meant, however, by wages, is the labourer’s real scale of
comfort; the quantity he obtains of the things which nature or habit has
made necessary or agreeable to him: wages in the sense in which they are
of importance to the receiver. In the sense in which they are of
importance to the payer, they do not depend exclusively on such simple
principles. Wages in the first sense, the wages on which the labourer’s
comfort depends, we will call real wages, or wages in kind. Wages in the
second sense, we may be permitted to call, for the present, money wages;
assuming, as it is allowable to do, that money remains for the time an
invariable standard, no alteration taking place in the conditions under
which the circulating medium itself is produced or obtained. If money
itself undergoes no variation in cost, the money price of labour is an
exact measure of the Cost of Labour, and may be made use of as a
convenient symbol to express it.

The money wages of labour are a compound result of two elements: first,
real wages, or wages in kind, or, in other words, the quantity which the
labourer obtains of the ordinary articles of consumption; and secondly,
the money prices of those articles. In all old countries—all countries
in which the increase of population is in any degree checked by the
difficulty of obtaining subsistence—the habitual money price of labour
is that which will just enable the labourers, one with another, to
purchase the commodities without which they neither cannot or will not
keep up the population at its customary rate of increase.1 Their
standard of comfort being given, (and by the standard of comfort in a
labouring class, is meant that, rather than forego which, they will
abstain from multiplication,) money wages depend on the money price, and
therefore on the cost of Edition: current; Page: [690] production, of
the various articles which the labourers habitually consume: because if
their wages cannot procure them a given quantity of these, their
increase will slacken, and their wages rise. Of these articles, food and
other agricultural produce are so much the principal, as to leave little
influence to anything else.

It is at this point that we are enabled to invoke the aid of the
principles which have been laid down in this Third Part. The cost of
production of food and agricultural produce has been analyzed in a
preceding chapter. It depends on the productiveness of the least fertile
land, or of the least productively employed portion of capital, which
the necessities of society have as yet put in requisition for
agricultural purposes. The cost of production of the food grown in these
least advantageous circumstances, determines, as we have seen, the
exchange value and money price of the whole. In any given state,
therefore, of the labourers' habits, their money wages depend on the
productiveness of the least fertile land, or least productive
agricultural capital; on the point which cultivation has reached in its
downward progress—in its encroachments on the barren lands, and its
gradually increased strain upon the powers of the more fertile. Now, the
force which urges cultivation in this downward course is the increase of
people; while the counter-force which checks the descent, is the
improvement of agricultural science and practice, enabling the same soil
to yield to the same labour more ample returns. The costliness of the
most costly part of the produce of cultivation is an exact expression of
the state, at any given moment, of the race which population and
agricultural skill are always running against each other.

§ 2. It is well said by Dr. Chalmers, that many of the most important
lessons in political economy are to be learnt at the extreme margin of
cultivation, the last point which the culture of the soil has reached in
its contest with the spontaneous agencies of nature. The degree of
productiveness of this extreme margin is an index to the existing state
of the distribution of the produce among the three classes, of
labourers, capitalists, and landlords.

When the demand of an increasing population for more food cannot be
satisfied without extending cultivation to less fertile land, or
incurring additional outlay, with a less proportional return, on land
already in cultivation, it is a necessary condition of this increase of
agricultural produce that the value and price of that produce must first
rise. But as soon as the price has risen sufficiently to give Edition:
current; Page: [691] to the additional outlay of capital the ordinary
profit, the rise will not go on still further for the purpose of
enabling the new land, or the new expenditure on old land, to yield rent
as well as profit. The land or capital last put in requisition, and
occupying what Dr. Chalmers calls the margin of cultivation, will yield,
and continue to yield, no rent. But if this yields no rent, the rent
afforded by all other land or agricultural capital will be exactly so
much as it produces more than this. The price of food will always on the
average be such, that the worst land, and the least productive
instalment of the capital employed on the better lands, shall just
replace the expenses with the ordinary profit. If the least favoured
land and capital just do thus much, all other land and capital will
yield an extra profit, equal to the proceeds of the extra produce due to
their superior productiveness; and this extra profit becomes, by
competition, the prize of the landlords. Exchange, and money, therefore,
make no difference in the law of rent: it is the same as we originally
found it. Rent is the extra return made to agricultural capital when
employed with peculiar advantages; the exact equivalent of what those
advantages enable the producers to economize in the cost of production:
the value and price of the produce being regulated by the cost of
production to those producers who have no advantages; by the return to
that portion of agricultural capital, the circumstances of which are the
least favourable.

§ 3. Wages and Rent being thus regulated by the same principles when
paid in money, as they would be if apportioned in kind, it follows that
Profits are so likewise. For the surplus, after replacing wages and
paying rent, constitutes Profits.

We found in the last chapter of the Second Book, that the advances of
the capitalist, when analyzed to their ultimate elements, consist either
in the purchase or maintenance of labour, or in the profits of former
capitalists; and that therefore profits, in the last resort, depend upon
the Cost of Labour, falling as that rises, and rising as it falls. Let
us endeavour to trace more minutely the operation of this law.

There are two modes in which the Cost of Labour, which is correctly
represented (money being supposed invariable) by the money wages of the
labourer, may be increased. The labourer may obtain greater comforts;
wages in kind—real wages—may rise. Or the progress of population may
force down cultivation to inferior soils, and more costly processes;
thus raising the cost of production, the Edition: current; Page: [692]
value, and the price, of the chief articles of the labourer’s
consumption. On either of these suppositions, the rate of profit will
fall.

If the labourer obtains more abundant commodities, only by reason of
their greater cheapness; if he obtains a greater quantity, but not on
the whole a greater cost; real wages will be increased, but not money
wages, and there will be nothing to affect the rate of profit. But if he
obtains a greater quantity of commodities of which the cost of
production is not lowered, he obtains a greater cost; his money wages
are higher. The expense of these increased money wages falls wholly on
the capitalist. There are no conceivable means by which he can shake it
off. It may be said—it is, not unfrequently, said—that he will get rid
of it by raising his price. But this opinion we have already, and more
than once, fully refuted.∗

The doctrine, indeed, that a rise of wages causes an equivalent rise of
prices, is, as we formerly observed, self-contradictory: for if it did
so, it would not be a rise of wages; the labourer would get no more of
any commodity than he had before, let his money wages rise ever so much;
a rise of real wages would be an impossibility. This being equally
contrary to reason and to fact, it is evident that a rise of money wages
does not raise prices; that high wages are not a cause of high prices. A
rise of general wages falls on profits. There is no possible
alternative.

Having disposed of the case in which the increase of money wages, and of
the Cost of Labour, arises from the labourer’s obtaining more ample
wages in kind, let us now suppose it to arise from the increased cost of
production of the things which he consumes; owing to an increase of
population, unaccompanied by an equivalent increase of agricultural
skill. The augmented supply required by the population would not be
obtained, unless the price of food rose sufficiently to remunerate the
farmer for the increased cost of production. The farmer, however, in
this case sustains a twofold disadvantage. He has to carry on his
cultivation under less favourable conditions of productiveness than
before. For this, as it is a disadvantage belonging to him only as a
farmer, and not shared by other employers, he will, on the general
principles of value, be compensated by a rise of the price of his
commodity: indeed, until this rise has taken place, he will not bring to
market the required increase of produce. But this very rise of price
involves him in another necessity, for which he is not compensated. As
the real Edition: current; Page: [693] wages of labour are by
supposition unaltered, he must pay higher money wages to his labourers.
This necessity, being common to him with all other capitalists, forms no
ground for a rise of price. The price will rise, until it has placed him
in as good a situation in respect of profits, as other employers of
labour: it will rise so as to indemnify him for the increased labour
which he must now employ in order to produce a given quantity of food:
but the increased wages of that labour are a burthen common to all, and
for which no one can be indemnified. It will be paid wholly from
profits.

Thus we see that increased wages, when common to all descriptions of
productive labourers, and when really representing a greater Cost of
Labour, are always and necessarily at the expense of profits. And by
reversing the cases, we should find in like manner that diminished
wages, when representing a really diminished Cost of Labour, are
equivalent to a rise of profits. But the opposition of pecuniary
interest thus indicated between the class of capitalists and that of
labourers, is to a great extent only apparent. Real wages are a very
different thing from the Cost of Labour, and are generally highest at
the times and places where, from the easy terms on which the land yields
all the produce as yet required from it, the value and price of food
being low, the cost of labour to the employer, notwithstanding its ample
remuneration, is comparatively cheap, and the rate of profit
consequently high.1 We thus obtain a full confirmation of our original
theorem that Profits depend on the Cost of Labour: or, to express the
meaning with still greater accuracy, the rate of profit and the cost of
labour vary inversely as one another, and are joint effects of the same
agencies or causes.

But does not this proposition require to be slightly modified, by making
allowance for that portion (though comparatively small) of the expenses
of the capitalist, which does not consist in wages paid by himself or
reimbursed to previous capitalists, but in the profits of those previous
capitalists? Suppose, for example, an invention in the manufacture of
leather, the advantage of which should consist in rendering it
unnecessary that the hides should remain for so great a length of time
in the tan-pit. Shoemakers, saddlers, and other workers in leather,
would save a part of that portion of the cost of their material which
consists of the tanner’s profits during the time his capital is locked
up; and this saving, it may be said, is a source from which they might
derive an increase Edition: current; Page: [694] of profit, though wages
and the Cost of Labour remained exactly the same. In the case here
supposed, however, the consumer alone would benefit, since the prices of
shoes, harness, and all other articles into which leather enters, would
fall, until the profits of the producers were reduced to the general
level. To obviate this objection, let us suppose that a similar saving
of expense takes place in all departments of production at once. In that
case, since values and prices would not be affected, profits would
probably be raised; but if we look more closely into the case we shall
find, that it is because the cost of labour would be lowered. In this as
in any other case of increase in the general productiveness of labour,
if the labourer obtained only the same real wages, profits would be
raised: but the same real wages would imply a smaller Cost of Labour;
the cost of production of all things having been, by the supposition,
diminished. If, on the other hand, the real wages of labour rose
proportionally, and the Cost of Labour to the employer remained the
same, the advances of the capitalist would bear the same ratio to his
returns as before, and the rate of profit would be unaltered. The reader
who may wish for a more minute examination of this point, will find it
in the volume of separate Essays to which reference has before been
made.∗ The question is too intricate in comparison with its importance,
to be further entered into in a work like the present; and I will merely
say, that it seems to result from the considerations adduced in the
Essay, that there is nothing in the case in question to affect the
integrity of the theory which affirms an exact correspondence, in an
inverse direction, between the rate of profit and the Cost of Labour.

Edition: current; Page: [695]


Book IV: INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY ON PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION


CHAPTER I: general characteristics of a progressive state of wealth

§1. The three preceding Parts include as detailed a view as our limits
permit, of what, by a happy generalization of a mathematical phrase, has
been called the Statics of the subject. We have surveyed the field of
economical facts, and have examined how they stand related to one
another as causes and effects; what circumstances determine the amount
of production, of employment for labour, of capital and population; what
laws regulate rent, profits, and wages; under what conditions and in
what proportions commodities are interchanged between individuals and
between countries. We have thus obtained a collective view of the
economical phenomena of society, considered as existing simultaneously.
We have ascertained, to a certain extent, the principles of their
interdependence; and when the state of some of the elements is known, we
should now be able to infer, in a general way, the contemporaneous state
of most of the others. All this, however, has only put us in possession
of the economical laws of a stationary and unchanging society. We have
still to consider the economical condition of mankind as liable to
change, and indeed (in the more advanced portions of the race, and in
all regions to which their influence reaches) as at all times undergoing
progressive changes. We have to consider what these changes are, what
are their laws, and what their ultimate tendencies; thereby adding a
theory of motion to our theory of equilibrium—the Dynamics of political
economy to the Statics.

Edition: current; Page: [696]
In this inquiry, it is natural to commence by tracing the operation of
known and acknowledged agencies. Whatever may be the other changes which
the economy of society is destined to undergo, there is one actually in
progress, concerning which there can be no dispute. In the leading
countries of the world, and in all others as they come within the
influence of those leading countries, there is at least one progressive
movement which continues with little interruption from year to year and
from generation to generation; a progress in wealth; an advancement of
what is called material prosperity. All the nations which we are
accustomed to call civilized, increase gradually in production and in
population: and there is no reason to doubt, that not only these nations
will for some time continue so to increase, but that most of the other
nations of the world, including some not yet founded, will successively
enter upon the same career. It will, therefore, be our first object to
examine the nature and consequences of this progressive change; the
elements which constitute it, and the effects it produces on the various
economical facts of which we have been tracing the laws, and especially
on wages, profits, rents, values, and prices.

§2. Of the features which characterize this progressive economical
movement of civilized nations, that which first excites attention,
through its intimate connexion with the phenomena of Production, is the
perpetual, and so far as human foresight can extend, the unlimited,
growth of man's power over nature. Our knowledge of the properties and
laws of physical objects shows no sign of approaching its ultimate
boundaries: it is advancing more rapidly, and in a greater number of
directions at once, than in any previous age or generation, and
affording such frequent glimpses of unexplored fields beyond, as to
justify the belief that our acquaintance with nature is still almost in
its infancy. This increasing physical knowledge is now, too, more
rapidly than at any former period, converted, by practical ingenuity,
into physical power. The most marvellous of modern inventions, one which
realizes the imaginary feats of the magician, not metaphorically but
literally—the electro-magnetic telegraph—sprang into existence but a few
years after the establishment of the scientific theory which it realizes
and exemplifies. Lastly, the manual part of these great scientific
operations is now never wanting to the intellectual: there is no
difficulty in finding or forming, in a sufficient number of the working
hands of the community, the skill requisite for executing Edition:
current; Page: [697] the most delicate processes of the application of
science to practical uses. From this union of conditions, it is
impossible not to look forward to a vast multiplication and long
succession of contrivances for economizing labour and increasing its
produce; and to an ever wider diffusion of the use and benefit of those
contrivances.

Another change, which has always hitherto characterized, and will
assuredly continue to characterize, the progress of civilized society,
is a continual increase of the security of person and property. The
people of every country in Europe, the most backward as well as the most
advanced, are, in each generation, better protected against the violence
and rapacity of one another, both by a more efficient judicature and
police for the suppression of private crime, and by the decay and
destruction of those mischievous privileges which enabled certain
classes of the community to prey with impunity upon the rest. They are
also, in every generation, better protected, either by institutions or
by manners and opinion, against arbitrary exercise of the power of
government. Even in semi-barbarous Russia, acts of spoliation directed
against individuals, who have not made themselves politically obnoxious,
are not supposed to be now so frequent as much to affect any person's
feelings of security. Taxation, in all European countries, grows less
arbitrary and oppressive, both in itself and in the manner of levying
it. Wars, and the destruction they cause, are now usually1 confined, in
almost every country, to those distant and outlying possessions at which
it comes into contact with savages. Even the vicissitudes of fortune
which arise from inevitable natural calamities, are more and more
softened to those on whom they fall, by the continual extension of the
salutary practice of insurance.

Of this increased security, one of the most unfailing effects is a great
increase both of production and of accumulation. Industry and frugality
cannot exist where there is not a preponderant probability that those
who labour and spare will be permitted to enjoy. And the nearer this
probability approaches to certainty, the more do industry and frugality
become pervading qualities in a people. Experience has shown that a
large proportion of the results of labour and abstinence may be taken
away by fixed taxation, without impairing, and sometimes even with the
effect of stimulating, the qualities from which a great production and
an abundant capital take their rise. But those qualities are not proof
Edition: current; Page: [698] against a high degree of uncertainty. The
Government may carry off a part; but there must be assurance that it
will not interfere, nor suffer any one to interfere, with the remainder.

One of the changes which most infallibly attend the progress of modern
society, is an improvement in the business capacities of the general
mass of mankind. I do not mean that the practical sagacity of an
individual human being is greater than formerly. I am inclined to
believe that economical progress has hitherto had even a contrary
effect. A person of good natural endowments, in a rude state of society,
can do a great number of things tolerably well, has a greater power of
adapting means to ends, is more capable of extricating himself and
others from an unforeseen embarrassment, than ninety-nine in a hundred
of those who have known only what is called the civilized form of life.
How far these points of inferiority of faculties are compensated, and by
what means they might be compensated still more completely, to the
civilized man as an individual being, is a question belonging to a
different inquiry from the present. But to civilized human beings
collectively considered, the compensation is ample. What is lost in the
separate efficiency of each, is far more than made up by the greater
capacity of united action. In proportion as they put off the qualities
of the savage, they become amenable to discipline; capable of adhering
to plans concerted beforehand, and about which they may not have been
consulted; of subordinating their individual caprice to a preconceived
determination, and performing severally the parts allotted to them in a
combined undertaking. Works of all sorts, impracticable to the savage or
the half-civilized, are daily accomplished by civilized nations, not by
any greatness of faculties in the actual agents, but through the fact
that each is able to rely with certainty on the others for the portion
of the work which they respectively undertake. The peculiar
characteristic, in short, of civilized beings, is the capacity of
co-operation; and this, like other faculties, tends to improve by
practice, and becomes capable of assuming a constantly wider sphere of
action.

Accordingly there is no more certain incident of the progressive change
taking place in society, than the continual growth of the principle and
practice of co-operation. Associations of individuals voluntarily
combining their small contributions now perform works, both of an
industrial and of many other characters, which no one person or small
number of persons are rich enough to accomplish, or for the performance
of which the few persons capable of Edition: current; Page: [699]
accomplishing them were formerly enabled to exact the most inordinate
remuneration. As wealth increases and business capacity improves, we may
look forward to a great extension of establishments, both for industrial
and other purposes, formed by the collective contributions of large
numbers; establishments like those called by the technical name of
joint-stock companies, or the associations less formally constituted,
which are so numerous in England, to raise funds for public or
philanthropic objects, 1 or, lastly, those associations of workpeople
either for production, or to buy goods for their common consumption,
which are now specially known by the name of co-operative societies.

The progress which is to be expected in the physical sciences and arts,
combined with the greater security of property, and greater freedom in
disposing of it, which are obvious features in the civilization of
modern nations, and with the more extensive and more skilful employment
of the joint-stock principle, afford space and scope for an indefinite
increase of capital and production, and for the increase of population
which is its ordinary accompaniment. That the growth of population will
overpass the increase of production, there is not much reason to
apprehend; and that it should even keep pace with it, is inconsistent
with the supposition of any real improvement in the poorest classes of
the people. It is, however, quite possible that there might be a great
progress in industrial improvement, and in the signs of what is commonly
called national prosperity; a great increase of aggregate wealth, and
even, in some respects, a better distribution of it; that not only the
rich might grow richer, but many of the poor might grow rich, that the
intermediate classes might become more numerous and powerful, and the
means of enjoyable existence be more and more largely diffused, while
yet the great class at the base of the whole might increase in numbers
only, and not in comfort nor in cultivation. We must, therefore, in
considering the effects of the progress of industry, admit as a
supposition, however greatly we deprecate as a fact, an increase of
population as long-continued, as indefinite, and possibly even as rapid,
as the increase of production and accumulation.

With these preliminary observations on the causes of change at work in a
society which is in a state of economical progress, I proceed to a more
detailed examination of the changes themselves.

Edition: current; Page: [700]


CHAPTER II: influence of the progress of industry and population on values and prices

§ 1. The changes which the progress of industry causes or presupposes in
the circumstances of production, are necessarily attended with changes
in the values of commodities.

The permanent values of all things which are neither under a natural nor
under an artificial monopoly, depend, as we have seen, on their cost of
production. But the increasing power which mankind are constantly
acquiring over nature, increases more and more the efficiency of human
exertion, or, in other words, diminishes cost of production. All
inventions by which a greater quantity of any commodity can be produced
with the same labour, or the same quantity with less labour, or which
abridge the process, so that the capital employed needs not be advanced
for so long a time, lessen the cost of production of the commodity. As,
however, value is relative; if inventions and improvements in production
were made in all commodities, and all in the same degree, there would be
no alteration in values. Things would continue to exchange for each
other at the same rates as before; and mankind would obtain a greater
quantity of all things in return for their labour and abstinence,
without having that greater abundance measured and declared (as it is
when it affects only one thing) by the diminished exchange value of the
commodity.

As for prices, in these circumstances they would be affected or not,
according as the improvements in production did or did not extend to the
precious metals. If the materials of money were an exception to the
general diminution of cost of production, the values of all other things
would fall in relation to money, that is, there would be a fall of
general prices throughout the world. But if money, like other things,
and in the same degree as other things, were obtained in greater
abundance and cheapness, prices would be Edition: current; Page: [701]
no more affected than values would: and there would be no visible sign
in the state of the markets, of any of the changes which had taken
place; except that there would be (if people continued to labour as much
as before) a greater quantity of all sorts of commodities, circulated at
the same prices by a greater quantity of money.

Improvements in production are not the only circumstance accompanying
the progress of industry which tends to diminish the cost of producing,
or at least of obtaining, commodities. Another circumstance is the
increase of intercourse between different parts of the world. As
commerce extends, and the ignorant attempts to restrain it by tariffs
become obsolete, commodities tend more and more to be produced in the
places in which their production can be carried on at the least expense
of labour and capital to mankind. As civilization spreads, and security
of person and property becomes established, in parts of the world which
have not hitherto had that advantage, the productive capabilities of
those places are called into fuller activity, for the benefit both of
their own inhabitants and of foreigners. The ignorance and misgovernment
in which many of the regions most favoured by nature are still
grovelling, afford work, probably, for many generations before those
countries will be raised even to the present level of the most civilized
parts of Europe. Much will also depend on the increasing migration of
labour and capital to unoccupied parts of the earth, of which the soil,
climate, and situation are found, by the ample means of exploration now
possessed, to promise not only a large return to industry, but great
facilities of producing commodities suited to the markets of old
countries. Much as the collective industry of the earth is likely to be
increased in efficiency by the extension of science and of the
industrial arts, a still more active source of increased cheapness of
production will be found, probably, for some time to come, in the
gradually unfolding consequences of Free Trade, and in the increasing
scale on which Emigration and Colonization will be carried on.

From the causes now enumerated, unless counteracted by others, the
progress of things enables a country to obtain at less and less of real
cost, not only its own productions but those of foreign countries.
Indeed, whatever diminishes the cost of its own productions, when of an
exportable character, enables it, as we have already seen, to obtain its
imports at less real cost.

§ 2. But is it the fact, that these tendencies are not counteracted? Has
the progress of wealth and industry no effect in regard Edition:
current; Page: [702] to cost of production, but to diminish it? Are no
causes of an opposite character brought into operation by the same
progress, sufficient in some cases not only to neutralize, but to
overcome the former, and convert the descending movement of cost of
production into an ascending movement? We are already aware that there
are such causes, and that, in the case of the most important classes of
commodities, food and materials, there is a tendency diametrically
opposite to that of which we have been speaking. The cost of production
of these commodities tends to increase.

This is not a property inherent in the commodities themselves. If
population were stationary, and the produce of the earth never needed to
be augmented in quantity, there would be no cause for greater cost of
production. Mankind would, on the contrary, have the full benefit of all
improvements in agriculture, or in the arts subsidiary to it, and there
would be no difference, in this respect, between the products of
agriculture and those of manufactures.1 The only products of industry
which, if population did not increase, would be liable to a real
increase of cost of production, are those which, depending on a material
which is not renewed, are either wholly or partially exhaustible; such
as coal, and most if not all metals; for even iron, the most abundant as
well as most useful of metallic products, which forms an ingredient of
most minerals and of almost all rocks, is susceptible of exhaustion so
far as regards its richest and most tractable ores.

When, however, population increases, as it has never yet failed to do
when the increase of industry and of the means of subsistence made room
for it, the demand for most of the productions of the earth, and
particularly for food, increases in a corresponding proportion. And then
comes into effect that fundamental law of production from the soil, on
which we have so frequently had occasion to expatiate; the law, that
increased labour, in any given state of agricultural skill, is attended
with a less than proportional increase of produce. The cost of
production of the fruits of the earth increases, caeteris paribus, with
every increase of the demand.

No tendency of a like kind exists with respect to manufactured articles.
The tendency is in the contrary direction. The larger Edition: current;
Page: [703] the scale on which manufacturing operations are carried on,
the more cheaply they can in general be performed. Mr. Senior has gone
the length of enunciating as an inherent law of manufacturing industry,
that in it increased production takes place at a smaller cost, while in
agricultural industry increased production takes place at a greater
cost. I cannot think, however, that even in manufactures, increased
cheapness follows increased production by anything amounting to a law.
It is a probable and usual, but not a necessary, consequence.

As manufactures, however, depend for their materials either upon
agriculture, or mining, or the spontaneous produce of the earth,
manufacturing industry is subject, in respect of one of its essentials,
to the same law as agriculture. But the crude material generally forms
so small a portion of the total cost, that any tendency which may exist
to a progressive increase in that single item, is much over-balanced by
the diminution continually taking place in all the other elements; to
which diminution it is impossible at present to assign any limit.

The tendency, then, being to a perpetual increase of the productive
power of labour in manufactures, while in agriculture and mining there
is a conflict between two tendencies, the one towards an increase of
productive power, the other towards a diminution of it, the cost of
production being lessened by every improvement in the processes, and
augmented by every addition to population; it follows that the exchange
values of manufactured articles, compared with the products of
agriculture and of mines, have, as population and industry advance, a
certain and decided tendency to fall. Money being a product of mines, it
may also be laid down as a rule, that manufactured articles tend, as
society advances, to fall in money price. The industrial history of
modern nations, especially during the last hundred years, fully bears
out this assertion.

§ 3. Whether agricultural produce increases in absolute as well as
comparative cost of production, depends on the conflict of the two
antagonist agencies, increase of population, and improvement in
agricultural skill. In some, perhaps in most, states of society,
(looking at the whole surface of the earth,) both agricultural skill and
population are either stationary, or increase very slowly, and the cost
of production of food, therefore, is nearly stationary. In a society
which is advancing in wealth, population generally increases faster than
agricultural skill, and food consequently tends to become Edition:
current; Page: [704] more costly; but there are times when a strong
impulse sets in towards agricultural improvement. Such an impulse has
shown itself in Great Britain during the last twenty or thirty1 years.
In England and Scotland agricultural skill has of late increased
considerably faster than population, insomuch that food and other
agricultural produce, notwithstanding the increase of people, can be
grown at less cost than they were thirty years ago:2 and the abolition
of the Corn Laws has given an additional stimulus to the spirit of
improvement. In some other countries, and particularly in France, the
improvement of agriculture gains ground still more decidedly upon
population, because though agriculture, except in a few provinces,
advances slowly, population advances still more slowly, and even with
increasing slowness; its growth being kept down, not by poverty, which
is diminishing, but by prudence.

Which of the two conflicting agencies is gaining upon the other at any
particular time, might be conjectured with tolerable accuracy from the
money price of agricultural produce (supposing bullion not to vary
materially in value), provided a sufficient number of years could be
taken, to form an average independent of the fluctuations of seasons.
This, however, is hardly practicable, since Mr. Tooke has shown that
even so long a period as half a century may include a much greater
proportion of abundant and a smaller of deficient seasons than is
properly due to it. A mere average, therefore, might lead to conclusions
only the more misleading, for their deceptive semblance of accuracy.
There would be less danger of error in taking the average of only a
small number of years, and correcting it by a conjectural allowance for
the character of the seasons, than in trusting to a longer average
without any such correction. It is hardly necessary to add, that in
founding conclusions on quoted prices, allowance must also be made as
far as possible for any changes in the general exchange value of the
precious metals.∗3

§ 4. Thus far, of the effect of the progress of society on the permanent
or average values and prices of commodities. It remains Edition:
current; Page: [705] to be considered in what manner the same progress
affects their fluctuations. Concerning the answer to this question there
can be no doubt. It tends in a very high degree to diminish them.

In poor and backward societies, as in the East, and in Europe during the
Middle Ages, extraordinary differences in the price of the same
commodity might exist in places not very distant from each other,
because the want of roads and canals, the imperfection of marine
navigation, and the insecurity of communications generally, prevented
things from being transported from the places where they were cheap to
those where they were dear. The things most liable to fluctuations in
value, those directly influenced by the seasons, and especially food,
were seldom carried to any great distances. Each locality depended, as a
general rule, on its own produce and that of its immediate
neighbourhood. In most years, accordingly, there was, in some part or
other of any large country, a real dearth. Almost every season must be
unpropitious to some among the many soils and climates to be found in an
extensive tract of country; but as the same season is also in general
more than ordinarily favourable to others, it is only occasionally that
the aggregate produce of the whole country is deficient, and even then
in a less degree than that of many separate portions; while a deficiency
at all considerable, extending to the whole world, is a thing almost
unknown. In modern times, therefore, there is only dearth, where there
formerly would have been famine, and sufficiency everywhere when
anciently there would have been scarcity in some places and superfluity
in others.

The same change has taken place with respect to all other articles of
commerce. The safety and cheapness of communications, which enable a
deficiency in one place to be supplied from the surplus of another, at a
moderate or even a small advance on the ordinary price, render the
fluctuations of prices much less extreme than formerly. This effect is
much promoted by the existence of large capitals, belonging to what are
called speculative merchants, whose business it is to buy goods in order
to resell them at a profit.

These dealers naturally buying things when they are cheapest, and
storing them up to be brought again into the market when the price has
become unusually high; the tendency of their operations is to equalize
price, or at least to moderate its inequalities. The prices of things
are neither so much depressed at one time, nor so much raised at
another, as they would be if speculative dealers did not exist.

Speculators, therefore, have a highly useful office in the Edition:
current; Page: [706] economy of society; and (contrary to common
opinion) the most useful portion of the class are those who speculate in
commodities affected by the vicissitudes of seasons. If there were no
corn-dealers, not only would the price of corn be liable to variations
much more extreme than at present, but in a deficient season the
necessary supplies might not be forthcoming at all. Unless there were
speculators in corn, or unless, in default of dealers, the farmers
became speculators, the price in a season of abundance would fall
without any limit or check, except the wasteful consumption that would
invariably follow. That any part of the surplus of one year remains to
supply the deficiency of another, is owing either to farmers who
withhold corn from the market, or to dealers who buy it when at the
cheapest and lay it up in store.

§ 5. Among persons who have not much considered the subject, there is a
notion that the gains of speculators are often made by causing an
artificial scarcity; that they create a high price by their own
purchases, and then profit by it. This may easily be shown to be
fallacious. If a corn-dealer makes purchases on speculation, and
produces a rise, when there is neither at the time nor afterwards any
cause for a rise of price except his own proceedings; he no doubt
appears to grow richer as long as his purchases continue, because he is
a holder of an article which is quoted at a higher and higher price: but
this apparent gain only seems within his reach so long as he does not
attempt to realize it. If he has bought, for instance, a million of
quarters, and by withholding them from the market, has raised the price
ten shillings a quarter; just so much as the price has been raised by
withdrawing a million quarters, will it be lowered by bringing them
back, and the best that he can hope is that he will lose nothing except
interest and his expenses. If by a gradual and cautious sale he is able
to realize, on some portion of his stores, a part of the increased
price, so also he will undoubtedly have had to pay a part of that price
on some portion of his purchases. He runs considerable risk of incurring
a still greater loss; for the temporary high price is very likely to
have tempted others, who had no share in causing it, and who might
otherwise not have found their way to his market at all, to bring their
corn there, and intercept a part of the advantage. So that instead of
profiting by a scarcity caused by himself, he is by no means unlikely,
after buying in an average market, to be forced to sell in a
superabundant one.

As an individual speculator cannot gain by a rise of price solely
Edition: current; Page: [707] of his own creating, so neither can a
number of speculators gain collectively by a rise which their operations
have artificially produced. Some among a number of speculators may gain,
by superior judgment or good fortune1 in selecting the time for
realizing, but they make this gain at the expense, not of the consumer,
but of the other speculators who are less judicious. They, in fact,
convert to their own benefit the high price produced by the speculations
of the others, leaving to these the loss resulting from the recoil. It
is not to be denied, therefore, that speculators may enrich themselves
by other people's loss. But it is by the losses of other speculators. As
much must have been lost by one set of dealers as is gained by another
set.

When a speculation in a commodity proves profitable to the speculators
as a body, it is because, in the interval between their buying and
reselling, the price rises from some cause independent of them, their
only connexion with it consisting in having foreseen it. In this case,
their purchases make the price begin to rise sooner than it otherwise
would do, thus spreading the privation of the consumers over a longer
period, but mitigating it at the time of its greatest height: evidently
to the general advantage. In this, however, it is assumed that they have
not overrated the rise which they looked forward to. For it often
happens that speculative purchases are made in the expectation of some
increase of demand, or deficiency of supply, which after all does not
occur, or not to the extent which the speculator expected. In that case
the speculation, instead of moderating fluctuation, has caused a
fluctuation of price which otherwise would not have happened, or
aggravated one which would. But in that case, the speculation is a
losing one, to the speculators collectively, however much some
individuals may gain by it. All that part of the rise of price by which
it exceeds what there are independent grounds for, cannot give to the
speculators as a body any benefit, since the price is as much depressed
by their sales as it was raised by their purchases; and while they gain
nothing by it, they lose, not only their trouble and expenses, but
almost always much more, through the effects incident to the artificial
rise of price, in checking consumption, and bringing forward supplies
from unforeseen quarters. The operations, therefore, of speculative
dealers, are useful to the public whenever profitable to themselves; and
though they are sometimes injurious to the public, by heightening the
fluctuations which their more usual office is to alleviate, yet Edition:
current; Page: [708] whenever this happens the speculators are the
greatest losers. The interest, in short, of the speculators as a body,
coincides with the interest of the public; and as they can only fail to
serve the public interest in proportion as they miss their own, the best
way to promote the one is to leave them to pursue the other in perfect
freedom.

I do not deny that speculators may aggravate a local scarcity. In
collecting corn from the villages to supply the towns, they make the
dearth penetrate into nooks and corners which might otherwise have
escaped from bearing their share of it. To buy and resell in the same
place, tends to alleviate scarcity; to buy in one place and resell in
another, may increase it in the former of the two places, but relieves
it in the latter, where the price is higher, and which, therefore, by
the very supposition, is likely to be suffering more. And these
sufferings always fall hardest on the poorest consumers, since the rich,
by outbidding, can obtain their accustomed supply undiminished if they
choose. To no persons, therefore, are the operations of corn-dealers on
the whole so beneficial as to the poor. Accidentally and exceptionally,
the poor may suffer from them: it might sometimes be more advantageous
to the rural poor to have corn cheap in winter, when they are entirely
dependent on it, even if the consequence were a dearth in spring, when
they can perhaps obtain partial substitutes. But there are no
substitutes, procurable at that season, which serve in any great degree
to replace bread-corn as the chief article of food: if there were, its
price would fall in the spring, instead of continuing, as it always
does, to rise till the approach of harvest.

There is an opposition of immediate interest, at the moment of sale,
between the dealer in corn and the consumer, as there always is between
the seller and the buyer: and a time of dearth being that in which the
speculator makes his largest profits, he is an object of dislike and
jealousy at that time, to those who are suffering while he is gaining.
It is an error, however, to suppose that the corn-dealer's business
affords him any extraordinary profit: he makes his gains not constantly,
but at particular times, and they must therefore occasionally be great,
but the chances of profit in a business in which there is so much
competition, cannot on the whole be greater than in other employments. A
year of scarcity, in which great gains are made by corn-dealers, rarely
comes to an end without a recoil which places many of them in the list
of bankrupts. There have been few more promising seasons for
corn-dealers than the Edition: current; Page: [709] year 1847, and
seldom was there a greater break-up among the speculators than in the
autumn of that year. The chances of failure, in this most precarious
trade, are a set-off against great occasional profits. If the
corn-dealer were to sell his stores, during a dearth, at a lower price
than that which the competition of the consumers assigns to him, he
would make a sacrifice, to charity or philanthropy, of the fair profits
of his employment, which may be quite as reasonably required from any
other person of equal means. His business being a useful one, it is the
interest of the public that the ordinary motives should exist for
carrying it on, and that neither law nor opinion should prevent an
operation beneficial to the public from being attended with as much
private advantage as is compatible with full and free competition.

It appears, then, that the fluctuations of values and prices arising
from variations of supply, or from alterations in real (as distinguished
from speculative) demand, may be expected to become more moderate as
society advances. With regard to those which arise from miscalculation,
and especially from the alterations of undue expansion and excessive
contraction of credit, which occupy so conspicuous a place among
commercial phenomena, the same thing cannot be affirmed with equal
confidence. Such vicissitudes, beginning with irrational speculation and
ending with a commercial crisis, have not hitherto become either less
frequent or less violent with the growth of capital and extension of
industry. Rather they may be said to have become more so: in
consequence, as is often said, of increased competition; but, as I
prefer to say, of a low rate of profits and interest, which makes
capitalists dissatisfied with the ordinary course of safe mercantile
gains.1 The connexion of this low rate of profit with the advance of
population and accumulation, is one of the points to be illustrated in
the ensuing chapters.

Edition: current; Page: [710]


CHAPTER III: influence of the progress of industry and population, on rents, profits, and wages

§ 1. Continuing the inquiry into the nature of the economical changes
taking place in a society which is in a state of industrial progress we
shall next consider what is the effect of that progress on the
distribution of the produce among the various classes who share in it.
We may confine our attention to the system of distribution which is the
most complex, and which virtually includes all others—that in which the
produce of manufactures is shared between two classes, labourers and
capitalists, and the produce of agriculture among three, labourers,
capitalists, and landlords.

The characteristic features of what is commonly meant by industrial
progress, resolve themselves mainly into three, increase of capital,
increase of population, and improvements in production; understanding
the last expression in its widest sense, to include the process of
procuring commodities from a distance, as well as that of producing
them. The other changes which take place are chiefly consequences of
these; as, for example, the tendency to a progressive increase of the
cost of production of food; arising from an increased demand, which may
be occasioned either by increased population, or by an increase of
capital and wages, enabling the poorer classes to increase their
consumption. It will be convenient to set out by considering each of the
three causes, as operating separately; after which we can suppose them
combined in any manner we think fit.

Let us first suppose that population increases, capital and the arts of
production remaining stationary. One of the effects of this change of
circumstances is sufficiently obvious: wages will fall; the labouring
class will be reduced to an inferior condition. The state of the
capitalist, on the contrary, will be improved. With the same capital, he
can purchase more labour, and obtain more produce. His rate of profit is
increased. The dependence of the Edition: current; Page: [711] rate of
profits on the cost of labour is here verified; for the labourer
obtaining a diminished quantity of commodities, and no alteration being
supposed in the circumstances of their production, the diminished
quantity represents a diminished cost. The labourer obtains not only a
smaller real reward, but the product of a smaller quantity of labour.
The first circumstance is the important one to himself, the last to his
employer.

Nothing has occurred, thus far, to affect in any way the value of any
commodity; and no reason, therefore, has yet shown itself, why rent
should be either raised or lowered. But if we look forward another stage
in the series of effects, we may see our way to such a consequence. The
labourers have increased in numbers: their condition is reduced in the
same proportion; the increased numbers divide among them only the
produce of the same amount of labour as before. But they may economize
in their other comforts, and not in their food: each may consume as much
food, and of as costly a quality as previously; or they may submit to a
reduction, but not in proportion to the increase of numbers. On this
supposition, notwithstanding the diminution of real wages, the increased
population will require an increased quantity of food. But since
industrial skill and knowledge are supposed to be stationary, more food
can only be obtained by resorting to worse land, or to methods of
cultivation which are less productive in proportion to the outlay.
Capital for this extension of agriculture will not be wanting; for
though, by hypothesis, no addition takes place to the capital in
existence, a sufficient amount can be spared from the industry which
previously supplied the other and less pressing wants which the
labourers have been obliged to curtail. The additional supply of food,
therefore, will be produced, but produced at a greater cost; and the
exchange value of agricultural produce must rise. It may be objected,
that profits having risen, the extra cost of producing food can be
defrayed from profits, without any increase of price. It could,
undoubtedly, but it will not; because, if it did, the agriculturist
would be placed in an inferior position to other capitalists. The
increase of profits, being the effect of diminished wages, is common to
all employers of labour. The increased expenses arising from the
necessity of a more costly cultivation, affect the agriculturist alone.
For this peculiar burthen he must be peculiarly compensated, whether the
general rate of profit be high or low. He will not submit indefinitely
to a deduction from his profits to which other capitalists are not
subject. He will not extend his cultivation by Edition: current; Page:
[712] laying out fresh capital, unless for a return sufficient to yield
him as high a profit as could be obtained by the same capital in other
investments. The value, therefore, of his commodity will rise, and rise
in proportion to the increased cost. The farmer will thus be indemnified
for the burthen which is peculiar to himself, and will also enjoy the
augmented rate of profit which is common to all capitalists.

It follows, from principles with which we are already familiar, that in
these circumstances rent will rise. Any land can afford to pay, and
under free competition will pay, a rent equal to the excess of its
produce above the return to an equal capital on the worst land, or under
the least favourable conditions. Whenever, therefore, agriculture is
driven to descend to worse land, or more onerous processes, rent rises.
Its rise will be twofold, for, in the first place, rent in kind, or corn
rent, will rise; and in the second, since the value of agricultural
produce has also risen, rent, estimated in manufactured or foreign
commodities (which is represented, caeteris paribus, by money rent) will
rise still more.

The steps of the process (if, after what has been formerly said, it is
necessary to retrace them) are as follows. Corn rises in price, to repay
with the ordinary profit the capital required for producing additional
corn on worse land or by more costly processes. So far as regards this
additional corn, the increased price is but an equivalent for the
additional expense; but the rise, extending to all corn, affords on all,
except the last produced, an extra profit. If the farmer was accustomed
to produce 100 quarters of wheat at 40s., and 120 quarters are now
required, of which the last twenty cannot be produced under 45s., he
obtains the extra five shillings on the entire 120 quarters, and not on
the last twenty alone. He has thus an extra 25l. beyond the ordinary
profits, and this, in a state of free competition, he will not be able
to retain. He cannot however be compelled to give it up to the consumer,
since a less price than 45s. would be inconsistent with the production
of the last twenty quarters. The price, then, will remain at 45s., and
the 25l. will be transferred by competition not to the consumer but to
the landlord. A rise of rents is therefore inevitably consequent on an
increased demand for agricultural produce, when unaccompanied by
increased facilities for its production. A truth which, after this final
illustration, we may henceforth take for granted.

The new element now introduced—an increased demand for food—besides
occasioning an increase of rent, still further disturbs the Edition:
current; Page: [713] distribution of the produce between capitalists and
labourers. The increase of population will have diminished the reward of
labour: and if its cost is diminished as greatly as its real
remuneration, profits will be increased by the full amount. If, however,
the increase of population leads to an increased production of food,
which cannot be supplied but at an enhanced cost of production, the cost
of labour will not be so much diminished as the real reward of it, and
profits, therefore, will not be so much raised. It is even possible that
they might not be raised at all. The labourers may previously have been
so well provided for, that the whole of what they now lose may be struck
off from their other indulgences, and they may not, either by necessity
or choice, undergo any reduction in the quantity or quality of their
food. To produce the food for the increased number may be attended with
such an increase of expense, that wages, though reduced in quantity, may
represent as great a cost, may be the product of as much labour, as
before, and the capitalist may not be at all benefited. On this
supposition the loss to the labourer is partly absorbed in the
additional labour required for producing the last instalment of
agricultural produce; and the remainder is gained by the landlord, the
only sharer who always benefits by an increase of population.

§ 2. Let us now reverse our hypothesis, and instead of supposing capital
stationary and population advancing, let us suppose capital advancing
and population stationary; the facilities of production, both natural
and acquired, being, as before, unaltered. The real wages of labour,
instead of falling, will now rise; and since the cost of production of
the things consumed by the labourer is not diminished, this rise of
wages implies an equivalent increase of the cost of labour, and
diminution of profits. To state the same deduction in other terms; the
labourers not being more numerous, and the productive power of their
labour being only the same as before, there is no increase of the
produce; the increase of wages, therefore, must be at the charge of the
capitalist. It is not impossible that the cost of labour might be
increased in even a greater ratio than its real remuneration. The
improved condition of the labourers may increase the demand for food.
The labourers may have been so ill off before, as not to have food
enough; and may now consume more: or they may choose to expend their
increased means partly or wholly in a more costly quality of food,
requiring more labour and more land; wheat, for example, instead of
oats, or potatoes. This Edition: current; Page: [714] extension of
agriculture implies, as usual, a greater cost of production and a higher
price, so that besides the increase of the cost of labour arising from
the increase of its reward, there will be a further increase (and an
additional fall of profits) from the increased costliness of the
commodities of which that reward consists. The same causes will produce
a rise of rent. What the capitalists lose, above what the labourers
gain, is partly transferred to the landlord, and partly swallowed up in
the cost of growing food on worse land or by a less productive process.

§ 3. Having disposed of the two simple cases, an increasing population
and stationary capital, and an increasing capital and stationary
population, we are prepared to take into consideration the mixed case,
in which the two elements of expansion are combined, both population and
capital increasing. If either element increases faster than the other,
the case is so far assimilated with one or other of the two preceding:
we shall suppose them, therefore, to increase with equal rapidity; the
test of equality being, that each labourer obtains the same commodities
as before, and the same quantity of those commodities. Let us examine
what will be the effect, on rent and profits, of this double progress.

Population having increased, without any falling off in the labourer's
condition, there is of course a demand for more food. The arts of
production being supposed stationary, this food must be produced at an
increased cost. To compensate for this greater cost of the additional
food, the price of agricultural produce must rise. The rise extending
over the whole amount of food produced, though the increased expenses
only apply to a part, there is a greatly increased extra profit, which,
by competition, is transferred to the landlord. Rent will rise, both in
quantity of produce and in cost; while wages, being supposed to be the
same in quantity, will be greater in cost. The labourer obtaining the
same amount of necessaries, money wages have risen; and as the rise is
common to all branches of production, the capitalist cannot indemnify
himself by changing his employment, and the loss must be borne by
profits.

It appears, then, that the tendency of an increase of capital and
population is to add to rent at the expense of profits: though rent does
not gain all that profits lose, a part being absorbed in increased
expenses of production, that is, in hiring or feeding a greater number
of labourers to obtain a given amount of agricultural produce. By
profits, must of course be understood the rate of profit; for a lower
Edition: current; Page: [715] rate of profit on a larger capital may
yield a larger gross profit, considered absolutely, though a smaller in
proportion to the entire produce.

This tendency of profits to fall, is from time to time counteracted by
improvements in production: whether arising from increase of knowledge,
or from an increased use of the knowledge already possessed. This is the
third of the three elements, the effects of which on the distribution of
the produce we undertook to investigate; and the investigation will be
facilitated by supposing, as in the case of the other two elements, that
it operates, in the first instance, alone.

§ 4. Let us then suppose capital and population stationary, and a sudden
improvement made in the arts of production; by the invention of more
efficient machines, or less costly processes, or by obtaining access to
cheaper commodities through foreign trade.

The improvement may either be in some of the necessaries or indulgences
which enter into the habitual consumption of the labouring class; or it
may be applicable only to luxuries consumed exclusively by richer
people. Very few, however, of the great industrial improvements are
altogether of this last description. Agricultural improvements, except
such as specially relate to some of the rarer and more peculiar
products, act directly upon the principal objects of the labourer's
expenditure. The steam-engine, and every other invention which affords a
manageable power, are applicable to all things, and of course to those
consumed by the labourer. Even the power-loom and the spinning-jenny,
though applied to the most delicate fabrics, are available no less for
the coarse cottons and woollens worn by the labouring class. All
improvements in locomotion cheapen the transport of necessaries as well
as of luxuries. Seldom is a new branch of trade opened, without, either
directly or in some indirect way, causing some of the articles which the
mass of the people consume to be either produced or imported at smaller
cost. It may safely be affirmed, therefore, that improvements in
production generally tend to cheapen the commodities on which the wages
of the labouring class are expended.

In so far as the commodities affected by an improvement are those which
the labourers generally do not consume, the improvement has no effect in
altering the distribution of the produce. Those particular commodities,
indeed, are cheapened; being produced at less cost, they fall in value
and in price, and all who consume them, Edition: current; Page: [716]
whether landlords, capitalists, or skilled and privileged labourers,
obtain increased means of enjoyment. The rate of profits, however, is
not raised. There is a larger gross profit, reckoned in quantity of
commodities. But the capital also, if estimated in those commodities,
has risen in value. The profit is the same percentage on the capital
that it was before. The capitalists are not benefited as capitalists,
but as consumers. The landlords and the privileged classes of labourers,
if they are consumers of the same commodities, share the same benefit.

The case is different with improvements which diminish the cost of
production of the necessaries of life, or of commodities which enter
habitually into the consumption of the great mass of labourers. The play
of the different forces being here rather complex, it is necessary to
analyse it with some minuteness.

As formerly observed,∗ there are two kinds of agricultural improvements.
Some consist in a mere saving of labour, and enable a given quantity of
food to be produced at less cost, but not on a smaller surface of land
than before. Others enable a given extent of land to yield not only the
same produce with less labour, but a greater produce; so that, if no
greater produce is required, a part of the land already under culture
may be dispensed with. As the part rejected will be the least productive
portion, the market will thenceforth be regulated by a better
description of land than what was previously the worst under
cultivation.

To place the effect of the improvement in a clear light, we must suppose
it to take place suddenly, so as to leave no time, during its
introduction, for any increase of capital or of population. Its first
effect will be a fall of the value and price of agricultural produce.
This is a necessary consequence of either kind of improvement, but
especially of the last.

An improvement of the first kind, not increasing the produce, does not
dispense with any portion of the land; the margin of cultivation (as Dr.
Chalmers terms it) remains where it was; agriculture does not recede,
either in extent of cultivated land, or in elaborateness of method: and
the price continues to be regulated by the same land, and by the same
capital, as before. But since that land or capital, and all other land
or capital which produces food, now yields its produce at smaller cost,
the price of food will fall proportionally. If one-tenth of the expense
of production has been saved, the price of produce will fall one-tenth.

Edition: current; Page: [717]
But suppose the improvement to be of the second kind; enabling the land
to produce, not only the same corn with one-tenth less labour, but a
tenth more corn with the same labour. Here the effect is still more
decided. Cultivation can now be contracted, and the market supplied from
a smaller quantity of land. Even if this smaller surface of land were of
the same average quality as the larger surface, the price would fall
one-tenth, because the same produce would be obtained with a tenth less
labour. But since the portion of land abandoned will be the least
fertile portion, the price of produce will thenceforth be regulated by a
better quality of land than before. In addition, therefore, to the
original diminution of one-tenth in the cost of production, there will
be a further diminution, corresponding with the recession of the
“margin” of agriculture to land of greater fertility. There will thus be
a twofold fall of price.

Let us now examine the effect of the improvements, thus suddenly made,
on the division of the produce; and in the first place, on rent. By the
former of the two kinds of improvement, rent would be diminished. By the
second, it would be diminished still more.

Suppose that the demand for food requires the cultivation of three
qualities of land, yielding, on an equal surface, and at an equal
expense, 100, 80, and 60 bushels of wheat. The price of wheat will, on
the average, be just sufficient to enable the third quality to be
cultivated with the ordinary profit. The first quality therefore will
yield forty and the second twenty bushels of extra profit, constituting
the rent of the landlord. And first, let an improvement be made, which,
without enabling more corn to be grown, enables the same corn to be
grown with one-fourth less labour. The price of wheat will fall
one-fourth, and 80 bushels will be sold for the price for which 60 were
sold before. But the produce of the land which produces 60 bushels is
still required, and the expenses being as much reduced as the price,
that land can still be cultivated with the ordinary profit. The first
and second qualities will therefore continue to yield a surplus of 40
and 20 bushels, and corn rent will remain the same as before. But corn
having fallen in price one-fourth, the same corn rent is equivalent to a
fourth less of money and of all other commodities. So far, therefore, as
the landlord expends his income in manufactured or foreign products, he
is one-fourth worse off than before. His income as landlord is reduced
to three-quarters of its amount: it is only as a consumer of corn that
he is as well off.

If the improvement is of the other kind, rent will fall in a still
Edition: current; Page: [718] greater ratio. Suppose that the amount of
produce which the market requires, can be grown not only with a fourth
less labour, but on a fourth less land. If all the land already in
cultivation continued to be cultivated, it would yield a produce much
larger than necessary. Land, equivalent to a fourth of the produce, must
now be abandoned; and as the third quality yielded exactly one-fourth,
(being 60 out of 240,) that quality will go out of cultivation. The 240
bushels can now be grown on land of the first and second qualities only;
being, on the first, 100 bushels plus one-third, or 133 1/3 bushels; on
the second, 80 bushels plus one-third, or 106 2/3 bushels; together 240.
The second quality of land, instead of the third, is now the lowest, and
regulates the price. Instead of 60, it is sufficient if 106 2/3 bushels
repay the capital with the ordinary profit. The price of wheat will
consequently fall, not in the ratio of 60 to 80, as in the other case,
but in the ratio of 60 to 106 2/3. Even this gives an insufficient idea
of the degree in which rent will be affected. The whole produce of the
second quality of land will now be required to repay the expenses of
production. That land, being the worst in cultivation, will pay no rent.
And the first quality will only yield the difference between 133 1/3
bushels and 106 2/3, being 26 2/3 bushels instead of 40. The landlords
collectively will have lost 33 1/3 out of 60 bushels in corn rent alone,
while the value and price of what is left will have been diminished in
the ratio of 60 to 106 2/3.

It thus appears, that the interest of the landlord is decidedly hostile
to the sudden and general introduction of agricultural improvements.
This assertion has been called a paradox, and made a ground for accusing
its first promulgator, Ricardo, of great intellectual perverseness, to
say nothing worse. I cannot discern in what the paradox consists; and
the obliquity of vision seems to me to be on the side of his assailants.
The opinion is only made to appear absurd by stating it unfairly. If the
assertion were that a landlord is injured by the improvement of his
estate, it would certainly be indefensible; but what is asserted is,
that he is injured by the improvement of the estates of other people,
although his own is included. Nobody doubts that he would gain greatly
by the improvement if he could keep it to himself, and unite the two
benefits, an increased produce from his land, and a price as high as
before. But if the increase of produce took place simultaneously on all
lands, the price would not be as high as before; and there is nothing
unreasonable in supposing that the landlords would be, not benefited,
but injured. It is admitted that whatever permanently reduces Edition:
current; Page: [719] the price of produce diminishes rent: and it is
quite in accordance with common notions to suppose that if, by the
increased productiveness of land, less land were required for
cultivation, its value, like that of other articles for which the demand
had diminished, would fall.

I am quite willing to admit that rents have not really been lowered by
the progress of agricultural improvement; but why? Because improvement
has never in reality been sudden, but always slow; at no time much
outstripping, and often falling far short of, the growth of capital and
population, which tends as much to raise rent, as the other to lower it,
and which is enabled, as we shall presently see, to raise it much
higher, by means of the additional margin afforded by improvements in
agriculture. First, however, we must examine in what manner the sudden
cheapening of agricultural produce would affect profits and wages.

In the beginning, money wages would probably remain the same as before,
and the labourers would have the full benefit of the cheapness. They
would be enabled to increase their consumption either of food or of
other articles, and would receive the same cost, and a greater quantity.
So far, profits would be unaffected. But the permanent remuneration of
the labourers essentially depends on what we have called their habitual
standard; the extent of the requirements which, as a class, they insist
on satisfying before they choose to have children. If their tastes and
requirements receive a durable impress from the sudden improvement in
their condition, the benefit to the class will be permanent. But the
same cause which enables them to purchase greater comforts and
indulgences with the same wages, would enable them to purchase the same
amount of comforts and indulgences with lower wages; and a greater
population may now exist, without reducing the labourers below the
condition to which they are accustomed. Hitherto this and no other has
been the use which the labourers have commonly made of any increase of
their means of living; they have treated it simply as convertible into
food for a greater number of children. It is probable, therefore, that
population would be stimulated, and that after the lapse of a generation
the real wages of labour would be no higher than before the improvement:
the reduction being partly brought about by a fall of money wages, and
partly through the price of food, the cost of which, from the demand
occasioned by the increase of population, would be increased. To the
extent to which money wages fell, profits would rise; the capitalist
obtaining a Edition: current; Page: [720] greater quantity of equally
efficient labour by the same outlay of capital. We thus see that a
diminution of the cost of living, whether arising from agricultural
improvements or from the importation of foreign produce, if the habits
and requirements of the labourers are not raised, usually lowers money
wages and rent, and raises the general rate of profit.

What is true of improvements which cheapen the production of food, is
true also of the substitution of a cheaper for a more costly variety of
it. The same land yields to the same labour a much greater quantity of
human nutriment in the form of maize or potatoes, than in the form of
wheat. If the labourers were to give up bread, and feed only on those
cheaper products, taking as their compensation, not a greater quantity
of other consumable commodities, but earlier marriages and larger
families, the cost of labour would be much diminished, and if labour
continued equally efficient, profits would rise; while rent would be
much lowered, since food for the whole population could be raised on
half or a third part of the land now sown with corn. At the same time,
it being evident that land too barren to be cultivated for wheat might
be made in case of necessity to yield potatoes sufficient to support the
little labour necessary for producing them, cultivation might ultimately
descend lower, and rent eventually rise higher, on a potato or maize
system, than on a corn system; because the land would be capable of
feeding a much larger population before reaching the limit of its
powers.

If the improvement, which we suppose to take place, is not in the
production of food, but of some manufactured article consumed by the
labouring class, the effect on wages and profits will at first be the
same; but the effect on rent very different. It will not be lowered; it
will even, if the ultimate effect of the improvement is an increase of
population, be raised: in which last case profits will be lowered. The
reasons are too evident to require statement.

§ 5. We have considered, on the one hand, the manner in which the
distribution of the produce into rent, profits, and wages, is affected
by the ordinary increase of population and capital, and on the other,
how it is affected by improvements in production, and more especially in
agriculture. We have found that the former cause lowers profits; and
raises rent and the cost of labour: while the tendency of agricultural
improvements is to diminish rent; and all improvements which cheapen any
article of the labourer's consumption, tend to diminish the cost of
labour and to raise profits. The Edition: current; Page: [721] tendency
of each cause in its separate state being thus ascertained, it is easy
to determine the tendency of the actual course of things, in which the
two movements are going on simultaneously, capital and population
increasing with tolerable steadiness, while improvements in agriculture
are made from time to time, and the knowledge and practice of improved
methods become diffused gradually through the community.

The habits and requirements of the labouring classes being given (which
determine their real wages), rents, profits, and money wages at any
given time, are the result of the composition of these rival forces. If
during any period agricultural improvement advances faster than
population, rent and money wages during that period will tend downward,
and profits upward. If population advances more rapidly than
agricultural improvement, either the labourers will submit to a
reduction in the quantity or quality of their food, or if not, rent and
money wages will progressively rise, and profits will fall.

Agricultural skill and knowledge are of slow growth, and still slower
diffusion. Inventions and discoveries, too, occur only occasionally,
while the increase of population and capital are continuous agencies. It
therefore seldom happens that improvement, even during a short time, has
so much the start of population and capital as actually to lower rent,
or raise the rate of profits. There are many countries in which the
growth of population and capital is not rapid, but in these agricultural
improvement is less active still. Population almost everywhere treads
close on the heels of agricultural improvement, and effaces its effects
as fast as they are produced.

The reason why agricultural improvement seldom lowers rent, is that it
seldom cheapens food, but only prevents it from growing dearer; and
seldom, if ever, throws land out of cultivation, but only enables worse
and worse land to be taken in for the supply of an increasing demand.
What is sometimes called the natural state of a country which is but
half cultivated, namely, that the land is highly productive, and food
obtained in great abundance by little labour, is only true of unoccupied
countries colonized by a civilized people. In the United States the
worst land in cultivation is of a high quality (except sometimes in the
immediate vicinity of markets or means of conveyance, where a bad
quality is compensated by a good situation);1 and even if no further
improvements were made in Edition: current; Page: [722] agriculture or
locomotion, cultivation would have many steps yet to descend, before the
increase of population and capital would be brought to a stand; but in
Europe five hundred years ago, though so thinly peopled in comparison to
the present population, it is probable that the worst land under the
plough was, from the rude state of agriculture, quite as unproductive as
the worst land now cultivated; and that cultivation had approached as
near to the ultimate limit of profitable tillage, in those times as in
the present. What the agricultural improvements since made have really
done is, by increasing the capacity of production of land in general, to
enable tillage to extend downwards to a much worse natural quality of
land than the worst which at that time would have admitted of
cultivation by a capitalist for profit; thus rendering a much greater
increase of capital and population possible, and removing always a
little and a little further off the barrier which restrains them;
population meanwhile always pressing so hard against the barrier, that
there is never any visible margin left for it to seize, every inch of
ground made vacant for it by improvement being at once filled up by its
advancing columns. Agricultural improvement may thus be considered to be
not so much a counterforce conflicting with increase of population, as a
partial relaxation of the bonds which confine that increase.

The effects produced on the division of the produce by an increase of
production, under the joint influence of increase of population and
capital and improvements of agriculture, are very different from those
deduced from the hypothetical cases previously discussed. In particular,
the effect on rent is most materially different. We remarked that—while
a great agricultural improvement made suddenly and universally would in
the first instance inevitably lower rent—such improvements enable rent,
in the progress of society, to rise gradually to a much higher limit
than it could otherwise attain, since they enable a much lower quality
of land to be ultimately cultivated. But in the case we are now
supposing, which nearly corresponds to the usual course of things, this
ultimate effect becomes the immediate effect. Suppose cultivation to
have reached, or almost reached, the utmost limit permitted by the state
of the industrial arts, and rent, therefore, to have attained nearly the
highest point to which it can be carried by the progress of population
and capital, with the existing amount of skill and knowledge. If a great
agricultural improvement were suddenly introduced, it might throw back
rent for a considerable space, leaving it to regain its Edition:
current; Page: [723] lost ground by the progress of population and
capital, and afterwards to go on further. But, taking place, as such
improvement always does, very gradually, it causes no retrograde
movement of either rent or cultivation; it merely enables the one to go
on rising, and the other extending, long after they must otherwise have
stopped. It would do this even without the necessity of resorting to a
worse quality of land; simply by enabling the lands already in
cultivation to yield a greater produce, with no increase of the
proportional cost. If, by improvements of agriculture, all the lands in
cultivation could be made, even with double labour and capital, to yield
a double produce, (supposing that in the meantime population increased
so as to require this double quantity) all rents would be doubled.

To illustrate the point, let us revert to the numerical example in a
former page. Three qualities of land yield respectively 100, 80, and 60
bushels to the same outlay on the same extent of surface. If No. 1 could
be made to yield 200, No. 2, 160, and No. 3, 120 bushels, at only double
the expense, and therefore without any increase of the cost of
production, and if the population, having doubled, required all this
increased quantity, the rent of No. 1 would be 80 bushels instead of 40,
and of No. 2, 40 instead of 20, while the price and value per bushel
would be the same as before: so that corn rent and money rent would both
be doubled. I need not point out the difference between this result, and
what we have shown would take place if there were an improvement in
production without the accompaniment of an increased demand for food.

Agricultural improvement, then, is always ultimately, and in the manner
in which it generally takes place also immediately, beneficial to the
landlord. We may add, that when it takes place in that manner, it is
beneficial to no one else. When the demand for produce fully keeps pace
with the increased capacity of production, food is not cheapened; the
labourers are not, even temporarily, benefited; the cost of labour is
not diminished, nor profits raised. There is a greater aggregate
production, a greater produce divided among the labourers, and a larger
gross profit; but the wages being shared among a larger population, and
the profits spread over a larger capital, no labourer is better off, nor
does any capitalist derive from the same amount of capital a larger
income.

The result of this long investigation may be summed up as follows. The
economical progress of a society constituted of landlords, capitalists,
and labourers, tends to the progressive Edition: current; Page: [724]
enrichment of the landlord class;1 while the cost of the labourer's
subsistence tends on the whole to increase,2 and profits to fall.
Agricultural improvements are a counteracting force to the two last
effects; but the first, though a case is conceivable in which it would
be temporarily checked, is ultimately in a high degree promoted by those
improvements; and the increase of population tends to transfer all the
benefits derived from agricultural improvement to the landlords alone.
What other consequences, in addition to these, or in modification of
them, arise from the industrial progress of a society thus constituted,
I shall endeavour to show in the succeeding chapter.

Edition: current; Page: [725]


CHAPTER IV: of the tendency of profits to a minimum

§ 1. The tendency of profits to fall as society advances, which has been
brought to notice in the preceding chapter, was early recognized by
writers on industry and commerce; but the laws which govern profits not
being then understood, the phenomenon was ascribed to a wrong cause.
Adam Smith considered profits to be determined by what he called the
competition of capital; and concluded that when capital increased, this
competition must likewise increase, and profits must fall. It is not
quite certain what sort of competition Adam Smith had here in view. His
words in the chapter on Profits of Stock∗ are, “When the stocks of many
rich merchants are turned into the same trade, their mutual competition
naturally tends to lower its profits; and when there is a like increase
of stock in all the different trades carried on in the same society, the
same competition must produce the same effect in them all.” This passage
would lead us to infer that, in Adam Smith's opinion, the manner in
which the competition of capital lowers profits is by lowering prices;
that being usually the mode in which an increased investment of capital
in any particular trade, lowers the profits of that trade. But if this
was his meaning, he overlooked the circumstance, that the fall of price,
which if confined to one commodity really does lower the profits of the
producer, ceases to have that effect as soon as it extends to all
commodities; because, when all things have fallen, nothing has really
fallen, except nominally; and even computed in money, the expenses of
every producer have diminished as much as his returns. Unless indeed
labour be the one commodity which has not fallen in money price, when
all other things have: if so, what has really taken place is a rise of
wages; and it is that, and not the fall of prices, which has lowered
Edition: current; Page: [726] the profits of capital. There is another
thing which escaped the notice of Adam Smith; that the supposed
universal fall of prices, through increased competition of capitals, is
a thing which cannot take place. Prices are not determined by the
competition of the sellers only, but also by that of the buyers; by
demand as well as supply. The demand which affects money prices consists
of all the money in the hands of the community, destined to be laid out
in commodities; and as long as the proportion of this to the commodities
is not diminished, there is no fall of general prices. Now, howsoever
capital may increase, and give rise to an increased production of
commodities, a full share of the capital will be drawn to the business
of producing or importing money, and the quantity of money will be
augmented in an equal ratio with the quantity of commodities. For if
this were not the case, and if money, therefore, were, as the theory
supposes, perpetually acquiring increased purchasing power, those who
produced or imported it would obtain constantly increasing profits; and
this could not happen without attracting labour and capital to that
occupation from other employments. If a general fall of prices, and
increased value of money, were really to occur, it could only be as a
consequence of increased cost of production, from the gradual exhaustion
of the mines.

It is not tenable, therefore, in theory, that the increase of capital
produces, or tends to produce, a general decline of money prices.
Neither is it true, that any general decline of prices, as capital
increased, has manifested itself in fact. The only things observed to
fall in price with the progress of society, are those in which there
have been improvements in production, greater than have taken place in
the production of the precious metals; as for example, all spun and
woven fabrics. Other things, again, instead of falling, have risen in
price, because their cost of production, compared with that of gold and
silver, has increased. Among these are all kinds of food, comparison
being made with a much earlier period of history. The doctrine,
therefore, that competition of capital lowers profits by lowering
prices, is incorrect in fact, as well as unsound in principle.

But it is not certain that Adam Smith really held that doctrine; for his
language on the subject is wavering and unsteady, denoting the absence
of a definite and well-digested opinion. Occasionally he seems to think
that the mode in which the competition of capital lowers profits, is by
raising wages. And when speaking of the rate of profit in new colonies,
he seems on the very verge of grasping the Edition: current; Page: [727]
complete theory of the subject. “As the colony increases, the profits of
stock gradually diminish. When the most fertile and best situated lands
have been all occupied, less profit can be made by the cultivators of
what is inferior both in soil and situation.” Had Adam Smith meditated
longer on the subject, and systematized his view of it by harmonizing
with each other the various glimpses which he caught of it from
different points, he would have perceived that this last is the true
cause of the fall of profits usually consequent upon increase of
capital.

∗2. Mr. Wakefield, in his Commentary on Adam Smith, and his important
writings on Colonization, takes a much clearer view of the subject, and
arrives, through a substantially correct series of deductions, at
practical conclusions which appear to me just and important; but he is
not equally happy in incorporating his valuable speculations with the
results of previous thought, and reconciling them with other truths.
Some of the theories of Dr. Chalmers, in his chapter “On the Increase
and Limits of Capital,” and the two chapters which follow it, coincide
in their tendency and spirit with those of Mr. Wakefield; but Dr.
Chalmers' ideas, though delivered, as is his custom, with a most
attractive semblance of clearness, are really on this subject much more
confused than even those of Adam Smith, and more decidedly infected with
the often refuted notion that the competition of capital lowers general
prices; the subject of Money apparently not having been included among
the parts of political economy which this acute and vigorous writer had
carefully studied.

Mr. Wakefield's explanation of the fall of profits is briefly this.
Production is limited not solely by the quantity of capital and of
labour, but also by the extent of the “field of employment.” The field
of employment for capital is twofold; the land of the country, and the
capacity of foreign markets to take its manufactured commodities. On a
limited extent of land, only a limited quantity of capital can find
employment at a profit. As the quantity of capital approaches this
limit, profit falls; when the limit is attained, profit is annihilated;
and can only be restored through an extension of the field of
employment, either by the acquisition of fertile land, or by opening new
markets in foreign countries, from which food and materials can be
purchased with the products of domestic capital. These propositions are,
in my opinion, substantially true; and, even to the phraseology in which
they are expressed, considered as Edition: current; Page: [728] adapted
to popular and practical rather than scientific uses, I have nothing to
object. The error which seems to me imputable to Mr. Wakefield is that
of supposing his doctrines to be in contradiction to the principles of
the best school of preceding political economists, instead of being, as
they really are, corollaries from those principles; though corollaries
which, perhaps, would not always have been admitted by those political
economists themselves.

The most scientific treatment of the subject which I have met with is in
an essay on the effects of Machinery, published in the Westminster
Review for January 1826, by Mr. William Ellis:∗ which was doubtless
unknown to Mr. Wakefield, but which had preceded him, though by a
different path, in several of his leading conclusions. This essay
excited little notice, partly from being published anonymously in a
periodical, and partly because it was much in advance of the state of
political economy at the time. In Mr. Ellis's view of the subject, the
questions and difficulties raised by Mr. Wakefield's speculations and by
those of Dr. Chalmers, find a solution consistent with the principles of
political economy laid down in the present treatise.

§ 3. There is at every time and place some particular rate of profit,
which is the lowest that will induce the people of that country and time
to accumulate savings, and to employ those savings productively. This
minimum rate of profit varies according to circumstances. It depends on
two elements. One is, the strength of the effective desire of
accumulation; the comparative estimate, made by the people of that place
and era, of future interests when weighed against present. This element
chiefly affects the inclination to save. The other element, which
affects not so much the willingness to save as the disposition to employ
savings productively, is the degree of security of capital engaged in
industrial operations. A state of general insecurity no doubt affects
also the disposition to save. A hoard may be a source of additional
danger to its reputed possessor. But as it may also be a powerful means
of averting dangers, the effects in this respect may perhaps be looked
upon as balanced. But in employing any funds which a person may possess
as capital on his own account, or in lending it to others to be so
employed, there is always some additional risk, over and Edition:
current; Page: [729] above that incurred by keeping it idle in his own
custody. This extra risk is great in proportion as the general state of
society is insecure: it may be equivalent to twenty, thirty, or fifty
per cent, or to no more than one or two; something, however, it must
always be: and for this, the expectation of profit must be sufficient to
compensate.

There would be adequate motives for a certain amount of saving, even if
capital yielded no profit. There would be an inducement to lay by in
good times a provision for bad; to reserve something for sickness and
infirmity, or as a means of leisure and independence in the latter part
of life, or a help to children in the outset of it. Savings, however,
which have only these ends in view, have not much tendency to increase
the amount of capital permanently in existence. These motives only
prompt persons to save at one period of life what they purpose to
consume at another, or what will be consumed by their children before
they can completely provide for themselves. The savings by which an
addition is made to the national capital usually emanate from the desire
of persons to improve what is termed their condition in life, or to make
a provision for children or others, independent of their exertions. Now,
to the strength of these inclinations it makes a very material
difference how much of the desired object can be effected by a given
amount and duration of self-denial; which again depends on the rate of
profit. And there is in every country some rate of profit, below which
persons in general will not find sufficient motive to save for the mere
purpose of growing richer, or of leaving others better off than
themselves. Any accumulation, therefore, by which the general capital is
increased, requires as its necessary condition a certain rate of profit;
a rate which an average person will deem to be an equivalent for
abstinence, with the addition of a sufficient insurance against risk.
There are always some persons in whom the effective desire of
accumulation is above the average, and to whom less than this rate of
profit is a sufficient inducement to save; but these merely step into
the place of others whose taste for expense and indulgence is beyond the
average, and who, instead of saving, perhaps even dissipate what they
have received.

I have already observed that this minimum rate of profit, less than
which is not consistent with the further increase of capital, is lower
in some states of society than in others; and I may add, that the kind
of social progress characteristic of our present civilization tends to
diminish it. In the first place, one of the acknowledged Edition:
current; Page: [730] effects of that progress is an increase of general
security. Destruction by wars, and spoliation by private or public
violence, are less and less to be apprehended; and the improvements
which may be looked for in education and in the administration of
justice, or, in their default, increased regard for opinion, afford a
growing protection against fraud and reckless mismanagement. The risks
attending the investment of savings in productive employment require,
therefore, a smaller rate of profit to compensate for them than was
required a century ago, and will hereafter require less than at present.
In the second place, it is also one of the consequences of civilization
that mankind become less the slaves of the moment, and more habituated
to carry their desires and purposes forward into a distant future. This
increase of providence is a natural result of the increased assurance
with which futurity can be looked forward to; and is, besides, favoured
by most of the influences which an industrial life exercises over the
passions and inclinations of human nature. In proportion as life has
fewer vicissitudes, as habits become more fixed, and great prizes are
less and less to be hoped for by any other means than long perseverance,
mankind become more willing to sacrifice present indulgence for future
objects. This increased capacity of forethought and self-control may
assuredly find other things to exercise itself upon than increase of
riches, and some considerations connected with this topic will shortly
be touched upon. The present kind of social progress, however, decidedly
tends, though not perhaps to increase the desire of accumulation, yet to
weaken the obstacles to it, and to diminish the amount of profit which
people absolutely require as an inducement to save and accumulate. For
these two reasons, diminution of risk and increase of providence, a
profit or interest of three or four per cent is as sufficient a motive
to the increase of capital in England at the present day, as thirty or
forty per cent in the Burmese Empire, or in England at the time of King
John. In Holland during the last century a return of two per cent on
government security, was consistent with an undiminished, if not with an
increasing, capital. But though the minimum rate of profit is thus
liable to vary, and though to specify exactly what it is would at any
given time be impossible, such a minimum always exists; and whether it
be high or low, when once it is reached, no further increase of capital
can for the present take place. The country has then attained what is
known to political economists under the name of the stationary state.

Edition: current; Page: [731]
§ 4. We now arrive at the fundamental proposition which this chapter is
intended to inculcate. When a country has long possessed a large
production, and a large net income to make savings from, and when,
therefore, the means have long existed of making a great annual addition
to capital; (the country not having, like America [1848], a large
reserve of fertile land still unused;) it is one of the characteristics
of such a country, that the rate of profit is habitually within, as it
were, a hand's breadth of the minimum, and the country therefore on the
very verge of the stationary state. By this I do not mean that this
state is likely, in any of the great countries of Europe, to be soon
actually reached, or that capital does not still yield a profit
considerably greater than what is barely sufficient to induce the people
of those countries to save and accumulate. My meaning is, that it would
require but a short time to reduce profits to the minimum, if capital
continued to increase at its present rate, and no circumstances having a
tendency to raise the rate of profit occurred in the meantime. The
expansion of capital would soon reach its ultimate boundary, if the
boundary itself did not continually open and leave more space.

In England, the ordinary rate of interest on government securities, in
which the risk is next to nothing, may be estimated [1848] at a little
more than three per cent: in all other investments, therefore, the
interest or profit calculated upon (exclusively of what is properly a
remuneration for talent or exertion) must be as much more than this
amount, as is equivalent to the degree of risk to which the capital is
thought to be exposed. Let us suppose that in England even so small a
net profit as one per cent, exclusive of insurance against risk, would
constitute a sufficient inducement to save, but that less than this
would not be a sufficient inducement. I now say, that the mere
continuance of the present annual increase of capital, if no
circumstance occurred to counteract its effect, would suffice in a small
number of years to reduce the rate of net profit to one per cent.

To fulfil the conditions of the hypothesis, we must suppose an entire
cessation of the exportation of capital for foreign investment. No more
capital sent abroad for railways or loans; no more emigrants taking
capital with them, to the colonies, or to other countries; no fresh
advances made, or credits given, by bankers or merchants to their
foreign correspondents. We must also assume that there are no fresh
loans for unproductive expenditure, by the government, or on mortgage,
or otherwise; and none of the waste of capital Edition: current; Page:
[732] which now takes place by the failure of undertakings which people
are tempted to engage in by the hope of a better income than can be
obtained in safe paths at the present habitually low rate of profit. We
must suppose the entire savings of the community to be annually invested
in really productive employment within the country itself; and no new
channels opened by industrial inventions, or by a more extensive
substitution of the best known processes for inferior ones.

Few persons would hesitate to say, that there would be great difficulty
in finding remunerative employment every year for so much new capital
and most would conclude that there would be what used to be termed a
general glut; that commodities would be produced, and remain unsold, or
be sold only at a loss. But the full examination which we have already
given to this question,∗ has shown that this is not the mode in which
the inconvenience would be experienced. The difficulty would not consist
in any want of a market. If the new capital were duly shared among many
varieties of employment, it would raise up a demand for its own produce,
and there would be no cause why any part of that produce should remain
longer on hand than formerly. What would really be, not merely
difficult, but impossible, would be to employ this capital without
submitting to a rapid reduction of the rate of profit.

As capital increased, population either would also increase, or it would
not. If it did not, wages would rise, and a greater capital would be
distributed in wages among the same number of labourers. There being no
more labour than before, and no improvements to render the labour more
efficient, there would not be any increase of the produce; and as the
capital, however largely increased, would only obtain the same gross
return, the whole savings of each year would be exactly so much
subtracted from the profits of the next and of every following year. It
is hardly necessary to say that in such circumstances profits would very
soon fall to the point at which further increase of capital would cease.
An augmentation of capital, much more rapid than that of population,
must soon reach its extreme limit, unless accompanied by increased
efficiency of labour (through inventions and discoveries, or improved
mental and physical education), or unless some of the idle people, or of
the unproductive labourers, became productive.

If population did increase with the increase of capital, and Edition:
current; Page: [733] in proportion to it, the fall of profits would
still be inevitable. Increased population implies increased demand for
agricultural produce. In the absence of industrial improvements, this
demand can only be supplied at an increased cost of production, either
by cultivating worse land, or by a more elaborate and costly cultivation
of the land already under tillage. The cost of the labourer's
subsistence is therefore increased; and unless the labourer submits to a
deterioration of his condition, profits must fall. In an old country
like England, if, in addition to supposing all improvement in domestic
agriculture suspended, we suppose that there is no increased production
in foreign countries for the English market, the fall of profits would
be very rapid. If both these avenues to an increased supply of food were
closed, and population continued to increase, as it is said to do, at
the rate of a thousand a day, all waste land which admits of cultivation
in the existing state of knowledge would soon be cultivated, and the
cost of production and price of food would be so increased, that, if the
labourers received the increased money wages necessary to compensate for
their increased expenses, profits would very soon reach the minimum. The
fall of profits would be retarded if money wages did not rise, or rose
in a less degree; but the margin which can be gained by a deterioration
of the labourers' condition is a very narrow one: in general they cannot
bear much reduction; when they can, they have also a higher standard of
necessary requirements, and will not. On the whole, therefore, we may
assume that in such a country as England, if the present annual amount
of savings were to continue, without any of the counteracting
circumstances which now keep in check the natural influence of those
savings in reducing profit, the rate of profit would speedily attain the
minimum, and all further accumulation of capital would for the present
cease.

§ 5. What, then, are these counteracting circumstances, which, in the
existing state of things, maintain a tolerably equal struggle against
the downward tendency of profits, and prevent the great annual savings
which take place in this country from depressing the rate of profit much
nearer to that lowest point to which it is always tending, and which,
left to itself, it would so promptly attain? The resisting agencies are
of several kinds.

First among them, we may notice one which is so simple and so
conspicuous, that some political economists, especially M. de Sismondi
and Dr. Chalmers, have attended to it almost to the Edition: current;
Page: [734] exclusion of all others. This is, the waste of capital in
periods of over-trading and rash speculation, and in the commercial
revulsions by which such times are always followed. It is true that a
great part of what is lost at such periods is not destroyed, but merely
transferred, like a gambler's losses, to more successful speculators.
But even of these mere transfers, a large portion is always to
foreigners, by the hasty purchase of unusual quantities of foreign goods
at advanced prices. And much also is absolutely wasted. Mines are
opened, railways or bridges made, and many other works of uncertain
profit commenced, and in these enterprises much capital is sunk which
yields either no return, or none adequate to the outlay. Factories are
built and machinery erected beyond what the market requires, or can keep
in employment. Even if they are kept in employment, the capital is no
less sunk; it has been converted from circulating into fixed capital,
and has ceased to have any influence on wages or profits. Besides this,
there is a great unproductive consumption of capital, during the
stagnation which follows a period of general over-trading.
Establishments are shut up, or kept working without any profit, hands
are discharged, and numbers of persons in all ranks, being deprived of
their income, and thrown for support on their savings, find themselves,
after the crisis has passed away, in a condition of more or less
impoverishment. Such are the effects of a commercial revulsion: and that
such revulsions are almost periodical, is a consequence of the very
tendency of profits which we are considering. By the time a few years
have passed over without a crisis, so much additional capital has been
accumulated, that it is no longer possible to invest it at the
accustomed profit: all public securities rise to a high price, the rate
of interest on the best mercantile security falls very low, and the
complaint is general among persons in business that no money is to be
made. Does not this demonstrate how speedily profit would be at the
minimum, and the stationary condition of capital would be attained, if
these accumulations went on without any counteracting principle? But the
diminished scale of all safe gains inclines persons to give a ready ear
to any projects which hold out, though at the risk of loss, the hope of
a higher rate of profit; and speculations ensue, which, with the
subsequent revulsions, destroy, or transfer to foreigners, a
considerable amount of capital, produce a temporary rise of interest and
profit, make room for fresh accumulations, and the same round is
recommenced.

This, doubtless, is one considerable cause which arrests profits
Edition: current; Page: [735] in their descent to the minimum, by
sweeping away from time to time a part of the accumulated mass by which
they are forced down. But this is not, as might be inferred from the
language of some writers, the principal cause. If it were, the capital
of the country would not increase; but in England it does increase
greatly and rapidly. This is shown by the increasing productiveness of
almost all taxes, by the continual growth of all the signs of national
wealth, and by the rapid increase of population, while the condition of
the labourers is certainly not declining, but on the whole improving.1
These things prove that each commercial revulsion, however disastrous,
is very far from destroying all the capital which has been added to the
accumulations of the country since the last revulsion preceding it, and
that, invariably, room is either found or made for the profitable
employment of a perpetually increasing capital, consistently with not
forcing down profits to a lower rate.

§ 6. This brings us to the second of the counter-agencies, namely,
improvements in production. These evidently have the effect of extending
what Mr. Wakefield terms the field of employment, that is, they enable a
greater amount of capital to be accumulated and employed without
depressing the rate of profit: provided always that they do not raise,
to a proportional extent, the habits and requirements of the labourer.
If the labouring class gain the full advantage of the increased
cheapness, in other words, if money wages do not fall, profits are not
raised, nor their fall retarded. But if the labourers people up to the
improvement in their condition, and so relapse to their previous state,
profits will rise. All inventions which cheapen any of the things
consumed by the labourers, unless their requirements are raised in an
equivalent degree, in time lower money wages: and by doing so, enable a
greater capital to be accumulated and employed, before profits fall back
to what they were previously.

Improvements which only affect things consumed exclusively by the richer
classes, do not operate precisely in the same manner. The cheapening of
lace or velvet has no effect in diminishing the cost of labour; and no
mode can be pointed out in which it can raise the rate of profit, so as
to make room for a larger capital before the minimum is attained. It,
however, produces an effect which is virtually equivalent; it lowers, or
tends to lower, the minimum Edition: current; Page: [736] itself. In the
first place, increased cheapness of articles of consumption promotes the
inclination to save, by affording to all consumers a surplus which they
may lay by, consistently with their accustomed manner of living; and
unless they were previously suffering actual hardships, it will require
little self-denial to save some part at least of this surplus. In the
next place, whatever enables people to live equally well on a smaller
income, inclines them to lay by capital for a lower rate of profit. If
people can live on an independence of 500l. a year in the same manner as
they formerly could on one of 1000l., some persons will be induced to
save in hopes of the one, who would have been deterred by the more
remote prospect of the other. All improvements, therefore, in the
production of almost any commodity, tend in some degree to widen the
interval which has to be passed before arriving at the stationary state:
but this effect belongs in a much greater degree to the improvements
which affect the articles consumed by the labourer, since these conduce
to it in two ways; they induce people to accumulate for a lower profit,
and they also raise the rate of profit itself.

§ 7. Equivalent in effect to improvements in production, is the
acquisition of any new power of obtaining cheap commodities from foreign
countries. If necessaries are cheapened, whether they are so by
improvements at home or importation from abroad, is exactly the same
thing to wages and profits. Unless the labourer obtains, and by an
improvement of his habitual standard, keeps, the whole benefit, the cost
of labour is lowered, and the rate of profit raised. As long as food can
continue to be imported for an increasing population without any
diminution of cheapness, so long the declension of profits through the
increase of population and capital is arrested, and accumulation may go
on without making the rate of profit draw nearer to the minimum. And on
this ground it is believed by some, that the repeal of the corn laws has
opened to this country a long era of rapid increase of capital with an
undiminished rate of profit.

Before inquiring whether this expectation is reasonable, one remark must
be made, which is much at variance with commonly received notions.
Foreign trade does not necessarily increase the field of employment for
capital. It is not the mere opening of a market for a country's
productions, that tends to raise the rate of profits. If nothing were
obtained in exchange for those productions but the luxuries of the rich,
the expenses of no capitalist Edition: current; Page: [737] would be
diminished; profits would not be at all raised, nor room made for the
accumulation of more capital without submitting to a reduction of
profits: and if the attainment of the stationary state were at all
retarded, it would only be because the diminished cost at which a
certain degree of luxury could be enjoyed, might induce people, in that
prospect, to make fresh savings for a lower profit than they formerly
were willing to do. When foreign trade makes room for more capital at
the same profit, it is by enabling the necessaries of life, or the
habitual articles of the labourer's consumption, to be obtained at
smaller cost. It may do this in two ways; by the importation either of
those commodities themselves, or of the means and appliances for
producing them. Cheap iron has, in a certain measure, the same effect on
profits and the cost of labour as cheap corn, because cheap iron makes
cheap tools for agriculture and cheap machinery for clothing. But a
foreign trade which neither directly, nor by any indirect consequence,
increases the cheapness of anything consumed by the labourers, does not,
any more than an invention or discovery in the like case, tend to raise
profits or retard their fall; it merely substitutes the production of
goods for foreign markets in the room of the home production of
luxuries, leaving the employment for capital neither greater nor less
than before. It is true, that there is scarcely any export trade which,
in a country that already imports necessaries or materials, comes within
these conditions: for every increase of exports enables the country to
obtain all its imports on cheaper terms than before.

A country which, as is now the case with England,1 admits food of all
kinds, and all necessaries and the materials of necessaries, to be
freely imported from all parts of the world, no longer depends on the
fertility of her own soil to keep up her rate of profits, but on the
soil of the whole world. It remains to consider how far this resource
can be counted upon, for making head during a very long period against
the tendency of profits to decline as capital increases.

It must, of course, be supposed that with the increase of capital,
population also increases; for if it did not, the consequent rise of
wages would bring down profits, in spite of any cheapness of food.
Suppose then that the population of Great Britain goes on increasing at
its present rate, and demands every year a supply of imported food
considerably beyond that of the year preceding. This annual increase in
the food demanded from the exporting countries can Edition: current;
Page: [738] only be obtained either by great improvements in their
agriculture, or by the application of a great additional capital to the
growth of food. The former is likely to be a very slow process, from the
rudeness and ignorance of the agricultural classes in the food-exporting
countries of Europe, while the British colonies and the United States
are already in possession of most of the improvements yet made, so far
as suitable to their circumstances. There remains as a resource, the
extension of cultivation. And on this it is to be remarked, that the
capital by which any such extension can take place, is mostly still to
be created. In Poland, Russia, Hungary, Spain, the increase of capital
is extremely slow. In America it is rapid, but not more rapid than the
population. The principal fund at present available for supplying this
country with a yearly increasing importation of food, is that portion of
the annual savings of America which has heretofore been applied to
increasing the manufacturing establishments of the United States, and
which free trade in corn may possibly divert from that purpose to
growing food for our market. This limited source of supply, unless great
improvements take place in agriculture, cannot be expected to keep pace
with the growing demand of so rapidly increasing a population as that of
Great Britain; and if our population and capital continue to increase
with their present rapidity, the only mode in which food can continue to
be supplied cheaply to the one, is by sending the other abroad to
produce it.1

§ 8. This brings us to the last of the counter-forces which check the
downward tendency of profits, in a country whose capital increases
faster than that of its neighbours, and whose profits are therefore
nearer to the minimum. This is, the perpetual overflow of capital into
colonies or foreign countries, to seek higher profits than can be
obtained at home. I believe this to have been for many years one of the
principal causes by which the decline of profits in England has been
arrested. It has a twofold operation. In the first place, it does what a
fire, or an inundation, or a commercial crisis would have done: it
carries off a part of the increase of capital from which the reduction
of profits proceeds. Secondly, the capital so carried off is not lost,
but is chiefly employed either in founding colonies, which become large
exporters of cheap agricultural produce, or in extending and perhaps
improving the agriculture of older Edition: current; Page: [739]
communities. It is to the emigration of English capital, that we have
chiefly to look for keeping up a supply of cheap food and cheap
materials of clothing, proportional to the increase of our population;
thus enabling an increasing capital to find employment in the country,
without reduction of profit, in producing manufactured articles with
which to pay for this supply of raw produce. Thus, the exportation of
capital is an agent of great efficacy in extending the field of
employment for that which remains: and it may be said truly that, up to
a certain point, the more capital we send away, the more we shall
possess and be able to retain at home.

In countries which are further advanced in industry and population, and
have therefore a lower rate of profit, than others, there is always,
long before the actual minimum is reached, a practical minimum, viz.,
when profits have fallen so much below what they are elsewhere, that,
were they to fall lower, all further accumulations would go abroad. In
the present state of the industry of the world, when there is occasion,
in any rich and improving country, to take the minimum of profits at all
into consideration for practical purposes, it is only this practical
minimum that needs be considered. As long as there are old countries
where capital increases very rapidly, and new countries where profit is
still high, profits in the old countries will not sink to the rate which
would put a stop to accumulation; the fall is stopped at the point which
sends capital abroad. It is only, however, by improvements in
production, and even in the production of things consumed by labourers,
that the capital of a country like England is prevented from speedily
reaching that degree of lowness of profit, which would cause all further
savings to be sent to find employment in the colonies, or in foreign
countries.1

Edition: current; Page: [740]


CHAPTER V: consequences of the tendency of profits to a minimum

§ 1. The theory of the effect of accumulation on profits, laid down in
the preceding chapter, materially alters many of the practical
conclusions which might otherwise be supposed to follow from the general
principles of Political Economy, and which were, indeed, long admitted
as true by the highest authorities on the subject.

It must greatly abate, or rather, altogether destroy, in countries where
profits are low, the immense importance which used to be attached by
political economists to the effects which an event or a measure of
government might have in adding to or subtracting from the capital of
the country. We have now seen that the lowness of profits is a proof
that the spirit of accumulation is so active, and that the increase of
capital has proceeded at so rapid a rate, as to outstrip the two
counter-agencies, improvements in production, and increased supply of
cheap necessaries from abroad: and that unless a considerable portion of
the annual increase of capital were either periodically destroyed, or
exported for foreign investment, the country would speedily attain the
point at which further accumulation would cease, or at least
spontaneously slacken, so as no longer to overpass the march of
invention in the arts which produce the necessaries of life. In such a
state of things as this, a sudden addition to the capital of the
country, unaccompanied by any increase of productive power, would be but
of transitory duration; since, by depressing profits and interest, it
would either diminish by a corresponding amount the savings which would
be made from income in the year or two following, or it would cause an
equivalent amount to be sent abroad, or to be wasted in rash
speculations. Neither, on the other hand, would a sudden abstraction of
capital, unless of inordinate amount, have any real effect in
impoverishing the country. After a few months or years, there would
exist in the country just as much capital as if none had been taken
away. The Edition: current; Page: [741] abstraction, by raising profits
and interest, would give a fresh stimulus to the accumulative principle,
which would speedily fill up the vacuum. Probably, indeed, the only
effect that would ensue, would be that for some time afterwards less
capital would be exported, and less thrown away in hazardous
speculation.

In the first place, then, this view of things greatly weakens, in a
wealthy and industrious country, the force of the economical argument
against the expenditure of public money for really valuable, even though
industriously unproductive, purposes. If for any great object of justice
or philanthropic policy, such as the industrial regeneration of Ireland,
or a comprehensive measure of colonization or of public education, it
were proposed to raise a large sum by way of loan, politicians need not
demur to the abstraction of so much capital, as tending to dry up the
permanent sources of the country's wealth, and diminish the fund which
supplies the subsistence of the labouring population. The utmost expense
which could be requisite for any of these purposes, would not in all
probability deprive one labourer of employment, or diminish the next
year's production by one ell of cloth or one bushel of grain. In poor
countries, the capital of the country requires the legislator's sedulous
care; he is bound to be most cautious of encroaching upon it, and should
favour to the utmost its accumulation at home, and its introduction from
abroad. But in rich, populous, and highly cultivated countries, it is
not capital which is the deficient element, but fertile land; and what
the legislator should desire and promote, is not a greater aggregate
saving, but a greater return to savings, either by improved cultivation,
or by access to the produce of more fertile lands in other parts of the
globe. In such countries, the government may take any moderate portion
of the capital of the country and expend it as revenue, without
affecting the national wealth: the whole being either drawn from that
portion of the annual savings which would otherwise be sent abroad, or
being subtracted from the unproductive expenditure of individuals for
the next year or two, since every million spent makes room for another
million to be saved before reaching the overflowing point. When the
object in view is worth the sacrifice of such an amount of the
expenditure that furnishes the daily enjoyments of the people, the only
well-grounded economical objection against taking the necessary funds
directly from capital, consists of the inconveniences attending the
process of raising a revenue by taxation, to pay the interest of a debt.

Edition: current; Page: [742]
The same considerations enable us to throw aside as unworthy of regard,
one of the common arguments against emigration as a means of relief for
the labouring class. Emigration, it is said, can do no good to the
labourers, if, in order to defray the cost, as much must be taken away
from the capital of the country as from its population. That anything
like this proportion could require to be abstracted from capital for the
purpose even of the most extensive colonization, few, I should think,
would now assert: but even on that untenable supposition, it is an error
to suppose that no benefit would be conferred on the labouring class. If
one-tenth of the labouring people of England were transferred to the
colonies, and along with them one-tenth of the circulating capital of
the country, either wages, or profits, or both, would be greatly
benefited by the diminished pressure of capital and population upon the
fertility of the land. There would be a reduced demand for food: the
inferior arable lands would be thrown out of cultivation, and would
become pasture; the superior would be cultivated less highly, but with a
greater proportional return; food would be lowered in price, and though
money wages would not rise, every labourer would be considerably
improved in circumstances, an improvement which, if no increased
stimulus to population and fall of wages ensued, would be permanent;
while if there did, profits would rise, and accumulation start forward
so as to repair the loss of capital. The landlords alone would sustain
some loss of income; and even they, only if colonization went to the
length of actually diminishing capital and population, but not if it
merely carried off the annual increase.

§ 2. From the same principles we are now able to arrive at a final
conclusion respecting the effects which machinery, and generally the
sinking of capital for a productive purpose, produce upon the immediate
and ultimate interests of the labouring class. The characteristic
property of this class of industrial improvements is the conversion of
circulating capital into fixed: and it was shown in the first Book,∗
that in a country where capital accumulates slowly, the introduction of
machinery, permanent improvements of land, and the like, might be, for
the time, extremely injurious; since the capital so employed might be
directly taken from the wages fund, the subsistence of the people and
the employment for labour curtailed, and the gross annual produce of the
country actually diminished. But in a country of great annual savings
and low Edition: current; Page: [743] profits, no such effects need be
apprehended. Since even the emigration of capital, or its unproductive
expenditure, or its absolute waste, do not in such a country, if
confined within any moderate bounds, at all diminish the aggregate
amount of the wages fund—still less can the mere conversion of a like
sum into fixed capital, which continues to be productive, have that
effect. It merely draws off at one orifice what was already flowing out
at another; or if not, the greater vacant space left in the reservoir
does but cause a greater quantity to flow in. Accordingly, in spite of
the mischievous derangements of the money-market which were at one time
occasioned by the sinking of great sums in railways, I was never able to
agree with those who apprehended mischief, from this source, to the
productive resources of the country.1 Not on the absurd ground (which to
any one acquainted with the elements of the subject needs no
confutation) that railway expenditure is a mere transfer of capital from
hand to hand, by which nothing is lost or destroyed. This is true of
what is spent in the purchase of the land; a portion too of what is paid
to parliamentary agents, counsel, engineers, and surveyors is saved by
those who receive it, and becomes capital again: but what is laid out in
the bonâ fide construction of the railway itself is lost and gone; when
once expended, it is incapable of ever being paid in wages or applied to
the maintenance of labourers again; as a matter of account, the result
is that so much food and clothing and tools have been consumed, and the
country has got a railway instead. But what I would urge is, that sums
so applied are mostly a mere appropriation of the annual overflowing
which would otherwise have gone abroad, or been thrown away
unprofitably, leaving neither a railway nor any other tangible result.
The railway gambling of 1844 and 1845 probably saved the country from a
depression of profits and interest, and a rise of all public and private
securities, which would have engendered still wilder speculations, and
when the effects came afterwards to be complicated by the scarcity of
food, would have ended in a still more formidable crisis than was
experienced in the years immediately following. In the poorer countries
of Europe, the rage for railway construction might have had worse
consequences than in England, were it not that in those countries such
enterprises are in a great measure carried on by foreign capital. The
railway operations of Edition: current; Page: [744] the various nations
of the world may be looked upon as a sort of competition for the
overflowing capital of the countries where profit is low and capital
abundant, as England and Holland. The English railway speculations are a
struggle to keep our annual increase of capital at home; those of
foreign countries are an effort to obtain it.∗

It already appears from these considerations, that the conversion of
circulating capital into fixed, whether by railways, or manufactories,
or ships, or machinery, or canals, or mines, or works of drainage and
irrigation, is not likely, in any rich country, to diminish the gross
produce or the amount of employment for labour. How much then is the
case strengthened, when we consider that these transformations of
capital are of the nature of improvements in production, which, instead
of ultimately diminishing circulating capital are the necessary
conditions of its increase, since they alone enable a country to possess
a constantly augmenting capital without reducing profits to the rate
which would cause accumulation to stop. There is hardly any increase of
fixed capital which does not enable the country to contain eventually a
larger circulating capital, than it otherwise could possess and employ
within its own limits; for there is hardly any creation of fixed capital
which, when it proves successful, does not cheapen the articles on which
wages are habitually expended. All capital sunk in the permanent
improvement of land lessens the cost of food and materials; almost all
improvements in machinery cheapen the labourer's clothing or lodging, or
the tools with which these are made; improvements in locomotion, such as
railways, cheapen to the consumer all things which are brought from a
distance. All these improvements make the labourers better off with the
same money wages, better off if they do not increase their rate of
multiplication. But if they do, and wages consequently fall, at least
profits rise, and, while accumulation receives an immediate stimulus,
room is made for a greater amount of capital before a sufficient motive
arises for sending it abroad. Even the improvements which do not cheapen
the things consumed by the labourer, and which, therefore, do not raise
profits nor retain capital in the country, nevertheless, as we have
seen, by lowering the minimum of profit for which people will ultimately
Edition: current; Page: [745] consent to save, leave an ampler margin
than previously for eventual accumulation, before arriving at the
stationary state.

We may conclude, then, that improvements in production, and emigration
of capital to the more fertile soils and unworked mines of the
uninhabited or thinly peopled parts of the globe, do not, as appears to
a superficial view, diminish the gross produce and the demand for labour
at home; but, on the contrary, are what we have chiefly to depend on for
increasing both, and are even the necessary conditions of any great or
prolonged augmentation of either. Nor is it any exaggeration to say,
that within certain, and not very narrow, limits, the more capital a
country like England expends in these two ways, the more she will have
left.

Edition: current; Page: [746]


CHAPTER VI: of the stationary state

§ 1. The preceding chapters comprise the general theory of the
economical progress of society, in the sense in which those terms are
commonly understood; the progress of capital, of population, and of the
productive arts. But in contemplating any progressive movement, not in
its nature unlimited, the mind is not satisfied with merely tracing the
laws of the movement; it cannot but ask the further question, to what
goal? Towards what ultimate point is society tending by its industrial
progress? When the progress ceases, in what condition are we to expect
that it will leave mankind?

It must always have been seen, more or less distinctly, by political
economists, that the increase of wealth is not boundless: that at the
end of what they term the progressive state lies the stationary state,
that all progress in wealth is but a postponement of this, and that each
step in advance is an approach to it. We have now been led to recognize
that this ultimate goal is at all times near enough to be fully in view;
that we are always on the verge of it, and that if we have not reached
it long ago, it is because the goal itself flies before us. The richest
and most prosperous countries would very soon attain the stationary
state, if no further improvements were made in the productive arts, and
if there were a suspension of the overflow of capital from those
countries into the uncultivated or ill-cultivated regions of the earth.

This impossibility of ultimately avoiding the stationary state—this
irresistible necessity that the stream of human industry should finally
spread itself out into an apparently stagnant sea—must have been, to the
political economists of the last two generations, an unpleasing and
discouraging prospect; for the tone and tendency of their speculations
goes completely to identify all that is economically desirable with the
progressive state, and with that alone. Edition: current; Page: [747]
With Mr. M'Culloch, for example, prosperity does not mean a large
production and a good distribution of wealth, but a rapid increase of
it; his test of prosperity is high profits; and as the tendency of that
very increase of wealth, which he calls prosperity, is towards low
profits, economical progress, according to him, must tend to the
extinction of prosperity. Adam Smith always assumes that the condition
of the mass of the people, though it may not be positively distressed,
must be pinched and stinted in a stationary condition of wealth, and can
only be satisfactory in a progressive state. The doctrine that, to
however distant a time incessant struggling may put off our doom, the
progress of society must “end in shallows and in miseries,” far from
being, as many people still believe, a wicked invention of Mr. Malthus,
was either expressly or tacitly affirmed by his most distinguished
predecessors, and can only be successfully combated on his principles.
Before attention had been directed to the principle of population as the
active force in determining the remuneration of labour, the increase of
mankind was virtually treated as a constant quantity; it was, at all
events, assumed that in the natural and normal state of human affairs
population must constantly increase, from which it followed that a
constant increase of the means of support was essential to the physical
comfort of the mass of mankind. The publication of Mr. Malthus' Essay is
the era from which better views of this subject must be dated; and
notwithstanding the acknowledged errors of his first edition, few
writers have done more than himself, in the subsequent editions, to
promote these juster and more hopeful anticipations.

Even in a progressive state of capital, in old countries, a
conscientious or prudential restraint on population is indispensable, to
prevent the increase of numbers from outstripping the increase of
capital, and the condition of the classes who are at the bottom of
society from being deteriorated. Where there is not, in the people, or
in some very large proportion of them, a resolute resistance to this
deterioration—a determination to preserve an established standard of
comfort—the condition of the poorest class sinks, even in a progressive
state, to the lowest point which they will consent to endure. The same
determination would be equally effectual to keep up their condition in
the stationary state, and would be quite as likely to exist. Indeed,
even now, the countries in which the greatest prudence is manifested in
the regulating of population are often those in which capital increases
least rapidly. Where there is an indefinite prospect of employment for
increased Edition: current; Page: [748] numbers, there is apt to appear
less necessity for prudential restraint. If it were evident that a new
hand could not obtain employment but by displacing, or succeeding to,
one already employed, the combined influences of prudence and public
opinion might in some measure be relied on for restricting the coming
generation within the numbers necessary for replacing the present.

§ 2. I cannot, therefore, regard the stationary state of capital and
wealth with the unaffected aversion so generally manifested towards it
by political economists of the old school. I am inclined to believe that
it would be, on the whole, a very considerable improvement on our
present condition. I confess I am not charmed with the ideal of life
held out by those who think that the normal state of human beings is
that of struggling to get on; that the trampling, crushing, elbowing,
and treading on each other's heels, which form the existing type of
social life, are the most desirable lot of human kind, or anything but
the disagreeable symptoms of one of the phases of industrial progress.
It may be a necessary stage in the progress of civilization, and those
European nations which have hitherto been so fortunate as to be
preserved from it, may have it yet to undergo. It is an incident of
growth, not a mark of decline, for it is not necessarily destructive of
the higher aspirations and the heroic virtues; as America, in her great
civil war, has proved to the world, both by her conduct as a people and
by numerous splendid individual examples, and as England, it is to be
hoped, would also prove, on an equally trying and exciting occasion.1
But it is not a kind of social perfection which philanthropists to come
will feel any very eager desire to assist in realizing. Most fitting,
indeed, is it, that while riches are power, and to grow as rich as
possible the universal object of ambition, the path to its attainment
should be open to all, without favour or partiality. But the best state
for human nature is that Edition: current; Page: [749] in which, while
no one is poor, no one desires to be richer, nor has any reason to fear
being thrust back by the efforts of others to push themselves forward.

That the energies of mankind should be kept in employment by the
struggle for riches, as they were formerly by the struggle of war, until
the better minds succeed in educating the others into better things, is
undoubtedly more desirable than that they should rust and stagnate.
While minds are coarse they require coarse stimuli, and let them have
them. In the meantime, those who do not accept the present very early
stage of human improvement as its ultimate type, may be excused for
being comparatively indifferent to the kind of economical progress which
excites the congratulations of ordinary politicians; the mere increase
of production and accumulation. For the safety of national independence
it is essential that a country should not fall much behind its
neighbours in these things. But in themselves they are of little
importance, so long as either the increase of population or anything
else prevents the mass of the people from reaping any part of the
benefit of them. I know not why it should be matter of congratulation
that persons who are already richer than any one needs to be, should
have doubled their means of consuming things which give little or no
pleasure except as representative of wealth; or that numbers of
individuals should pass over, every year, from the middle classes into a
richer class, or from the class of the occupied rich to that of the
unoccupied. It is only in the backward countries of the world that
increased production is still an important object: in those most
advanced, what is economically needed is a better distribution, of which
one indispensable means is a stricter restraint on population. Levelling
institutions, either of a just or of an unjust kind, cannot alone
accomplish it; they may lower the heights of society, but they cannot,
of themselves, permanently1 raise the depths.

On the other hand, we may suppose this better distribution of property
attained, by the joint effect of the prudence and frugality of
individuals, and of a system of legislation favouring equality of
fortunes, so far as is consistent with the just claim of the individual
to the fruits, whether great or small, of his or her own industry. We
may suppose, for instance (according to the suggestion thrown out in a
former chapter∗), a limitation of the sum which any one person Edition:
current; Page: [750] may acquire by gift or inheritance to the amount
sufficient to constitute a moderate independence. Under this twofold
influence society would exhibit these leading features: a well-paid and
affluent body of labourers; no enormous fortunes, except what were
earned and accumulated during a single lifetime; but a much larger body
of persons than at present, not only exempt from the coarser toils, but
with sufficient leisure, both physical and mental, from mechanical
details, to cultivate freely the graces of life, and afford examples of
them to the classes less favourably circumstanced for their growth. This
condition of society, so greatly preferable to the present, is not only
perfectly compatible with the stationary state, but, it would seem, more
naturally allied with that state than with any other.

There is room in the world, no doubt, and even in old countries, for a
great increase of population, supposing the arts of life to go on
improving, and capital to increase. But even if innocuous, I confess I
see very little reason for desiring it. The density of population
necessary to enable mankind to obtain, in the greatest degree, all the
advantages both of co-operation and of social intercourse, has, in all
the most populous countries, been attained. A population may be too
crowded, though all be amply supplied with food and raiment. It is not
good for man to be kept perforce at all times in the presence of his
species. A world from which solitude is extirpated is a very poor ideal.
Solitude, in the sense of being often alone, is essential to any depth
of meditation or of character; and solitude in the presence of natural
beauty and grandeur, is the cradle of thoughts and aspirations which are
not only good for the individual, but which society could ill do
without. Nor is there much satisfaction in contemplating the world with
nothing left to the spontaneous activity of nature; with every rood of
land brought into cultivation, which is capable of growing food for
human beings; every flowery waste or natural pasture ploughed up, all
quadrupeds or birds which are not domesticated for man's use
exterminated as his rivals for food, every hedgerow or superfluous tree
rooted out, and scarcely a place left where a wild shrub or flower could
grow without being eradicated as a weed in the name of improved
agriculture. If the earth must lose that great portion of its
pleasantness which it owes to things that the unlimited increase of
wealth and population would extirpate from it, for the mere purpose of
enabling it to support a larger, but not a better or a happier
population, I sincerely hope, for the sake of posterity, that Edition:
current; Page: [751] they will be content to be stationary, long before
necessity compels them to it.

It is scarcely necessary to remark that a stationary condition of
capital and population implies no stationary state of human improvement.
There would be as much scope as ever for all kinds of mental culture,
and moral and social progress; as much room for improving the Art of
Living, and much more likelihood of its being improved, when minds
ceased to be engrossed by the art of getting on. Even the industrial
arts might be as earnestly and as successfully cultivated, with this
sole difference, that instead of serving no purpose but the increase of
wealth, industrial improvements would produce their legitimate effect,
that of abridging labour. Hitherto [1848] it is questionable if all the
mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the day's toil of any
human being. They have enabled a greater population to live the same
life of drudgery and imprisonment, and an increased number of
manufacturers and others to make fortunes. They have increased the
comforts of the middle classes. But they have not yet begun to effect
those great changes in human destiny, which it is in their nature and in
their futurity to accomplish. Only when, in addition to just
institutions, the increase of mankind shall be under the deliberate
guidance of judicious foresight, can the conquests made from the powers
of nature by the intellect and energy of scientific discoverers become
the common property of the species, and the means of improving and
elevating the universal lot.

Edition: current; Page: [752]


CHAPTER VII: on the probable futurity of the labouring classes

§ 1. The observations in the preceding chapter had for their principal
object to deprecate a false ideal of human society. Their applicability
to the practical purposes of present times consists in moderating the
inordinate importance attached to the mere increase of production, and
fixing attention upon improved distribution, and a large remuneration of
labour, as the two desiderata. Whether the aggregate produce increases
absolutely or not, is a thing in which, after a certain amount has been
obtained, neither the legislator nor the philanthropist need feel any
strong interest: but, that it should increase relatively to the number
of those who share in it, is of the utmost possible importance; and
this, (whether the wealth of mankind be stationary, or increasing at the
most rapid rate ever known in an old country,) must depend on the
opinions and habits of the most numerous class, the class of manual
labourers.

1 When I speak, either in this place or elsewhere, of “the labouring
classes,” or of labourers as a “class,” I use those phrases in
compliance with custom, and as descriptive of an existing, but by no
means a necessary or permanent, state of social relations. I do not
recognize as either just or salutary, a state of society in which there
is any “class” which is not labouring; any human beings, exempt Edition:
current; Page: [753] from bearing their share of the necessary labours
of human life, except those unable to labour, or who have fairly earned
rest by previous toil. So long, however, as the great social evil exists
of a non-labouring class, labourers also constitute a class, and may be
spoken of, though only provisionally, in that character.

Considered in its moral and social aspect, the state of the labouring
people has latterly been a subject of much more speculation and
discussion than formerly; and the opinion that it is not now what it
ought to be, has become very general. The suggestions which have been
promulgated, and the controversies which have been excited, on detached
points rather than on the foundations of the subject, have put in
evidence the existence of two conflicting theories, respecting the
social position desirable for manual labourers. The one may be called
the theory of dependence and protection, the other that of
self-dependence.

According to the former theory, the lot of the poor, in all things which
affect them collectively, should be regulated for them, not by them.
They should not be required or encouraged to think for themselves, or
give to their own reflection or forecast an influential voice in the
determination of their destiny. It is supposed to be the duty of the
higher classes to think for them, and to take the responsibility of
their lot, as the commander and officers of an army take that of the
soldiers composing it. This function, it is contended, the higher
classes should prepare themselves to perform conscientiously, and their
whole demeanour should impress the poor with a reliance on it, in order
that, while yielding passive and active obedience to the rules
prescribed for them, they may resign themselves in all other respects to
a trustful insouciance, and repose under the shadow of their protectors.
The relation between rich and poor, according to this theory (a theory
also applied to the relation between men and women)1 should be only
partly authoritative; it should be amiable, moral, and sentimental:
affectionate tutelage on the one side, respectful and grateful deference
on the other. The rich should be in loco parentis to the poor, guiding
and restraining them like children. Of spontaneous action on their part
there should be no need. They should be called on for nothing but to do
their day's work, and to be moral and religious. Their morality and
religion should be provided for them by their superiors, who should see
them properly taught it, and should do all that is necessary Edition:
current; Page: [754] to ensure their being, in return for labour and
attachment, properly fed, clothed, housed, spiritually edified, and
innocently amused.

This is the ideal of the future, in the minds of those whose
dissatisfaction with the Present assumes the form of affection and
regret towards the Past.1 Like other ideals, it exercises an unconscious
influence on the opinions and sentiments of numbers who never
consciously guide themselves by any ideal. It has also this in common
with other ideals, that it has never been historically realised. It
makes its appeal to our imaginative sympathies in the character of a
restoration of the good times of our forefathers. But no times can be
pointed out in which the higher classes of this or any other country
performed a part even distantly resembling the one assigned to them in
this theory. It is an idealization, grounded on the conduct and
character of here and there an individual. All privileged and powerful
classes, as such, have used their power in the interest of their own
selfishness, and have indulged their self-importance in despising, and
not in lovingly caring for, those who were, in their estimation,
degraded, by being under the necessity of working for their benefit. I
do not affirm that what has always been must always be, or that human
improvement has no tendency to correct the intensely selfish fillings
engendered by power; but though the evil may be lessened, it cannot be
eradicated, until the power itself is withdrawn. This, at least, seems
to me undeniable, that long before the superior classes could be
sufficiently improved to govern in the tutelary manner supposed, the
inferior classes would be too much improved to be so governed.

I am quite sensible of all that is seductive in the picture of society
which this theory presents. Though the facts of it have no prototype in
the past, the feelings have. In them lies all that there is of reality
in the conception. As the idea is essentially repulsive of a society
only held together by the relations and feelings arising out of
pecuniary interests, so there is something naturally attractive in a
form of society abounding in strong personal attachments and
disinterested self-devotion. Of such feelings it must be admitted that
the relation of protector and protected has hitherto been the richest
source. The strongest attachments of human beings in general, are
towards the things or the persons that stand between them and some
dreaded evil. Hence, in an age of lawless violence and insecurity, and
general hardness and roughness of Edition: current; Page: [755] manners,
in which life is beset with dangers and sufferings at every step, to
those who have neither a commanding position of their own, nor a claim
on the protection of some one who has—a generous giving of protection,
and a grateful receiving of it, are the strongest ties which connect
human beings; the feelings arising from that relation are their warmest
feelings; all the enthusiasm and tenderness of the most sensitive
natures gather round it; loyalty on the one part and chivalry on the
other are principles exalted into passions. I do not desire to
depreciate these qualities.1 The error lies in not perceiving, that
these virtues and sentiments, like the clanship and the hospitality of
the wandering Arab, belong emphatically to a rude and imperfect state of
the social union; and that the feelings between protector and protected,
whether between kings and subjects, rich and poor, or men and women,2
can no longer have this beautiful and endearing character where there
are no longer any serious dangers from which to protect. What is there
in the present state of society to make it natural that human beings, of
ordinary strength and courage, should glow with the warmest gratitude
and devotion in return for protection? The laws protect them, wherever
the laws do not criminally fail in their duty.3 To be under the power of
some one, instead of being as formerly the sole condition of safety, is
now, speaking generally, the only situation which exposes to grievous
wrong. The so-called protectors are now the only persons against whom,
in any ordinary circumstances, protection is needed. The brutality and
tyranny with which every police report is filled, are those of husbands
to wives, of parents to children. That the law does not prevent these
atrocities, that it is only now making a first timid attempt to repress
and punish them, is no matter of necessity, but the deep disgrace of
those by whom the laws are made and administered. No man or woman who
either possesses or is able to earn an independent livelihood, Edition:
current; Page: [756] requires any other protection than that which the
law could and ought to give. This being the case, it argues great
ignorance of human nature to continue taking for granted that relations
founded on protection must always subsist, and not to see that the
assumption of the part of protector, and of the power which belongs to
it, without any of the necessities which justify it, must engender
feelings opposite to loyalty.

Of the working men, at least in the more advanced countries of Europe,
it may be pronounced certain, that the patriarchal or paternal system of
government is one to which they will not again be subject. That question
was decided, when they were taught to read, and allowed access to
newspapers and political tracts; when dissenting preachers were suffered
to go among them, and appeal to their faculties and feelings in
opposition to the creeds professed and countenanced by their superiors;
when they were brought together in numbers, to work socially under the
same roof; when railways enabled them to shift from place to place, and
change their patrons and employers as easily as their coats; when they
were encouraged to seek a share in the government, by means of the
electoral franchise.1 The working classes have taken their interests
into their own hands, and are perpetually showing that they think the
interests of their employers not identical with their own, but opposite
to them. Some among the higher classes flatter themselves that these
tendencies may be counteracted by moral and religious education: but
they have let the time go by for giving an education which can serve
their purpose. The principles of the Reformation have reached as low
down in society as reading and writing, and the poor will not much
longer accept morals and religion of other people's prescribing. I speak
more particularly of this country, especially the town population, and
the districts of the most scientific agriculture or the highest wages,
Scotland and the north of England. Among the more inert and less
modernized agricultural population of the southern counties, it might be
possible for the gentry to retain, for some time longer, something of
the ancient deference and submission of the poor, by bribing them with
high wages and constant employment; by insuring them support, and never
requiring them to do anything which they do not like. But these are two
conditions which never have been combined, and never can be, for long
together. A guarantee of subsistence can only be practically kept up,
when Edition: current; Page: [757] work is enforced and superfluous
multiplication restrained by at least a moral compulsion. It is then,
that the would-be revivers of old times which they do not understand,
would feel practically in how hopeless a task they were engaged. The
whole fabric of patriarchal or seignorial influence, attempted to be
raised on the foundation of caressing the poor, would be shattered
against the necessity of enforcing a stringent Poor-law.

§ 2. It is on a far other basis that the well-being and well-doing of
the labouring people must henceforth rest. The poor have come out of
leading-strings, and cannot any longer be governed or treated like
children. To their own qualities must now be commended the care of their
destiny. Modern nations will have to learn the lesson, that the
well-being of a people must exist by means of the justice and
self-government, the δικαιοσ[w1]νη and σωχροσ[w1]νη of the individual
citizens. The theory of dependence attempts to dispense with the
necessity of these qualities in the dependent classes. But now, when
even in position they are becoming less and less dependent, and their
minds less and less acquiescent in the degree of dependence which
remains, the virtues of independence are those which they stand in need
of. Whatever advice, exhortation or guidance is held out to the
labouring classes, must henceforth be tendered to them as equals, and
accepted by them with their eyes open. The prospect of the future
depends on the degree in which they can be made rational beings.

There is no reason to believe that prospect other than hopeful. The
progress indeed has hitherto been, and still is, slow. But there is a
spontaneous education going on in the minds of the multitude, which may
be greatly accelerated and improved by artificial aids. The instruction
obtained from newspapers and political tracts may not be the most solid
kind of instruction, but it is an immense improvement upon none at all.
1 What it does for a people has been admirably exemplified during the
cotton crisis, in the case of the Lancashire spinners and weavers, who
have acted with the consistent good sense and forbearance so justly
applauded, simply because, being readers of newspapers, they understood
the causes of the calamity which had befallen them, and knew that it was
in no way imputable either to their employers or to the Government. It
is not certain that their conduct would have been as rational and
Edition: current; Page: [758] exemplary, if the distress had preceded
the salutary measure of fiscal emancipation which gave existence to the
penny press. The institutions for lectures and discussion, the
collective deliberations on questions of common interest, the trade
unions, the political agitation, all serve to awaken public spirit, to
diffuse variety of ideas among the mass, and to excite thought and
reflection in the more intelligent. Although the too early attainment of
political franchises by the least educated class might retard, instead
of promoting, their improvement, there can be little doubt that it has
been greatly stipulated by the attempt to acquire them.1 In the
meantime, the working classes are now part of the public; in all
discussions on matters of general interest they, or a portion of them,
are now partakers; all who use the press as an instrument may, if it so
happens, have them for an audience; the avenues of instruction through
which the middle classes acquire such ideas as they have, are accessible
to, at least, the operatives in the towns. With these resources, it
cannot be doubted that they will increase in intelligence, even by their
own unaided efforts; while there is reason to hope that great
improvements both in the quality and quantity of school education will
be effected by the exertions either of government or of individuals, and
that the progress of the mass of the people in mental cultivation, and
in the virtues which are dependent on it, will take place more rapidly,
and with fewer intermittences and aberrations, than if left to itself.

From this increase of intelligence, several effects may be confidently
anticipated. First: that they will become even less willing than at
present to be led and governed, and directed into the way they should
go, by the mere authority and prestige of superiors. If they have not
now, still less will they have hereafter, any deferential awe, or
religious principle of obedience, holding them in mental subjection to a
class above them. The theory of dependence and protection will be more
and more intolerable to them, and they will require that their conduct
and condition shall be essentially self-governed. It is, at the same
time, quite possible Edition: current; Page: [759] that they may demand,
in many cases, the intervention of the legislature in their affairs, and
the regulation by law of various things which concern them, often under
very mistaken ideas of their interest. Still, it is their own will,
their own ideas and suggestions, to which they will demand that effect
should be given, and not rules laid down for them by other people. It is
quite consistent with this, that they should feel respect for
superiority of intellect and knowledge, and defer much to the opinions,
on any subject, of those whom they think well acquainted with it. Such
deference is deeply grounded in human nature; but they will judge for
themselves of the persons who are and are not entitled to it.

§ 3. It appears to me impossible but that the increase of intelligence,
of education, and of the love of independence among the working classes,
must be attended with a corresponding growth of the good sense which
manifests itself in provident habits of conduct, and that population,
therefore, will bear a gradually diminishing ratio to capital and
employment. This most desirable result would be much accelerated by
another change, which lies in the direct line of the best tendencies of
the time; the opening of industrial occupations freely to both sexes.
The same reasons which make it no longer necessary that the poor should
depend on the rich, make it equally unnecessary that women should depend
on men; and the least which justice requires is that law and custom
should not enforce dependence (when the correlative protection has
become superfluous) by ordaining that a woman, who does not happen to
have a provision by inheritance, shall have scarcely any means open to
her of gaining a livelihood, except as a wife and mother. Let women who
prefer that occupation, adopt it; but that there should be no option, no
other carrière possible for the great majority of women, except in the
humbler departments of life, is a flagrant social injustice.1 The ideas
and institutions by Edition: current; Page: [760] which the accident of
sex is made the groundwork of an inequality of legal rights, and a
forced dissimilarity of social functions, must ere long be recognised as
the greatest hindrance to moral, social, and even intellectual
improvement. On the present occasion I shall only indicate, among the
probable consequences of the industrial and social independence of
women, a great diminution of the evil of over-population. It is by
devoting one-half of the human species to that exclusive function, by
making it fill the entire life of one sex, and interweave itself with
almost all the objects of the other, that the animal instinct in
question is nursed into the disproportionate preponderance which it has
hitherto exercised in human life.

§ 4. The political consequences of the increasing power and importance
of the operative classes, and of the growing ascendancy of numbers,
which, even in England and under the present institutions, is rapidly
giving to the will of the majority at least a negative voice in the acts
of government, are too wide a subject to be discussed in this place.
But, confining ourselves to economical considerations, and
notwithstanding the effect which improved intelligence in the working
classes, together with just laws, may have in altering the distribution
of the produce to their advantage, I cannot think that they will be
permanently contented with the condition of labouring for wages as their
ultimate state.1 They may be willing to pass Edition: current; Page:
[761] through the class of servants in their way to that of employers;
but not to remain in it all their lives. To begin as hired labourers,
then after a few years to work on their own account, and finally employ
others, is the normal condition of labourers in a new country, rapidly
increasing in wealth and population, like America or Australia. 1 But in
an old and fully peopled country, those who begin life as labourers for
hire, as a general rule, continue such to the end, unless they sink into
the still lower grade of recipients of public charity. In the present
stage of human progress, when ideas of equality are daily spreading more
widely among the poorer classes, and can no longer be checked by
anything short of the entire suppression of printed discussion and even
of freedom of speech, it is not to be expected that the division of the
human race into two hereditary classes, employers and employed, can be
permanently maintained. The relation is nearly as unsatisfactory to the
payer of wages as to the receiver. If the rich regard the poor as, by a
kind of natural law, their servants and dependents, the rich in their
turn are regarded as a mere prey and pasture for the poor; the subject
of demands and expectations wholly indefinite, increasing in extent with
every concession made to them. 2 The total absence of regard for justice
or fairness in the relations between the two, is as marked on the side
of the employed as on that of the employers. We look in vain among the
working classes in general for the just pride which will choose to give
good work for good wages; for the most part, their sole endeavour is to
receive as much, and return as little in the shape of service, as
possible. It will sooner or later become insupportable to the employing
classes, to live in close and hourly contact with persons whose
interests and feelings are in hostility to them. Capitalists are almost
as much interested as labourers in Edition: current; Page: [762] placing
the operations of industry on such a footing, that those who labour for
them may feel the same interest in the work, which is felt by those who
labour on their own account.

The opinion expressed in a former part of this treatise respect. ing
small landed properties and peasant proprietors, may have made the
reader anticipate that a wide diffusion of property in land is the
resource on which I rely for exempting at least the agricultural
labourers from exclusive dependence on labour for hire. Such, however,
is not my opinion. I indeed deem that form of agricultural economy to be
most groundlessly cried down, and to be greatly preferable, in its
aggregate effects on human happiness, to hired labour in any form in
which it exists at present; because the prudential check to population
acts more directly, and is shown by experience to be more efficacious;
and because, in point of security, of independence, of exercise of any
other than the animal faculties, the state of a peasant proprietor is
far superior to that of an agricultural labourer in this or any other
old country. Where the former system already exists, and works on the
whole satisfactorily, I should regret, in the present state of human
intelligence, to see it abolished in order to make way for the other,
under a pedantic notion of agricultural improvement as a thing
necessarily the same in every diversity of circumstances. In a backward
state of industrial improvement, as in Ireland, I should urge its
introduction, in preference to an exclusive system of hired labour; as a
more powerful instrument for raising a population from semi-savage
listlessness and recklessness, to persevering industry and prudent
calculation.

But a people who have once adopted the large system of production,
either in manufactures or in agriculture, are not likely to recede from
it; and when population is kept in due proportion to the means of
support, it is not desirable that they should. Labour is unquestionably
more productive on the system of large industrial enterprises; the
produce, if not greater absolutely, is greater in proportion to the
labour employed: the same number of persons can be supported equally
well with less toil and greater leisure; which will be wholly an
advantage, as soon as civilization and improvement have so far advanced,
that what is a benefit to the whole shall be a benefit to each
individual composing it.1 And in the moral aspect of Edition: current;
Page: [763] the question, which is still more important than the
economical, something better should be aimed at as the goal of
industrial improvement, than to disperse mankind over the earth in
single families, each ruled internally, as families now are, by a
patriarchal despot, and having scarcely any community of interest, or
necessary mental communion, with other human beings. The domination of
the head of the family over the other members, in this state of things,
is absolute; while the effect on his own mind tends towards
concentration of all interests in the family, considered as an expansion
of self, and absorption of all passions in that of exclusive possession,
of all cares in those of preservation and acquisition. As a step out of
the merely animal state into the human, out of reckless abandonment to
brute instincts into prudential foresight and self-government, this
moral condition may be seen without displeasure. But if public spirit,
generous sentiments, or true justice and equality are desired,
association, not isolation, of interests, is the school in which these
excellences are nurtured. The aim of improvement should be not solely to
place human beings in a condition in which they will be able to do
without one another, but to enable them to work with or for one another
in relations not involving dependence. Hitherto there has been no
alternative for those who lived by their labour, but that of labouring
either each for himself alone, or for a master. But the civilizing and
improving influences of association, and the efficiency and economy of
production on a large scale, may be obtained without dividing the
producers into two parties with hostile interests and feelings, the many
who do the work being mere servants under the command of the one who
supplies the funds, and having no interest of their own in the
enterprise except to earn their wages with as little labour as possible.
The speculations and discussions of the last fifty years, and the events
of the last thirty,1 are abundantly conclusive on this point. If the
improvement which even triumphant military despotism has only retarded,
not stopped, shall continue its course,2 there can be little doubt that
the status of hired labourers will gradually tend to confine itself to
the Edition: current; Page: [764] description of workpeople whose low
moral qualities render them unfit for anything more independent: and
that the relation of masters and work-people will be gradually
superseded by partnership, in one of two forms: in some cases,
association of the labourers with the capitalist; in others, and perhaps
finally in all,1 association of labourers among themselves.

2 § 5. The first of these forms of association has long been practised,
not indeed as a rule, but as an exception. In several departments of
industry there are already cases in which every one who contributes to
the work, either by labour or by pecuniary resources, has a partner's
interest in it, proportional to the value of his contribution. It is
already a common practice to remunerate those in whom peculiar trust is
reposed, by means of a percentage on the profits: and cases exist in
which the principle is, with excellent success, carried down to the
class of mere manual labourers.

In the American ships trading to China, it has long been the Edition:
current; Page: [765] custom for every sailor to have an interest in the
profits of the voyage; and to this has been ascribed the general good
conduct of those seamen, and the extreme rarity of any collision between
them and the government or people of the country. An instance in
England, not so well known as it deserves to be, is that of the Cornish
miners. “In Cornwall the mines are worked strictly on the system of
joint adventure; gangs of miners contracting with the agent, who
represents the owner of the mine, to execute a certain portion of a vein
and fit the ore for market, at the price of so much in the pound of the
sum for which the ore is sold. These contracts are put up at certain
regular periods, generally every two months, and taken by a voluntary
partnership of men accustomed to the mine. This system has its
disadvantages, in consequence of the uncertainty and irregularity of the
earnings, and consequent necessity of living for long periods on credit;
but it has advantages which more than counterbalance these drawbacks. It
produces a degree of intelligence, independence, and moral elevation,
which raise the condition and character of the Cornish miner far above
that of the generality of the labouring class. We are told by Dr.
Barham, that ‘they are not only, as a class, intelligent for labourers,
but men of considerable knowledge.’ Also, that ‘they have a character of
independence, something American, the system by which the contracts are
let giving the takers entire freedom to make arrangements among
themselves; so that each man feels, as a partner in his little firm,
that he meets his employers on nearly equal terms.’... With this basis
of intelligence and independence in their character, we are not
surprised when we hear that ‘a very great number of miners are now
located on possessions of their own, leased for three lives or
ninety-nine years, on which they have built houses;’ or that “281, 541l.
are deposited in saving banks in Cornwall, of which two-thirds are
estimated to belong to miners.'”∗

Mr. Babbage, who also gives an account of this system, observes that the
payment to the crews of whaling ships is governed by a similar
principle; and that “the profits arising from fishing with nets on the
south coast of England are thus divided: one-half the produce belongs to
the owner of the boat and net; the other half is divided in equal
portions between the persons using it, who are also bound to assist in
repairing the net when required.” Mr. Edition: current; Page: [766]
Babbage has the great merit of having pointed out the practicability,
and the advantage, of extending the principle to manufacturing industry
generally.∗1

Edition: current; Page: [767]
1 Some attention has been excited by an experiment of this nature,
commenced above thirty years ago by a Paris tradesman, Edition: current;
Page: [768] a house-painter, M. Leclaire,∗ and described by him in a
pamphlet published in the year 1842. M. Leclaire, according to his
statement, employs on an average two hundred workmen, whom he pays in
the usual manner, by fixed wages or salaries. He assigns to himself,
besides interest for his capital, a fixed allowance for his labour and
responsibility as manager. At the end of the year, the surplus profits
are divided among the body, himself included, in the proportion of their
salaries.† The reasons by which M. Leclaire was led to adopt this system
are highly instructive. Finding the conduct of his workmen
unsatisfactory, he first tried the effect of giving higher wages, and by
this he managed to obtain a body of excellent workmen, who would not
quit his service for any other. “Having thus succeeded” (I quote from an
abstract of the pamphlet in Chambers' Journal,‡) “in producing some sort
of stability in the arrangement of his establishment, M. Leclaire
expected, he says, to enjoy greater peace of mind. In this, however, he
was disappointed. So long as he was able to superintend everything
himself, from the general concerns of his business down to its minutest
details, he did enjoy a certain satisfaction; but from the moment that,
owing to the increase of his business, he found that he could be nothing
more than the centre from which orders were issued, and to which reports
were brought in, his former anxiety and discomfort returned upon him.”
He speaks lightly of the other sources of anxiety to which a tradesman
is subject, but describes as an incessant cause of vexation the losses
arising from the misconduct of workmen. An employer “will find workmen
whose indifference to his interests is such that they do not perform
two-thirds of the amount of work which they are capable of; hence the
continual fretting of masters, Edition: current; Page: [769] who, seeing
their interests neglected, believe themselves entitled to suppose that
workmen are constantly conspiring to ruin those from whom they derive
their livelihood. If the journeyman were sure of constant employment,
his position would in some respects be more enviable than that of the
master, because he is assured of a certain amount of day's wages, which
he will get whether he works much or little. He runs no risk, and has no
other motive to stimulate him to do his best than his own sense of duty.
The master, on the other hand, depends greatly on chance for his
returns: his position is one of continual irritation and anxiety. This
would no longer be the case to the same extent, if the interests of the
master and those of the workmen were bound up with each other, connected
by some bond of mutual security, such as that which would be obtained by
the plan of a yearly division of profits.”

Even in the first year during which M. Leclaire's experiment was in
complete operation, the success was remarkable. Not one of his
journeymen who worked as many as three hundred days, earned in that year
less than 1500 francs, and some considerably more. His highest rate of
daily wages being four francs, or 1200 francs for 300 days, the
remaining 300 francs, or 12l., must have been the smallest amount which
any journeyman, who worked that number of days, obtained as his
proportion of the surplus profit. M. Leclaire describes in strong terms
the improvement which was already manifest in the habits and demeanour
of his workmen, not merely when at work, and in their relations with
their employer, but at other times and in other relations, showing
increased respect both for others and for themselves. 1 M. Chevalier, in
a work published in 1848,∗ stated on M. Leclaire's authority, that the
increased zeal of the workpeople continued to be a full compensation to
him, even in a pecuniary sense, for the share of profit which he
renounced in their favour. 2 And M. Villiaumé, in 1857,†
observes:—“Though he has always kept himself free from the frauds which
are but too frequent in his profession, he has always been able to hold
his ground against competition, and has acquired a handsome competency
in spite of the relinquishment of so great a portion of his profits.
Assuredly he has been only thus successful because the unusual activity
of his workpeople, and the watch which they kept over one Edition:
current; Page: [770] another, have compensated him for the sacrifice
made in contenting himself with only a share of the gain.ℍ∗

The beneficent example set by M. Leclaire has been followed, with
brilliant success, by other employers of labour on a large scale at
Paris; and I annex, from the work last referred to (one of the ablest of
the many able treatises on political economy produced by the present
generation of the political economists of France), some signal examples
of the economical and moral benefit arising from this admirable
arrangement.†

Edition: current; Page: [771]
1 Until the passing of the Limited Liability Act, it was held that an
arrangement similar to M. Leclaire's would have been impossible in
England, as the workmen could not, in the previous state of the law,
have been associated in the profits, without being liable for losses.
One of the many benefits of that great legislative improvement has been
to render partnerships of this description possible, and we may now
expect to see them carried into practice. Messrs Briggs, of the Whitwood
and Methley collieries, near Normanton in Yorkshire, have taken the
first step. They now work these mines by a company, two-thirds of the
capital of which they themselves continue to hold, but undertake, in the
allotment of the remaining third, to give the preference to the
“officials and operatives employed Edition: current; Page: [772] in the
concern;” and, what is of still greater importance, whenever the annual
profit exceeds 10 per cent, one-half the excess is divided among the
work-people and employés, whether shareholders or not, in proportion to
their earnings during the year. It is highly honourable to these
important employers of labour to have initiated a system so full of
benefit both to the operatives employed and to the general interest of
social improvement: and they express no more than a just confidence in
the principle when they say, that “the adoption of the mode of
appropriation thus recommended would, it is believed, add so great an
element of success to the undertaking as to increase rather than
diminish the dividend to the shareholders.”1

2 § 6. The form of association, however, which if mankind continue to
improve, must be expected in the end to predominate, Edition: current;
Page: [773] is not that which can exist between a capitalist as chief,
and work-people without a voice in the management, but the association
of the labourers themselves on terms of equality, collectively owning
the capital with which they carry on their operations, and working under
managers elected and removable by themselves. So long as this idea
remained in a state of theory, in the writings of Owen or of Louis
Blanc, it may have appeared, to the common modes of judgment, incapable
of being realised, and not likely to be tried unless by seizing on the
existing capital, and confiscating it for the benefit of the labourers;
which is even now imagined by many persons, and pretended by more, both
in England and on the Continent, to be the meaning and purpose of
Socialism. But there is a capacity of exertion and self-denial in the
masses of mankind, which is never known but on the rare occasions on
which it is appealed to in the name of some great idea or elevated
sentiment. Such an appeal was made by the French Revolution of 1848. For
the first time it then seemed to the intelligent and generous of the
working classes of a great nation, that they had obtained a government
who sincerely desired the freedom and dignity of the many, and who did
not look upon it as their natural and legitimate state to be instruments
of production, worked for the benefit of the possessors of capital.
Under this encouragement, the ideas sown by Socialist writers, of an
emancipation of labour to be effected by means of association, throve
and fructified; and many working people came to the resolution, not only
that they would work for one another, instead of working for a master
tradesman or manufacturer, but that they would also free themselves, at
whatever cost of labour or privation, from the necessity of paying, out
of the produce of their industry, Edition: current; Page: [774] a heavy
tribute for the use of capital; that they would extinguish this tax, not
by robbing the capitalists of what they or their predecessors had
acquired by labour and preserved by economy, but by honestly acquiring
capital for themselves. If only a few operatives had attempted this
arduous task, or if, while many attempted it, a few only had succeeded,
their success might have been deemed to furnish no argument for their
system as a permanent mode of industrial organization. But, excluding
all the instances of failure, there exist, or existed a short time ago,1
upwards of a hundred successful, and many eminently prosperous,
associations of operatives in Paris alone, besides a considerable number
in the departments. An instructive sketch of their history and
principles has been published, under the title of L'Association Ouvrière
Industrielle et Agricole, by H. Feugueray: and as it is frequently
affirmed in English newspapers that the associations at Paris have
failed, by writers who appear to mistake the predictions of their
enemies at their first formation for the testimonies of subsequent
experience, I think it important to show by quotations from M.
Feugueray's volume, strengthened by still later testimonies,2 that these
representations are not only wide of the truth, but the extreme contrary
of it.

The capital of most of the associations was originally confined to the
few tools belonging to the founders, and the small sums which could be
collected from their savings, or which were lent to them by other
workpeople as poor as themselves. In some cases, however, loans of
capital were made to them by the republican government: but the
associations which obtained these advances, or at least which obtained
them before they had already achieved success, are, it appears, in
general by no means the most prosperous. The most striking instances of
prosperity are in the case of those who have had nothing to rely on but
their own slender means and the small loans of fellow-workmen, and who
lived on bread and water while they devoted the whole surplus of their
gains to the formation of a capital.

“Often,” says M. Feugueray,∗ “there was no money at all in hand, and no
wages could be paid. The goods did not go off, the payments did not come
in, bills could not get discounted, the warehouse of materials was
empty; they had to submit to privation, Edition: current; Page: [775] to
reduce all expenses to the minimum, to live sometimes on bread and
water.... It is at the price of these hardships and anxieties that men
who began with hardly any resource but their good will and their hands,
succeeded in creating customers, in acquiring credit, forming at last a
joint capital, and thus founding associations whose futurity now seems
to be assured.”

I will quote at length the remarkable history of one of these
associations.∗

“The necessity of a large capital for the establishment of a pianoforte
manufactory was so fully recognised in the trade, that in 1848 the
delegates of several hundred workmen who had combined to form a great
association, solicited from the government a subvention of 300,000
francs [12,000l.], being a tenth part of the whole sum voted by the
National Assembly. I remember that, as one of the Commission charged
with the distribution of the fund, I tried in vain for two hours to
convince the two delegates with whom the Commission conferred, that
their request was exorbitant. They answered imperturbably, that their
trade was a peculiar one; that the association could only have a chance
of success on a very large scale and with a considerable capital; that
300,000 francs were the smallest sum which could sufffice them, and that
they could not reduce the demand by a single sou. The Commission
refused.

“Now, after this refusal, the project of a great association being
abandoned, what happened was this. Fourteen workmen, and it is singular
that among them was one of the two delegates, resolved to set up by
themselves a pianoforte-making association. The project was hazardous on
the part of men who had neither money nor credit: but faith does not
reason—it acts.

“Our fourteen men therefore went to work, and I borrow from an excellent
article by M. Cochut in the National, the accuracy of which I can
attest, the following account of their first proceedings.

“Some of them, who had worked on their own account, brought with them in
tools and materials the value of about 2000 francs [80l.]. There was
needed besides a circulating capital. Each member, not without
difficulty, managed to subscribe 10 francs [8s.]. A certain number of
workmen not interested in the society gave their adhesion by bringing
small contributions. On March 10, 1849, a sum of 229½ francs [9l. 3s.
7½d.] having been realized, the association was declared constituted.

“This sum was not even sufficient for setting up, and for the Edition:
current; Page: [776] small expenses required from day to day for the
service of a workshop. There being nothing left for wages, nearly two
months elapsed without their touching a farthing. How did they subsist
during this interval? As workmen live when out of employment, by sharing
the portion of a comrade who is in work; by selling or pawning bit by
bit the few articles they possess.

“They had executed some orders. They received the payment on the 4th of
May. That day was for them like a victory at the opening of a campaign,
and they determined to celebrate it. After paying all debts that had
fallen due, the dividend of each member amounted to 6 francs 61
centimes. They agreed to allow to each 5 francs [4s.] on account of his
wages, and to devote the surplus to a fraternal repast. The fourteen
shareholders, most of whom had not tasted wine for a year past, met,
along with their wives and children. They expended 32 sous [1s. 4d.] per
family. This day is still spoken of in their workshops with an emotion
which it is difficult not to share.

“For a month longer it was necessary to content themselves with the
receipt of five franca per week. In the course of June a baker, either
from love of music or on speculation, offered to buy a piano, paying for
it in bread. The bargain was made at the price of 480 francs. It was a
piece of good luck to the association. They had now at least what was
indispensable. They determined not to reckon the bread in the account of
wages. Each ate according to his appetite, or rather to that of his
family; for the married shareholders were allowed to take away bread
freely for their wives and children.

“Meanwhile the association, being composed of excellent workmen,
gradually surmounted the obstacles and privations which had embarrassed
its starting. Its account-books offer the best proof of the progress
which its pianos had made in the estimation of buyers. From August 1849
the weekly contingent rises to 10, 15, and 20 francs per week; and this
last sum does not represent all their profits, each partner having left
in the common stock much more than he received from it. Indeed it is not
by the sum which the member receives weekly that his situation can be
judged, but by the share acquired in the ownership of a property already
considerable. The following was the position of the association when it
took stock on the 30th December 1850.

“At this period the number of shareholders was thirty-two. Large
workshops and warehouses, rented for 2000 francs, were no longer
sufficient for the business.

Edition: current; Page: [777]
Frs.
Cents.
^∗^ “The last two items consisted of safe securities, nearly all of
which have since been realized.”
^†^ “These adherents are workmen of the trade, who subscribed small sums
to the association at its commencement: a portion of them were
reimbursed in the beginning of 1851. The sum due to creditors has also
been much reduced: on the 23rd of April it only amounted to 113 francs
59 centimes.”
Independent of tools, valued at . . . . .
5,922
60
They possessed in goods and especially in
 materials, the value of . . . . . . .
22,972
28
They had in cash . . . . . . . . .
1,021
10
” in bills . . . . . . . . .
3,540
There was due to them^∗^ . . . . . . .
5,861
90
——————
They had thus to their credit . . . . . .
39,317
88
Against this are only to be debited 4737 francs
 86 centimes due to creditors, and 1650 francs
 to eighty adherents;^†^ in all . . . . .
6,387
86
——————
Remaining . . . . . . . . .
32,930
02
[£1319
4_s._]

which formed their indivisible capital and the reserve of the individual
members. At this period the association had 76 pianos under
construction, and received more orders than they could execute.”

From a later report we learn that this society subsequently divided
itself into two separate associations, one of which, in 1854, already
possessed a circulating capital of 56,000 francs‡ [2240l.]. In 1863 its
total capital was 6520l.

Edition: current; Page: [778]
The same admirable qualities by which the associations were carried
through their early struggles, maintained them in their increasing
prosperity. Their rules of discipline, instead of being more lax, are
stricter than those of ordinary workshops; but being rules self-imposed,
for the manifest good of the community, and not for the convenience of
an employer regarded as having an Edition: current; Page: [779] opposite
interest, they are far more scrupulously obeyed, and the voluntary
obedience carries with it a sense of personal worth and dignity. With
wonderful rapidity the associated workpeople have learnt to correct
those of the ideas they set out with which are in opposition to the
teaching of reason and experience. Almost all the associations, at
first, excluded piece-work, and gave equal wages Edition: current; Page:
[780] whether the work done was more or less. Almost all have abandoned
this system, and after allowing to every one a fixed minimum, sufficient
for subsistence, they apportion all further remuneration according to
the work done: most of them even dividing the profits at the end of the
year, in the same proportion as the earnings.∗

Edition: current; Page: [781]
It is the declared principle of most of these associations that they do
not exist for the mere private benefit of the individual members, but
for the promotion of the co-operative cause. With every extension,
therefore, of their business, they take in additional members, not (when
they remain faithful to their original plan) to receive wages from them
as hired labourers, but to enter at once into the full benefits of the
association, without being required to bring anything in, except their
labour: the only condition imposed is that of receiving during a few
years a smaller share in the annual division of profits, as some
equivalent for the sacrifices of the founders. When members quit the
association, which they are always at liberty to do, they carry none of
the capital with them: it remains an indivisible property, of which the
members for the time being have the use, but not the arbitrary disposal:
by the stipulations of most of the contracts, even if the association
breaks up, the capital cannot be divided, but must be devoted entire to
some work of beneficence or of public utility. A fixed, and generally a
considerable, proportion of the annual profits, is not shared among the
members, but added to the capital of the association, or devoted to the
repayment of advances previously made to it: another portion is set
aside to provide for the sick and disabled, and another to form a fund
for extending the practice of association, or aiding other associations
in their need. The managers are paid, like other members, for the time
which is occupied in management, usually at the rate of the highest paid
labour: but the rule is adhered to, that the exercise of power shall
never be an occasion of profit.

Of the ability of the associations to compete successfully with
individual capitalists, even at an early period of their existence, M.
Feugueray said, “The associations which have been founded in the last
two years” (M. Feugueray wrote in 1851) “had many obstacles to overcome;
the majority of them were almost entirely without capital: all were
treading in a path previously unexplored; they ran the risks which
always threaten innovators and beginners. Nevertheless, in many of the
trades in which they have been established, they are already formidable
competitors of the old houses, and are even complained of on that
account by a part of the bourgeoisie. This is not only true of the
cooks, the lemonade sellers, and hair-dressers, Edition: current; Page:
[782] trades the nature of which enables the associations to rely on
democratic custom, but also in other trades where they have not the same
advantages. One has only to consult the makers of chairs, of arm-chairs,
of files, and one will learn from them if the most important
establishments in their respective trades are not those of the
associated workmen.”

1 The vitality of these associations must indeed be great, to have
enabled about twenty of them to survive not only the anti-socialist
reaction, which for the time discredited all attempts to enable
workpeople to be their own employers—not only the tracasseries of the
police, and the hostile policy of the government since the
usurpation—but in addition to these obstacles, all the difficulties
arising from the trying condition of financial and commercial affairs
from 1854 to 1858. Of the prosperity attained by some of them even while
passing through this difficult period, I have given examples which must
be conclusive to all minds as to the brilliant future reserved for the
principle of co-operation.∗

Edition: current; Page: [783]
1 It is not in France alone that these associations have commenced a
career of prosperity. To say nothing at present of Germany, Piedmont,
and Switzerland (where the Konsum-Verein of Zürich is one of the most
prosperous co-operative associations in Europe), England can produce
cases of success rivalling even those which I have cited from France.
Under the impulse commenced by Mr. Owen, and more recently propagated by
the writings and personal efforts of a band of friends, chiefly
clergymen and barristers, to whose noble exertions too much praise can
scarcely be given, the good seed was widely sown; the necessary
alterations in the English law of partnership were obtained from
Parliament, on the benevolent and public-spirited initiative of Mr.
Slaney; many industrial associations, and a still greater number of
co-operative stores for retail purchases, were founded. Among these are
already many instances of remarkable prosperity, the most signal of
which are the Edition: current; Page: [784] Leeds Flour Mill, and the
Rochdale Society of Equitable Pioneers. Of this last association, the
most successful of all, the history has been written in a very
interesting manner by Mr. Holyoake;∗ and the notoriety which by this and
other means has been given to facts so encouraging, is causing a rapid
extension of associations with similar objects in Lancashire, Yorkshire,
London, and elsewhere.

The original capital of the Rochdale Society consisted of 28l.; brought
together by the unassisted economy of about forty labourers, through the
slow process of a subscription of twopence (afterwards raised to
threepence) per week. With this sum they established in 1844 a small
shop, or store, for the supply of a few common articles for the
consumption of their own families. As their carefulness and honesty
brought them an increase of customers and of subscribers, they extended
their operations to a greater number of articles of consumption, and in
a few years were able to make a large investment in shares of a
Co-operative Corn Mill. Mr. Holyoake thus relates the stages of their
progress up to 1857:—

“The Equitable Pioneers' Society is divided into seven departments :
Grocery, Drapery, Butchering, Shoemaking, Clogging, Tailoring,
Wholesale.

“A separate account is kept of each business, and a general account is
given each quarter, showing the position of the whole.

“The grocery business was commenced, as we have related, in December
1844, with only four articles to sell. It now includes whatever a
grocer's shop should include.

“The drapery business was started in 1847, with an humble array of
attractions. In 1854 it was erected into a separate department.

“A year earlier, 1846, the Store began to sell butcher's meat, buying
eighty or one hundred pounds of a tradesman in the town. After a while
the sales were discontinued until 1850, when the Society had a warehouse
of its own. Mr. John Moorhouse, who has now two assistants, buys and
kills for the Society three oxen, eight sheep, sundry porkers and
calves, which are on the average converted into 130l. of cash per week.

“Shoemaking commenced in 1852. Three men and an apprentice make, and a
stock is kept on sale.

Edition: current; Page: [785]
“Clogging and tailoring commenced also in this year.

“The wholesale department commenced in 1852, and marls an important
development of the Pioneers' proceedings. This department has been
created for supplying any members requiring large quantities, and with a
view to supply the co-operative stores of Lancashire and Yorkshire,
whose small capitals do not enable them to buy in the best markets, nor
command the services of what is otherwise indispensable to every store—a
good buyer, who knows the markets and his business, who knows what, how,
and where to buy. The wholesale department guarantees purity, quality,
fair prices, standard weight and measure, but all on the never-failing
principle, cash payment.”

In consequence of the number of members who now reside at a distance,
and the difficulty of serving the great increase of customers, “Branch
Stores have been opened. In 1856 the first Branch was opened in the
Oldham Road; about a mile from the centre of Rochdale. In 1857 the
Castleton Branch, and another in the Whitworth Road, were established,
and a fourth Branch in Pinfold.”

The warehouse, of which their original Store was a single apartment, was
taken on lease by the Society, very much out of repair, in 1849. “Every
part has undergone neat refitting and modest decoration, and now wears
the air of a thoroughly respectable place of business. One room is now
handsomely fitted up as a news room. Another is neatly fitted up as a
library.... Their news room is as well supplied as that of a London
club.” It is now “free to members, and supported from the Education
Fund,” a fund consisting of 2½ per cent of all the profits divided,
which is set apart for educational purposes. “The Library contains 2200
volumes of the best, and among them, many of the most expensive books
published. The Library is free. From 1850 to 1855, a school for young
persons was conducted at a charge of twopence per month. Since 1855, a
room has been granted by the Board for the use of from twenty to thirty
persons, from the ages of fourteen to forty, for mutual instruction on
Sundays and Tuesdays....

“The corn-mill was of course rented, and stood at Small Bridge, some
distance from the town—one mile and a half. The Society have since built
in the town an entirely new mill for themselves. The engine and the
machinery are of the moat substantial and improved kind. The capital
invested in the corn-mill is 8450l., of which 3731l. 15s. 2d. is
subscribed by the Equitable Pioneers' Society. The corn-mill employs
eleven men.”

Edition: current; Page: [786]
At a later period they extended their operations to the staple
manufacture itself. From the success of the Pioneers' Society grew not
only the co-operative corn-mill, but a co-operative association for
cotton and woollen manufacturing. “The capital in this department is
4000l., of which sum 2042l. has been subscribed by the Equitable
Pioneers' Society. This Manufacturing Society has ninety-six power-looms
at work, and employs twenty-six men, seven women, four boys, and five
girls—in all forty-two persons....”

“In 1853 the Store purchased for 745l.; a warehouse (freehold) on the
opposite side of the street, where they keep and retail their stores of
flour, butcher's meat, potatoes, and kindred articles. Their
committee-rooms and offices are fitted up in the same building. They
rent other houses adjoining for calico and hosiery and shoe stores. In
their wilderness of rooms, the visitor stumbles upon shoemakers and
tailors at work under healthy conditions, and in perfect peace of mind
as to the result on Saturday night. Their warehouses are everywhere as
bountifully stocked as Noah's Ark, and cheerful customers literally
crowd Toad Lane at night, swarming like bees to every counter. The
industrial districts of England have not such another sight as the
Rochdale Co-operative Store on Saturday night.”∗ Since the disgraceful
failure of the Rochdale Edition: current; Page: [787] Savings Bank in
1849, the Society's Store has become the virtual Savings Bank of the
place.

The following Table, completed to 11360 from the Almanack published by
the Society, shows the pecuniary result of its operations from the
commencement.

Year.
No. of
 members.
Amount of Capital.
Amount of cash sales
 in store (annual).
Amount of profit
 (annual).
^∗^ [1865] The latest report to which I have access is that for the
quarter ending September 20, 1864, of which I take the following
abstract from the November number of that valuable periodical the
_Co-operator_, conducted by Mr. Henry Pitman, one of the most active and
judicious apostles of the Co-operative cause:—“The number of members is
4580, being an increase of 132 for the three months. The capital or
assets of the society is 59,536_l._ 10_s._ 1_d._, or more than last
quarter by 3687_l._ 13_s._ 7_d._ The cash received for sale of goods is
45,806_l._ 0_s._ 10½_d._, being an increase of 2283_l._ 12_s._ 5½_d._ as
compared with the previous three months. The profit realized is 5713_l._
2_s._ 7½_d._, which, after depreciating fixed stock account 182_l._
2_s._ 4½_d._, paying interest on share capital 598_l._ 17_s._ 6_d._,
applying 2½ per cent to an educational fund, viz. 122_l._ 17_s._ 9_d._,
leaves a dividend to members on their purchases of 2_s._ 4_d._ in the
pound. Non-members have received 261_l._ 18_s._ 4_d._, at 1_s._ 8_d._ in
the pound on their purchases, leaving 8_d._ in the pound profit to the
society, which increases the reserve fund 104_l._ 15_s._ 4_d._ This fund
now stands at 1352_l._ 7_s._ 11½_d._, the accumulation of profits from
the trade of the public with the store since September 1862, over and
above the 1_s._ 8_d._ in the pound allowed to such purchasers.”


Edition: current; Page: [788]
I need not enter into similar particulars respecting the Corn-Mill
Society, and will merely state that in 1860 its capital is set down,on
the same authority, at 26,618l. 14s. 6d., and the profit for that single
year at 10,164l. 12s. 5d. For the manufacturing establishment I have no
certified information later than that of Mr. Holyoake, who states the
capital of the concern, in 1857, to be 5500l. But a letter in the
Rochdale Observer of May 26, 1860, editorially announced as by a person
of good information, says that the capital had at that time reached
50,000l.: and the same letter gives highly satisfactory statements
respecting other similar associations; the Rosendale Industrial Company,
capital 40,000l.; the Walsden Co-operative Company, capital 8000l.; the
Bacup and Wardle Commercial Company, with a capital of 40,000l.; “of
which more than one-third is borrowed at 5 per cent, and this
circumstance, be reduced to during the last two years of unexampled
commercial prosperity, has caused the rate of dividend to shareholders
to rise to an almost fabulous height.”

1 It is not necessary to enter into any details respecting the
subsequent history of English Co-operation; the less so, as it is now
one of the recognised elements in the progressive movement of the age,
and, as such, has latterly been the subject of elaborate articles in
most of our leading periodicals, one of the most recent and best of
which was in the Edinburgh Review for October 1864: and the progress of
Co-operation from month to month is regularly chronicled in the
Co-operator. I must not, however, omit to mention the last great step in
advance in reference to the Co-operative Stores, the formation in the
North of England (and another is in course of formation in London) of a
Wholesale Society, to dispense with the services of the wholesale
merchant as well as of the retail dealer, and extend to the Societies
the advantage which each society gives to its own members, by an agency
for co-operative purchases, of foreign as well as domestic commodities,
direct from the producers.

2 It is hardly possible to take any but a hopeful view of the Edition:
current; Page: [789] prospects of mankind, when, in two leading
countries of the world, the obscure depths of society contain simple
working men whose integrity, good sense, self-command, and honourable
confidence in one another, have enabled them to carry these noble
experiments to the triumphant issue which the facts recorded in the
preceding pages attest.

From the progressive advance of the co-operative movement, a great
increase may be looked for even in the aggregate productiveness of
industry. The sources of the increase are twofold. In the first place,
the class of mere distributors, who are not producers but auxiliaries of
production, and whose inordinate numbers, far more than the gains of
capitalists, are the cause why so great a portion of the wealth produced
does not reach the producers—will be reduced to more modest dimensions.
Distributors differ from producers in this, that when producers
increase, even though in any given department of industry they may be
too numerous, they actually produce more: but the multiplication of
distributors does not make more distribution to be done, more wealth to
be distributed; it does but divide the same work among a greater number
of persons, seldom even cheapening the process. By limiting the
distributors to the number really required for making the commodities
accessible to the consumers-which is the direct effect of the
co-operative system—a vast number of hands will be set free for
production, and the capital which feeds and the gains which remunerate
them will be applied to feed and remunerate producers. This great
economy of the world's resources would be realized even if co-operation
stopped at associations for purchase and consumption, without extending
to production.

The other mode in which co-operation tends, still more efficaciously, to
increase the productiveness of labour, consists in the vast stimulus
given to productive energies, by placing the labourers, as a mass, in a
relation to their work which would make it their principle and their
interest—at present it is neither—to do the utmost, instead of the least
possible, in exchange for their remuneration. 1 It is scarcely possible
to rate too highly this material benefit, which yet is as nothing
compared with the moral revolution in society that would accompany it:
the healing of the standing feud between capital and labour; the
transformation of human life, from a conflict of classes struggling for
opposite interests, to a friendly Edition: current; Page: [790] rivalry
in the pursuit of a good common to all; the elevation of the dignity of
labour; a new sense of security and independence in the labouring class;
and the conversion of each human being's daily occupation into a school
of the social sympathies and the practical intelligence.

Such is the noble idea which the promoters of Co-operation should have
before them. But to attain, in any degree, these objects, it is
indispensable that all, and not some only, of those who do the work
should be identified in interest with the prosperity of the undertaking.
Associations which, when they have been successful, renounce the
essential principle of the system, and become joint-stock companies of a
limited number of shareholders, who differ from those of other companies
only in being working men; associations which employ hired labourers
without any interest in the profits (and I grieve to say that the
Manufacturing Society even of Rochdale has thus degenerated) are, no
doubt, exercising a lawful right in honestly employing the existing
system of society to improve their position as individuals, but it is
not from them that anything need be expected towards replacing that
system by a better. Neither will such societies, in the long run,
succeed in keeping their ground against individual competition.
Individual management, by the one person principally interested, has
great advantages over every description of collective management.
Co-operation has but one thing to oppose to those advantages—the common
interest of all the workers in the work. When individual capitalists, as
they will certainly do, add this to their other points of advantage;
when, even if only to increase their gains, they take up the practice
which these co-operative societies have dropped, and connect the
pecuniary interest of every person in their employment with the most
efficient and most economical management of the concern; they are likely
to gain an easy victory over societies which retain the defects, while
they cannot possess the full advantages, of the old system.

Under the most favourable supposition, it will be desirable, and perhaps
for a considerable length of time, that individual capitalists,
associating their work-people in the profits, should coexist with even
those co-operative societies which are faithful to the co-operative
principle. Unity of authority makes many things possible, which could
not or would not be undertaken subject to the chance of divided councils
or changes in the management. A private capitalist, exempt from the
control of a body, if he is a person of Edition: current; Page: [791]
capacity, is considerably more likely than almost any association to run
judicious risks, and originate costly improvements. Co-operative
societies may be depended on for adopting improvements after they have
been tested by success, but individuals are more likely to commence
things previously untried. Even in ordinary business, the competition of
capable persons who in the event of failure are to have all the loss,
and in the case of success the greater part of the gain, will be very
useful in keeping the managers of co-operative societies up to the due
pitch of activity and vigilance.

When, however, co-operative societies shall have sufficiently
multiplied, it is not probable that any but the least valuable
work-people will any longer consent to work all their lives for wages
merely; both private capitalists and associations will gradually find it
necessary to make the entire body of labourers participants in profits.
Eventually, and in perhaps a less remote future than may be supposed, we
may, through the co-operative principle, see our way to 1 a change in
society, which would combine the freedom and independence of the
individual, with the moral, intellectual, and economical advantages of
aggregate production; and which, without violence or spoliation, or even
any sudden disturbance of existing habits and expectations, would
realize, at least in the industrial department, the best aspirations of
the democratic spirit, by putting an end to the division of society into
the industrious and the idle, and effacing all social distinctions but
those fairly earned by personal services and exertions. Associations
like those which we have described, by the very process of their
success, are a course of education in those moral and active qualities
by which alone success can be either deserved or attained. As
associations multiplied, they would tend more and more to absorb all
work-people, except those who have too little understanding, or too
little virtue, to be capable of learning to act on any other system than
that of narrow selfishness. As this change proceeded, owners of capital
would gradually find it to their advantage, instead of maintaining the
struggle of the old system with work-people of only the worst
description, to lend their capital to the associations; to do this at a
diminishing rate of interest, and at last, perhaps, even to exchange
their capital for terminable annuities. In this or some such mode, the
existing accumulations of capital might honestly, and by a kind of
spontaneous process, become in the end the joint property of all who
participate in their productive employment: a transformation Edition:
current; Page: [792] which, thus effected, (and assuming of course that
both sexes participate equally in the rights and in the government of
the association)∗ would be the nearest approach to social justice, and
the most beneficial ordering of industrial affairs for the universal
good, which it is possible at present to foresee.

1 § 7. I agree, then with the Socialist writers in their conception of
the form which industrial operations tend to assume in the advance of
improvement; and I entirely share their opinion that the time is ripe
for commencing this transformation, and that it should by all just and
effectual means be aided and encouraged. But while I agree and
sympathize with Socialists in this practical portion of their aims, I
utterly dissent from the most conspicuous and vehement part of their
teaching, their declamations against competition. With moral conceptions
in many respects far ahead of the existing arrangements of society, they
have in general very confused and erroneous notions of its actual
working; and one of their greatest errors, as I conceive, is to charge
upon competition all the economical evils which at present exist. They
forget that wherever competition is not, monopoly is; and that monopoly,
in all its forms, is the taxation of the industrious for the support of
indolence, if not of plunder. They forget, too, that with the exception
of competition among labourers, all other competition is for the benefit
of the labourers, by cheapening the articles they consume; that
competition even in the labour market is a source not of low but of high
wages, wherever the competition for labour exceeds the competition of
labour, as in America, in the colonies, and in the skilled trades; and
never could be a cause of low wages, save by the overstocking of the
labour market through the too great numbers of the labourers' families;
while, if the supply of labourers is excessive, not even Socialism can
prevent their remuneration from being low. Besides, if association were
universal, there Edition: current; Page: [793] would be no competition
between labourer and labourer; and that between association and
association would be for the benefit of the consumers, that is, of the
associations; of the industrious classes generally.

I do not pretend that there are no inconveniences in competition, or
that the moral objections urged against it by Socialist writers, as a
source of jealousy and hostility among those engaged in the same
occupation, are altogether groundless. But if competition has its evils,
it prevents greater evils. As M. Feugueray well says,∗ “The deepest root
of the evils and iniquities which fill the industrial world, is not
competition, but the subjection of labour to capital, and the enormous
share which the possessors of the instruments of industry are able to
take from the produce.... If competition has great power for evil, it is
no less fertile of good, especially in what regards the development of
the individual faculties, and the success of innovations.” It is the
common error of Socialists to overlook the natural indolence of mankind;
their tendency to be passive, to be the slaves of habit, to persist
indefinitely in a course once chosen. Let them once attain any state of
existence which they consider tolerable, and the danger to be
apprehended is that they will thenceforth stagnate; will not exert
themselves to improve, and by letting their faculties rust, will lose
even the energy required to preserve them from deterioration.
Competition may not be the best conceivable stimulus, but it is at
present a necessary one, and no one can foresee the time when it will
not be indispensable to progress. Even confining ourselves to the
industrial department, in which, more than in any other, the majority
may be supposed to be competent judges of improvements; it would be
difficult to induce the general assembly of an association to submit to
the trouble and inconvenience of altering their habits by adopting some
new and promising invention, unless their knowledge of the existence of
rival associations made them apprehend that what they would not consent
to do, others would, and that they would be left behind in the race.

Instead of looking upon competition as the baneful and anti-social
principle which it is held to be by the generality of Socialists, I
conceive that, even in the present state of society and industry, every
restriction of it is an evil, and every extension of it, even if for the
time injuriously affecting some class of labourers, is always an
ultimate good. To be protected against competition is to be Edition:
current; Page: [794] protected in idleness, in mental dulness; to be
saved the necessity of being as active and as intelligent as other
people; and if it is also to be protected against being underbid for
employment by a less highly paid class of labourers, this is only where
old custom, or local and partial monopoly, has placed some particular
class of artisans in a privileged position as compared with the rest;
and the time has come when the interest of universal improvement is no
longer promoted by prolonging the privileges of a few. If the
slop-sellers and others 1 of their class have lowered the wages of
tailors, and some other artisans, by making them an affair of
competition instead of custom, so much the better in the end. What is
now required is not to bolster up old customs, whereby limited classes
of labouring people obtain partial gains which interest them in keeping
up the present organization of society, but to introduce new general
practices beneficial to all; and there is reason to rejoice at whatever
makes the privileged classes of skilled artisans feel that they have the
same interests, and depend for their remuneration on the same general
causes, and must resort for the improvement of their condition to the
same remedies, as the less fortunately circumstanced and comparatively
helpless multitude.1

Edition: current; Page: [795]


BOOK V: ON THE INFLUENCE OF GOVERNMENT


CHAPTER I: of the functions of government in general

§ 1. One of the most disputed questions both in political science and in
practical statesmanship at this particular period relates to the proper
limits of the functions and agency of governments. At other times it has
been a subject of controversy how governments should be constituted, and
according to what principles and rules they should exercise their
authority; but it is now almost equally a question to what departments
of human affairs that authority should extend. And when the tide sets so
strongly towards changes in government and legislation, as a means of
improving the condition of mankind, this discussion is more likely to
increase than to diminish in interest. On the one hand, impatient
reformers, thinking it easier and shorter to get possession of the
government than of the intellects and dispositions of the public, are
under a constant temptation to stretch the province of government beyond
due bounds: while, on the other, mankind have been so much accustomed by
their rulers to interference for purposes other than the public good, or
under an erroneous conception of what that good requires, and so many
rash proposals are made by sincere lovers of improvement, for
attempting, by compulsory regulation, the attainment of objects which
can only be effectually or only usefully compassed by opinion and
discussion, that there has grown up a spirit of resistance in limine to
the interference of government, merely as such, and a disposition to
restrict its sphere of action within the narrowest bounds. From
differences in the historical Edition: current; Page: [796] development
of different nations, not necessary to be here dwelt upon, the former
excess, that of exaggerating the province of government, prevails most,
both in theory and in practice, among the Continental nations, while in
England the contrary spirit has hitherto been predominant.

The general principles of the question, in so far as it is a question of
principle, I shall make an attempt to determine in a later chapter of
this Book: after first considering the effects produced by the conduct
of government in the exercise of the functions universally acknowledged
to belong to it. For this purpose, there must be a specification of the
functions which are either inseparable from the idea of a government, or
are exercised habitually and without objection by all governments; as
distinguished from those respecting which it has been considered
questionable whether governments should exercise them or not. The former
may be termed the necessary, the latter the optional, functions of
government. 1 By the term optional it is not meant to imply, that it can
ever be a matter of indifference, or of arbitrary choice, whether the
government should or should not take upon itself the functions in
question; but only that the expediency of its exercising them does not
amount to necessity, and is a subject on which diversity of opinion does
or may exist.

§ 2. In attempting to enumerate the necessary functions of government,
we find them to be considerably more multifarious than most people are
at first aware of, and not capable of being circumscribed by those very
definite lines of demarcation, which, in the inconsiderateness of
popular discussion, it is often attempted to draw round them. We
sometimes, for example, hear it said that governments ought to confine
themselves to affording protection against force and fraud: that, these
two things apart, people should be free agents, able to take care of
themselves, and that so long as a person practises no violence or
deception, to the injury of others in person or property, 2 legislatures
and governments are in no way called on to concern themselves about him.
But why should people be protected by their government, that is, by
their own collective strength, against violence and fraud, and not
against other evils, except that the expediency is more obvious? If
nothing Edition: current; Page: [797] but what people cannot possibly do
for themselves, can be fit to be done for them by government, people
might be required to protect themselves by their skill and courage even
against force, or to beg or buy protection against it, as they actually
do where the government is not capable of protecting them: and against
fraud every one has the protection of his own wits. But without further
anticipating the discussion of principles, it is sufficient on the
present occasion to consider facts.

Under which of these heads, the repression of force or of fraud, are we
to place the operation, for example, of the laws of inheritance? Some
such laws must exist in all societies. It may be said, perhaps, that in
this matter government has merely to give effect to the disposition
which an individual makes of his own property by will. This, however, is
at least extremely disputable; there is probably no country by whose
laws the power of testamentary disposition is perfectly absolute. And
suppose the very common case of there being no will: does not the law,
that is, the government, decide on principles of general expediency, who
shall take the succession? and in case the successor is in any manner
incompetent, does it not appoint persons, frequently officers of its
own, to collect the property and apply it to his benefit? There are many
other cases in which the government undertakes the administration of
property, because the public interest, or perhaps only that of the
particular persons concerned, is thought to require it. This is often
done in case of litigated property; and in cases of judicially declared
insolvency. It has never been contended that in doing these things, a
government exceeds its province.

Nor is the function of the law in defining property itself so simple a
thing as may be supposed. It may be imagined, perhaps, that the law has
only to declare and protect the right of every one to what he has
himself produced, or acquired by the voluntary consent, fairly obtained,
of those who produced it. But is there nothing recognized as property
except what has been produced? Is there not the earth itself, its
forests and waters, and all other natural riches, above and below the
surface? These are the inheritance of the human race, and there must be
regulations for the common enjoyment of it. What rights, and under what
conditions, a person shall be allowed to exercise over any portion of
this common inheritance cannot be left undecided. No function of
government is less optional than the regulation of these things, or more
completely involved in the idea of civilized society.

Edition: current; Page: [798]
Again, the legitimacy is conceded of repressing violence or treachery;
but under which of these heads are we to place the obligation imposed on
people to perform their contracts? Nonperformance does not necessarily
imply fraud; the person who entered into the contract may have sincerely
intended to fulfil it: and the term fraud, which can scarcely admit of
being extended even to the case of voluntary breach of contract when no
deception was practised, is certainly not applicable when the omission
to perform is a case of negligence. Is it no part of the duty of
governments to enforce contracts? Here the doctrine of non-interference
would no doubt be stretched a little, and it would be said that
enforcing contracts is not regulating the affairs of individuals at the
pleasure of government, but giving effect to their own expressed desire.
Let us acquiesce in this enlargement of the restrictive theory, and take
it for what it is worth. But governments do not limit their concern with
contracts to a simple enforcement. They take upon themselves to
determine what contracts are fit to be enforced. It is not enough that
one person, not being either cheated or compelled, makes a promise to
another. There are promises by which it is not for the public good that
persons should have the power of binding themselves. To say nothing of
engagements to do something contrary to law, there are engagements which
the law refuses to enforce, for reasons connected with the interest of
the promiser, or with the general policy of the state. A contract by
which a person sells himself to another as a slave would be declared
void by the tribunals of this and of most other European countries.
There are few nations whose laws enforce a contract for what is looked
upon as prostitution, or any matrimonial engagement of which the
conditions vary in any respect from those which the law has thought fit
to prescribe. But when once it is admitted that there are any
engagements which for reasons of expediency the law ought not to
enforce, the same question is necessarily opened with respect to all
engagements. Whether, for example, the law should enforce a contract to
labour, when the wages are too low or the hours of work too severe:
whether it should enforce a contract by which a person binds himself to
remain, for more than a very limited period, in the service of a given
individual: whether a contract of marriage, entered into for life,
should continue to be enforced against the deliberate will of the
persons, or of either of the persons, who entered into it. Every
question which can possibly arise as to the policy of contracts, and of
the relations which they establish among human Edition: current; Page:
[799] beings, is a question for the legislator; and one which he cannot
escape from considering, and in some way or other deciding.

Again, the prevention and suppression of force and fraud afford
appropriate employment for soldiers, policemen, and criminal judges; but
there are also civil tribunals. The punishment of wrong is one business
of an administration of justice, but the decision of disputes is
another. Innumerable disputes arise between persons, without mala fides
on either side, through misconception of their legal rights, or from not
being agreed about the facts, on the proof of which those rights are
legally dependent. Is it not for the general interest that the State
should appoint persons to clear up these uncertainties and terminate
these disputes? It cannot be said to be a case of absolute necessity.
People might appoint an arbitrator, and engage to submit to his
decision; and they do so where there are no courts of justice, or where
the courts are not trusted, or where their delays and expenses, or the
irrationality of their rules of evidence, deter people from resorting to
them. Still, it is universally thought right that the State should
establish civil tribunals; and if their defects often drive people to
have recourse to substitutes, even then the power held in reserve of
carrying the case before a legally constituted court, gives to the
substitutes their principal efficacy.

Not only does the State undertake to decide disputes, it takes
precautions beforehand that disputes may not arise. The laws of most
countries lay down rules for determining many things, not because it is
of much consequence in what way they are determined, but in order that
they may be determined somehow, and there may be no question on the
subject. The law prescribes forms of words for many kinds of contract,
in order that no dispute or misunderstanding may arise about their
meaning: it makes provision that if a dispute does arise, evidence shall
be procurable for deciding it, by requiring that the document be
attested by witnesses and executed with certain formalities. The law
preserves authentic evidence of facts to which legal consequences are
attached, by keeping a registry of such facts; as of births, deaths, and
marriages, of wills and contracts, and of judicial proceedings. In doing
these things, it has never been alleged that government oversteps the
proper limits of its functions.

Again, however wide a scope we may allow to the doctrine that
individuals are the proper guardians of their own interests, and that
government owes nothing to them but to save them from being Edition:
current; Page: [800] interfered with by other people, the doctrine can
never be applicable to any persons but those who are capable of acting
in their own behalf. The individual may be an infant, or a lunatic, or
fallen into imbecility. The law surely must look after the interests of
such persons. It does not necessarily do this through officers of its
own. It often devolves the trust upon some relative or connexion. But in
doing so is its duty ended? Can it make over the interests of one person
to the control of another, and be excused from supervision, or from
holding the person thus trusted responsible for the discharge of the
trust?

There is a multitude of cases in which governments, with general
approbation, assume powers and execute functions for which no reason can
be assigned except the simple one, that they conduce to general
convenience. We may take as an example, the function (which is a
monopoly too) of coining money. This is assumed for no more recondite
purpose than that of saving to individuals the trouble, delay, and
expense of weighing and assaying. No one, however, even of those most
jealous of state interference, has objected to this as an improper
exercise of the powers of government. Prescribing a set of standard
weights and measures is another instance. Paving, lighting, and
cleansing the streets and thoroughfares, is another; whether done by the
general government, or, as is more usual, and generally more advisable,
by a municipal authority. Making or improving harbours, building
lighthouses, making surveys in order to have accurate maps and charts,
raising dykes to keep the sea out, and embankments to keep rivers in,
are cases in point.

Examples might be indefinitely multiplied without intruding on any
disputed ground. But enough has been said to show that the admitted
functions of government embrace a much wider field than can easily be
included within the ring-fence of any restrictive definition, and that
it is hardly possible to find any ground of justification common to them
all, except the comprehensive one of general expediency; nor to limit
the interference of government by any universal rule, save the simple
and vague one, that it should never be admitted but when the case of
expediency is strong.

§ 3. Some observations, however, may be usefully bestowed on the nature
of the considerations on which the question of government interference
is most likely to turn, and on the mode of estimating the comparative
magnitude of the expediencies involved. This will form the last of the
three parts, into which our discussion of the Edition: current; Page:
[801] principles and effects of government interference may conveniently
be divided. The following will be our division of the subject.

We shall first consider the economical effects arising from the manner
in which governments perform their necessary and acknowledged functions.

We shall then pass to certain governmental interferences of what I have
termed the optional kind (i.e. overstepping the boundaries of the
universally acknowledged functions) which have heretofore taken place,
and in some cases still take place, under the influence of false general
theories.

It will lastly remain to inquire whether, independently of any false
theory, and consistently with a correct view of the laws which regulate
human affairs, there be any cases of the optional class in which
governmental interference is really advisable, and what are those cases.

The first of these divisions is of an extremely miscellaneous character:
since the necessary functions of government, and those which are so
manifestly expedient that they have never or very rarely been objected
to, are, as already pointed out, too various to be brought under any
very simple classification. Those, however, which are of principal
importance, which alone it is necessary here to consider, may be reduced
to the following general heads.

First, the means adopted by governments to raise the revenue which is
the condition of their existence.

Secondly, the nature of the laws which they prescribe on the two great
subjects of Property and Contracts.

Thirdly, the excellences or defects of the system of means by which they
enforce generally the execution of their laws, namely, their judicature
and police.

We commence with the first head, that is, with the theory of Taxation.

Edition: current; Page: [802]


CHAPTER II: on the general principles of taxation

§ 1. The qualities desirable, economically speaking, in a system of
taxation, have been embodied by Adam Smith in four maxims or principles,
which, having been generally concurred by subsequent writers, may be
said to have become classical, and this chapter cannot be better
commenced than by quoting them.∗

“1. The subjects of every state ought to contribute to the support of
the government, as nearly as possible in proportion to their respective
abilities: that is, in proportion to the revenue which they respectively
enjoy under the protection of the state. In the observation or neglect
of this maxim consists what is called the equality or inequality of
taxation.

“2. The tax which each individual is bound to pay ought to be certain,
and not arbitrary. The time of payment, the manner of payment, the
quantity to be paid, ought all to be clear and plain to the contributor,
and to every other person. Where it is otherwise, every person subject
to the tax is put more or less in the power of the tax-gatherer, who can
either aggravate the tax upon any obnoxious contributor, or extort, by
the terror of such aggravation, some present or perquisite to himself.
The uncertainty of taxation encourages the insolence and favours the
corruption of an order of men who are naturally unpopular, even when
they are neither insolent nor corrupt. The certainty of what each
individual ought to pay is, in taxation, a matter of so great
importance, that a very considerable degree of inequality, it appears, I
believe, from the experience of all nations, is not near so great an
evil, as a very small degree of uncertainty.

“3. Every tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the manner, in which
it is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay it. A tax
upon the rent of land or of houses, payable at the Edition: current;
Page: [803] same term at which such rents are usually paid, is levied at
a time when it is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to
pay; or when he is most likely to have wherewithal to pay. Taxes upon
such consumable goods as are articles of luxury are all finally paid by
the consumer, and generally in a manner that is very convenient to him.
He pays them by little and little, as he has occasion to buy the goods.
As he is at liberty, too, either to buy or not to buy, as he pleases, it
must be his own fault if he ever suffers any considerable inconvenience
from such taxes.

“4. Every tax ought to be so contrived as both to take out and to keep
out of the pockets of the people as little as possible over and above
what it brings into the public treasury of the state. A tax may either
take out or keep out of the pockets of the people a great deal more than
it brings into the public treasury, in the four following ways. First,
the levying of it may require a great number of officers, whose salaries
may eat up the greater part of the produce of the tax, and whose
perquisites may impose another additional tax upon the people.”
Secondly, it may divert a portion of the labour and capital of the
community from a more to a less productive employment. “Thirdly, by the
forfeitures and other penalties which those unfortunate individuals
incur who attempt unsuccessfully to evade the tax, it may frequently
ruin them, and thereby put an end to the benefit which the community
might have derived from the employment of their capitals. An injudicious
tax offers a great temptation to smuggling. Fourthly, by subjecting the
people to the frequent visits and the odious examination of the
tax-gatherers, it may expose them to much unnecessary trouble, vexation,
and oppression:” to which may be added, that the restrictive regulations
to which trades and manufactures are often subjected to prevent evasion
of a tax, are not only in themselves troublesome and expensive, but
often oppose insuperable obstacles to making improvements in the
processes.

The last three of these four maxims require little other explanation or
illustration than is contained in the passage itself. How far any given
tax conforms to, or conflicts with them, is a matter to be considered in
the discussion of particular taxes. But the first of the four points,
equality of taxation, requires to be more fully examined, being a thing
often imperfectly understood, and on which many false notions have
become to a certain degree accredited, through the absence of any
definite principles of judgment in the popular mind.

Edition: current; Page: [804]
§ 2. For what reason ought equality to be the rule in matters of
taxation? For the reason that it ought to be so in all affairs of
government. As a government ought to make no distinction of persons or
classes in the strength of their claims on it, whatever sacrifices it
requires from them should be made to bear as nearly as possible with the
same pressure upon all, which, it must be observed, is the mode by which
least sacrifice is occasioned on the whole. If any one bears less than
his fair share of the burthen, some other person must suffer more than
his share, and the alleviation to the one is not, caeteris paribus,so
great a good to him, as the increased pressure upon the other is an
evil. Equality of taxation, therefore, as a maxim of politics, means
equality of sacrifice. It means apportioning the contribution of each
person towards the expenses of government so that he shall feel neither
more nor less inconvenience from his share of the payment than every
other person experiences from his. This standard, like other standards
of perfection, cannot be completely realized; but the first object in
every practical discussion should be to know what perfection is.

There are persons, however, who are not content with the general
principles of justice as a basis to ground a rule of finance upon, but
must have something, as they think, more specifically appropriate to the
subject. What best pleases them is, to regard the taxes paid by each
member of the community as an equivalent for value received, in the
shape of service to himself; and they prefer to rest the justice of
making each contribute in proportion to his means, upon the ground, that
he who has twice as much property to be protected, receives, on an
accurate calculation, twice as much protection, and ought, on the
principles of bargain and sale, to pay twice as much for it. Since,
however, the assumption that government exists solely for the protection
of property, is not one to be deliberately adhered to; some consistent
adherents of the quid pro quo principle go on to observe, that
protection being required for person as well as property, and
everybody's person receiving the same amount of protection, a poll-tax
of a fixed sum per head is a proper equivalent for this part of the
benefits of government, while the remaining part, protection to
property, should be paid for in proportion to property. There is in this
adjustment a false air of nice adaptation, very acceptable to some
minds. But in the first place, it is not admissible that the protection
of persons and that of property are the sole purposes of government. The
ends of government are as comprehensive as those of the social union.
They Edition: current; Page: [805] consist of all the good, and all the
immunity from evil, which the existence of government can be made either
directly or indirectly to bestow. In the second place, the practice of
setting definite values on things essentially indefinite, and making
them a ground of practical conclusions, is peculiarly fertile in false
views of social questions. It cannot be admitted, that to be protected
in the ownership of ten times as much property, is to be ten times as
much protected. Neither can it be truly said that the protection of
1000l. a year costs the state ten times as much as that of 100l. a year,
rather than twice as much, or exactly as much. The same judges,
soldiers, and sailors who protect the one protect the other, and the
larger income does not necessarily, though it may sometimes, require
even more policemen. Whether the labour and expense of the protection,
or the feelings of the protected person, or any other definite thing be
made the standard, there is no such proportion as the one supposed, nor
any other definable proportion. If we wanted to estimate the degrees of
benefit which different persons derive from the protection of
government, we should have to consider who would suffer most if that
protection were withdrawn: to which question if any answer could be
made, it must be, that those would suffer most who were weakest in mind
or body, either by nature or by position. Indeed, such persons would
almost infallibly be slaves. If there were any justice, therefore, in
the theory of justice now under consideration, those who are least
capable of helping or defending themselves, being those to whom the
protection of government is the most indispensable, ought to pay the
greatest share of its price: the reverse of the true idea of
distributive justice, which consists not in imitating but in redressing
the inequalities and wrongs of nature.

Government must be regarded as so pre-eminently a concern of all, that
to determine who are most interested in it is of no real importance. If
a person or class of persons receive so small a share of the benefit as
makes it necessary to raise the question, there is something else than
taxation which is amiss, and the thing to be done is to remedy the
defect, instead of recognizing it and making it a ground for demanding
less taxes. As, in a case of voluntary subscription for a purpose in
which all are interested, all are thought to have done their part fairly
when each has contributed according to his means, that is, has made an
equal sacrifice for the common object; in like manner should this be the
principle of compulsory contributions: and it is superfluous to look for
a more ingenious or recondite ground to rest the principle upon.

Edition: current; Page: [806]
§ 3. Setting out, then, from the maxim that equal sacrifices ought to be
demanded from all, we have next to inquire whether this is in fact done
by making each contribute the same percentage on his pecuniary means.
Many persons maintain the negative, saying that a tenth part taken from
a small income is a heavier burthen than the same fraction deducted from
one much larger: and on this is grounded the very popular scheme of what
is called a graduated property tax, viz. an income tax in which the
percentage rises with the amount of the income.

On the best consideration I am able to give to this question, it appears
to me that the portion of truth which the doctrine contains, arises
principally from the difference between a tax which can be saved from
luxuries, and one which trenches, in ever so small a degree, upon the
necessaries of life. To take a thousand a year from the possessor of ten
thousand, would not deprive him of anything really conducive either to
the support or to the comfort of existence; and if such would be the
effect of taking five pounds from one whose income is fifty, the
sacrifice required from the last is not only greater than, but entirely
incommensurable with, that imposed upon the first. The mode of adjusting
these inequalities of pressure, which seems to be the most equitable, is
that recommended by Bentham, of leaving a certain minimum of income,
sufficient to provide the necessaries of life, untaxed. Suppose 50l. a
year to be sufficient to provide the number of persons ordinarily
supported from a single income with the requisites of life and health,
and with protection against habitual bodily suffering, but not with any
indulgence. This then should be made the minimum, and incomes exceeding
it should pay taxes not upon their whole amount, but upon the surplus.
If the tax be ten per cent., an income of 60l. should be considered as a
net income of 10l., and charged with 1l. a year, while an income of
1000l. should be charged as one of 950l. Each would then pay a fixed
proportion, not of his whole means, but of his superfluities.∗ An income
not exceeding 50l. should not be taxed at all, either directly or by
taxes on necessaries; for as by supposition this is the smallest income
which labour ought to be able to command, the government ought not to be
a party to making it smaller. This arrangement, however, would
constitute a reason, in addition to Edition: current; Page: [807] others
which might be stated, for maintaining taxes on articles of luxury
consumed by the poor. The immunity extended to the income required for
necessaries, should depend on its being actually expended for that
purpose; and the poor who, not having more than enough for necessaries,
divert any part of it to indulgences, should like other people
contribute their quota out of those indulgences to the expenses of the
state.

The exemption in favour of the smaller incomes should not, I think, be
stretched further than to the amount of income needful for life, health,
and immunity from bodily pain. If 50l. a year is sufficient (which may
be doubted) for these purposes,1 an income of 100l. a year would, as it
seems to me, obtain al1 the relief it is entitled to, compared with one
of 1000l., by being taxed only on 50l. of its amount. It may be said,
indeed, that to take 100l. from 1000l. (even giving back five pounds) is
a heavier impost than 1000l. taken from 10,000l. (giving back the same
five pounds). But this doctrine seems to me too disputable altogether,
and even if true at all, not true to a sufficient extent, to be made the
foundation of any rule of taxation. Whether the person with 10,000l. a
year cares less for 1000l. than the person with only 1000l. a year cares
for 100l., and if so, how much less, does not appear to me capable of
being decided with the degree of certainty on which a legislator or a
financier ought to act.2

Some indeed contend that the rule of proportional taxation bears harder
upon the moderate than upon the large incomes, because the same
proportional payment has more tendency in the former case than in the
latter, to reduce the payer to a lower grade of social rank. The fact
appears to me more than questionable. But even admitting it, I object to
its being considered incumbent on government to shape its course by such
considerations, or to recognize the notion that social importance is or
can be determined by amount of expenditure. Government ought to set an
example of rating all things at their true value, and riches, therefore,
at the worth, for comfort or pleasure, of the things which they will
Edition: current; Page: [808] buy: and ought not to sanction the
vulgarity of prizing them for the pitiful vanity of being known to
possess them, or the paltry shame of being suspected to be without them,
the presiding motives of three-fourths of the expenditure of the middle
classes. The sacrifices of real comfort or indulgence which government
requires, it is bound to apportion among all persons with as much
equality as possible; but their sacrifices of the imaginary dignity
dependent on expense, it may spare itself the trouble of estimating.

Both in England and on the Continent a graduated property tax (l'impôt
progressif) has been advocated, on the avowed ground that the state
should use the instrument of taxation as a means of mitigating the
inequalities of wealth. I am as desirous as any one that means should be
taken to diminish those inequalities, but not so as to relieve the
prodigal at the expense of the prudent.1 To tax the larger incomes at a
higher percentage than the smaller is to lay a tax on industry and
economy; to impose a penalty on people for having worked harder and
saved more than their neighbours. It is not the fortunes which are
earned, but those which are unearned, that it is for the public good to
place under limitation.2 A just and wise legislation would abstain from
holding out motives for dissipating rather than saving the earnings of
honest exertion.3 Its impartiality between competitors would consist in
endeavouring that they should all start fair, and not in hanging a
weight upon the swift to diminish the distance between them and the
slow.4 Many, indeed, fail with greater efforts than those with which
others succeed, not from difference of merits, but difference of
opportunities; but if all were done which it would be in the power of a
good government to do, by instruction and by legislation, to diminish
this inequality of opportunities, the differences of fortune arising
from people's own earnings could not justly give umbrage.5 With Edition:
current; Page: [809] respect to the large fortunes acquired by gift or
inheritance, the power of bequeathing is1 one of those privileges of
property which are fit subjects for regulation on grounds of general
expediency; and I have already suggested,∗ as a possible mode2 of
restraining the accumulation of large fortunes in the hands of those who
have not earned them by exertion, a limitation of the amount which any
one person should be permitted to acquire by gift, bequest, or
inheritance. Apart from this, and from the proposal of Bentham (also
discussed in a former chapter) that collateral inheritance ab intestato
should cease, and the property escheat to the state, I conceive that
inheritances and legacies, exceeding a certain amount, are highly proper
subjects for taxation: and that the revenue from them should be as great
as it can be made without giving rise to evasions, by donation inter
vivos or concealment of property, such as it would be impossible
adequately to check. The principle of graduation (as it is called,) that
is, of levying a larger percentage on a larger sum, though its
application to general taxation would be in my opinion objectionable,3
seems to me both just and expedient4 as applied to legacy and
inheritance duties.5

The objection to a graduated property tax applies in an aggravated
degree to the proposition of an exclusive tax on what is called
“realized property,” that is, property not forming a part of any capital
engaged in business, or rather in business under the superintendence of
the owner: as land, the public funds, money lent on mortgage, and shares
(I presume) in joint-stock companies. Except the proposal of applying a
sponge to the national debt, no such palpable violation of common
honesty has found sufficient support in this country, during the present
generation, to be regarded as within the domain of discussion. It has
not the palliation of a Edition: current; Page: [810] graduated property
tax, that of laying the burthen on those best able to bear it; for
“realized property” includes the far larger portion of the provision
made for those who are unable to work, and consists, in great part, of
extremely small fractions. I can hardly conceive a more shameless
pretension, than that the major part of the property of the country,
that of merchants, manufacturers, farmers, and shopkeepers, should be
exempted from its share of taxation; that these classes should only
begin to pay their proportion after retiring from business, and if they
never retire should be excused from it altogether. But even this does
not give an adequate idea of the injustice of the proposition. The
burthen thus exclusively thrown on the owners of the smaller portion of
the wealth of the community, would not even be a burthen on that class
of persons in perpetual succession, but would fall exclusively on those
who happened to compose it when the tax was laid on. As land and those
particular securities would thenceforth yield a smaller net income,
relatively to the general interest of capital and to the profits of
trade; the balance would rectify itself by a permanent depreciation of
those kinds of property. Future buyers would acquire land and securities
at a reduction of price, equivalent to the peculiar tax, which tax they
would, therefore, escape from paying; while the original possessors
would remain burthened with it even after parting with the property,
since they would have sold their land or securities at a loss of value
equivalent to the fee-simple of the tax. Its imposition would thus be
tantamount to the confiscation for public uses of a percentage of their
property, equal to the percentage laid on their income by the tax. That
such a proposition should find any favour, is a striking instance of the
want of conscience in matters of taxation, resulting from the absence of
any fixed principles in the public mind, and of any indication of a
sense of justice on the subject in the general conduct of governments.
Should the scheme ever enlist a large party in its support, the fact
would indicate a laxity of pecuniary integrity in national affairs,
scarcely inferior to American repudiation.

§ 4. Whether the profits of trade may not rightfully be taxed at a lower
rate than incomes derived from interest or rent, is part of the more
comprehensive question, so often mooted on the occasion of the present
income tax, whether life incomes should be subjected to the same rate of
taxation as perpetual incomes: whether salaries, Edition: current; Page:
[811] for example, or annuities, or the gains of professions, should pay
the same percentage as the income from inheritable property.

The existing tax treats all kinds of incomes exactly alike, taking its
sevenpence (now [1871] fourpence) in the pound, as well from the person
whose income dies with him, as from the landholder, stockholder, or
mortgagee, who can transmit his fortune undiminished to his descendants.
This is a visible injustice: yet it does not arithmetically violate the
rule that taxation ought to be in proportion to means. When it is said
that a temporary income ought to be taxed less than a permanent one, the
reply is irresistible, that it is taxed less; for the income which lasts
only ten years pays the tax only ten years, while that which lasts for
ever pays for ever. 1 On this point some financial reformers are guilty
of a great fallacy. They contend that incomes ought to be assessed to
the income tax not in proportion to their annual amount, but to their
capitalized value: that, for example, if the value of a perpetual
annuity of 100l. is 3000l., and a life annuity of the same amount, being
worth only half the number of years' purchase, could only be sold for
1500l., the perpetual income should pay twice as much per cent income
tax as the terminable income; if the one pays 10l. a year the other
should pay only 5l. But in this argument there is the obvious oversight,
that it values the incomes by one standard and the payments by another;
it capitalizes the incomes, but forgets to capitalize the payments. An
annuity worth 3000l. ought, it is alleged, to be taxed twice as highly
as one which is only worth 1500l., and no assertion can be more
unquestionable; but it is forgotten that the income worth 3000l. pays to
the supposed income tax 10l. a year in perpetuity, which is equivalent,
by supposition, to 300l., while the terminable income pays the same 10l.
only during the life of its owner, which on the same calculation is a
value of 150l., and could actually be bought for that sum. Already,
therefore, the income which is only half as valuable, pays only half as
much to the tax; and if in addition to this its annual quota were
reduced from 10l. to 5l., it would pay, not half, but a fourth part only
of the payment demanded from the perpetual income. To make it just that
the one income should pay only half as much per annum as the other, it
would be necessary that it should pay that half for the same period,
that is, in perpetuity.

Edition: current; Page: [812]
1 The rule of payment which this school of financial reformers contend
for, would be very proper if the tax were only to be levied once, to
meet some national emergency. On the principle of requiring from all
payers an equal sacrifice, every person who had anything belonging to
him, reversioners included, would be called on for a payment
proportioned to the present value of his property. I wonder it does not
occur to the reformers in question, that precisely because this
principle of assessment would be just in the case of a payment made once
for all, it cannot possibly be just for a permanent tax. When each pays
only once, one person pays no oftener than another; and the proportion
which would be just in that case, cannot also be just if one person has
to make the payment only once, and the other several times. This,
however, is the type of the case which actually occurs. The permanent
incomes pay the tax as much oftener than the temporary ones, as a
perpetuity exceeds the certain or uncertain length of time which forms
the duration of the income for life or years.

2 All attempts to establish a claim in favour of terminable incomes on
numerical grounds—to make out, in short, that a proportional tax is not
a proportional tax—are manifestly absurd. The claim does not rest on
grounds of arithmetic, but of human wants and feelings. 3 It is not
because the temporary annuitant has smaller means, but because he has
greater necessities, that he ought to be assessed at a lower rate.

In spite of the nominal equality of income, A, an annuitant of 1000l. a
year, cannot so well afford to pay 100l. out of it, as B who derives the
same annual sum from heritable property; A having usually a demand on
his income which B has not, namely, to provide by saving for children or
others; to which, in the case of salaries or professional gains, must
generally be added a provision for his own later years; while B may
expend his whole income without injury to his old age, and still have it
all to bestow on others after his death. If A, in order to meet these
exigencies, must lay by 300l. of his income, to take 100l. from him as
income tax is to take 100l. from 700l., since it must be retrenched from
that part only of his means which he can afford to spend on his own
consumption. Were he to throw it rateably on what he spends and on what
he saves, abating 70l. Edition: current; Page: [813] from his
consumption and 30l. from his annual saving, then indeed his immediate
sacrifice would be proportionately the same as B's: but then his
children or his old age would be worse provided for in consequence of
the tax. The capital sum which would be accumulated for them would be
one-tenth less, and on the reduced income afforded by this reduced
capital, they would be a second time charged with income tax; while B's
heirs would only be charged once.

The principle, therefore, of equality of taxation, interpreted in its
only just sense, equality of sacrifice, requires that a person who has
no means of providing for old age, or for those in whom he is
interested, except by saving from income, should have the tax remitted
on all that part of his income which is really and bonâ fide applied to
that purpose.

1 If, indeed, reliance could be placed on the conscience of the
contributors, or sufficient security taken for the correctness of their
statements by collateral precautions, the proper mode of assessing an
income tax would be to tax only the part of income devoted to
expenditure, exempting that which is saved. For when saved and invested
(and all savings, speaking generally, are invested) it thenceforth pays
income tax on the interest or profit which it brings, notwithstanding
that it has already been taxed on the principal. Unless, therefore,
savings are exempted from income tax, the contributors are twice taxed
on what they save, and only once on what they spend. A person who spends
all he receives, pays 7d. in the pound, or say three per cent, to the
tax, and no more; but if he Edition: current; Page: [814] saves part of
the year's income and buys stock, then in addition to the three per cent
which he has paid on the principal, and which diminishes the interest in
the same ratio, he pays three per cent annually on the interest itself,
which is equivalent to an immediate payment of a second three per cent
on the principal. So that while unproductive expenditure pays only three
per cent, savings pay six per cent: or more correctly, three per cent on
the whole, and another three per cent on the remaining ninety-seven. The
difference thus created to the disadvantage of prudence and economy, is
not only impolitic but unjust. To tax the sum invested, and afterwards
to tax also the proceeds of the investment, is to tax the same portion
of the contributor's means twice over. The principal and the interest
cannot both together form part of his resources; they are the same
portion twice counted: if he has the interest, it is because he abstains
from using the principal; if he spends the principal, he does not
receive the interest. Yet because he can do either of the two, he is
taxed as if he could do both, and could have the benefit of the saving
and that of the spending, concurrently with one another.

1 It has been urged as an objection to exempting savings from taxation,
that the law ought not to disturb, by artificial interference, the
natural competition between the motives for saving and those for
spending. But we have seen that the law disturbs this natural
competition when it taxes savings, not when it spares them; for as the
savings pay at any rate the full tax as soon as they are invested, their
exemption from payment in the earlier stage is necessary to prevent them
from paying twice, while money spent in unproductive consumption pays
only once. It has been further objected, that since the rich have the
greatest means of saving, any privilege given to savings is an advantage
bestowed on the rich at the expense of the poor. I answer, that it is
bestowed on them only in proportion as they abdicate the personal use of
their riches; in proportion as they divert their income from the supply
of their own wants, to a productive investment, through which, instead
of being consumed by themselves, it is distributed in wages among the
poor. If this be favouring the rich, I should like to have it pointed
out, what mode of assessing taxation can deserve the name of favouring
the poor.

2 No income tax is really just from which savings are not exempted;
Edition: current; Page: [815] and no income tax ought to be voted
without that provision, if the form of the returns, and the nature of
the evidence required, could be so arranged as to prevent the exemption
from being taken fraudulent advantage of, by saving with one hand and
getting into debt with the other, or by spending in the following year
what had been passed tax-free as saving in the year preceding. If this
difficulty could be surmounted, the difficulties and complexities
arising from the comparative claims of temporary and permanent incomes,
would disappear; for, since temporary incomes have no just claim to
lighter taxation than permanent incomes, except in so far as their
possessors are more called upon to save, the exemption of what they do
save would fully satisfy the claim. But if no plan can be devised for
the exemption of actual savings, sufficiently free from liability to
fraud, it is necessary, as the next thing in point of justice, to take
into account in assessing the tax, what the different classes of
contributors ought to save. And there would probably be no other mode of
doing this than the rough expedient of two different rates of
assessment. There would be great difficulty in taking into account
differences of duration between one terminable income and another; and
in the most frequent case, that of incomes dependent on life,
differences of age and health would constitute such extreme diversity as
it would be impossible to take proper cognizance of. It would probably
be necessary to be content with one uniform rate for all incomes of
inheritance, and another uniform rate for all those which necessarily
terminate with the life of the individual. In fixing the proportion
between the two rates, there must inevitably be something arbitrary;
perhaps a deduction of one-fourth in favour of life-incomes would be as
little objectionable as any which could be made, it being thus assumed
that one-fourth of a life-income is, on the average of all ages and
states of health, a suitable proportion to be laid by as a provision for
successors and for old age.∗

Edition: current; Page: [816]
Of the net profits of persons in business, a part, as before observed,
may be considered as interest on capital, and of a perpetual character,
and the remaining part as remuneration for the skill and labour of
superintendence. The surplus beyond interest depends on the life of the
individual, and even on his continuance in business, and is entitled to
the full amount of exemption allowed to terminable incomes. 1 It has
also, I conceive, a just claim to a further amount of exemption in
consideration of its precariousness. An income which some not unusual
vicissitude may reduce to nothing, or even convert into a loss, is not
the same thing to the feelings of the possessor as a permanent income of
1000l. a year, even though on an average Edition: current; Page: [817]
of years it may yield 1000l. a year. If life-incomes were assessed at
three-fourths of their amount, the profits of business, after deducting
interest on capital, should not only be assessed at three-fourths, but
should pay, on that assessment, a lower rate. Or perhaps the claims of
justice in this respect might be sufficiently met by allowing the
deduction of a fourth on the entire income, interest included.

These are the chief cases, of ordinary occurrence, in which any
difficulty arises in interpreting the maxim of equality of taxation. The
proper sense to be put upon it, as we have seen in the preceding
example, is, that people should be taxed, not in proportion to what they
have, but to what they can afford to spend. It is no objection to this
principle that we cannot apply it consistently to all cases. A person
with a life-income and precarious health, or who has many persons
depending on his exertions, must, if he wishes to provide for them after
his death, be more rigidly economical than one who has a life-income of
equal amount, with a strong constitution, and few claims upon him; and
if it be conceded that taxation cannot accommodate itself to these
distinctions, it is argued that there is no use in attending to any
distinctions, where the absolute amount of income is the same. But the
difficulty of doing perfect justice is no reason against doing as much
as we can. Though it may be a hardship to an annuitant whose life is
only worth five years' purchase, to be allowed no greater abatement than
is granted to one whose life is worth twenty, it is better for him even
so, than if neither of them were allowed any abatement at all.1

§ 5. Before leaving the subject of Equality of Taxation, I must remark
that there are cases in which exceptions may be made to it, consistently
with that equal justice which is the groundwork of the rule. Suppose
that there is a kind of income which constantly tends to increase,
without any exertion or sacrifice on the part of the owners: those
owners constituting a class in the community, whom the natural course of
things progressively enriches, consistently with complete passiveness on
their own part. In such a case it Edition: current; Page: [818] would be
no violation of the principles on which private property is grounded, if
the state should appropriate this increase of wealth, or part of it, as
it arises. This would not properly be taking anything from anybody; it
would merely be applying an accession of wealth, created by
circumstances, to the benefit of society, instead of allowing it to
become an unearned appendage to the riches of a particular class.

Now this is actually the case with rent. The ordinary progress of a
society which increases in wealth, is at all times tending to augment
the incomes of landlords; to give them both a greater amount and a
greater proportion of the wealth of the community, independently of any
trouble or outlay incurred by themselves. They grow richer, as it were
in their sleep, without working, risking, or economizing. What claim
have they, on the general principle of social justice, to this accession
of riches? In what would they have been wronged if society had, from the
beginning, reserved the right of taxing the spontaneous increase of
rent, to the highest amount required by financial exigencies? I admit
that it would be unjust to come upon each individual estate, and lay
hold of the increase which might be found to have taken place in its
rental; because there would be no means of distinguishing in individual
cases, between an increase owing solely to the general circumstances of
society, and one which was the effect of skill and expenditure on the
part of the proprietor. The only admissible mode of proceeding would be
by a general measure. The first step should be a valuation of all the
land in the country. The present value of all land should be exempt from
the tax; but after an interval had elapsed, during which society had
increased in population and capital, a rough estimate might be made of
the spontaneous increase which had accrued to rent since the valuation
was made. Of this the average price of produce would be some criterion:
if that had risen, it would be certain that rent had increased, and (as
already shown) even in a greater ratio than the rise of price. On this
and other data, an approximate estimate might be made, how much value
had been added to the land of the country by natural causes; and in
laying on a general land-tax, which for fear of miscalculation should be
considerably within the amount thus indicated, there would be an
assurance of not touching any increase of income which might be the
result of capital expended or industry exerted by the proprietor.

But though there could be no question as to the justice of taxing the
increase of rent, if society had avowedly reserved the right, has
Edition: current; Page: [819] not society waived that right by not
exercising it? In England, for example, have not all who bought land for
the last century or more, given value not only for the existing income,
but for the prospects of increase, under an implied assurance of being
only taxed in the same proportion with other incomes? This objection, in
so far as valid, has a different degree of validity in different
countries; depending on the degree of desuetude into which society has
allowed a right to fall, which, as no one can doubt, it once fully
possessed. In most countries of Europe, the right to take by taxation,
as exigency might require, an indefinite portion of the rent of land,
has never been allowed to slumber. In several parts of the Continent,
the land-tax forms a large proportion of the public revenues, and has
always been confessedly liable to be raised or lowered without reference
to other taxes. In these countries no one can pretend to have become the
owner of land on the faith of never being called upon to pay an
increased land-tax. In England the land-tax has not varied since the
early part of the last century. The last act of the legislature in
relation to its amount, was to diminish it; and though the subsequent
increase in the rental of the country has been immense, not only from
agriculture, but from the growth of towns and the increase of buildings,
the ascendancy of landholders in the legislature has prevented any tax
from being imposed, as it so justly might, upon the very large portion
of this increase which was unearned, and, as it were, accidental. For
the expectations thus raised, it appears to me that an amply sufficient
allowance is made, if the whole increase of income which has accrued
during this long period from a mere natural law, without exertion or
sacrifice, is held sacred from any peculiar taxation. From the present
date, or any subsequent time at which the legislature may think fit to
assert the principle, I see no objection to declaring that the future
increment of rent should be liable to special taxation; in doing which
all injustice to the landlords would be obviated, if the present
market-price of their land were secured to them; since that includes the
present value of all future expectations. With reference to such a tax,
perhaps a safer criterion than either a rise of rents or a rise of the
price of corn, would be a general rise in the price of land. It would be
easy to keep the tax within the amount which would reduce the market
value of land below the original valuation: and up to that point,
whatever the amount of the tax might be, no injustice would be done to
the proprietors.1

Edition: current; Page: [820]
§ 6. But whatever may be thought of the legitimacy of making the State a
sharer in all future increase of rent from natural causes, the existing
land-tax (which in this country unfortunately is very small) ought not
to be regarded as a tax, but as a rent-charge in favour of the public; a
portion of the rent, reserved from the beginning by the State, which has
never belonged to or formed part of the income of the landlords, and
should not therefore be counted to them as part of their taxation, so as
to exempt them from their fair share of every other tax. As well might
the tithe be regarded as a tax on the landlords: as well, in Bengal,
where the State, though entitled to the whole rent of the land, gave
away one-tenth of it to individuals, retaining the other nine-tenths,
might those nine-tenths be considered as an unequal and unjust tax on
the grantees of the tenth. That a person owns part of the rent, does not
make the rest of it his just right, injuriously withheld from him. The
landlords originally held their estates subject to feudal burthens, for
which the present land-tax is an exceedingly small equivalent, and for
their relief from which they should have been required to pay a much
higher price. All who have bought land since the tax existed have bought
it subject to the tax. There is not the smallest pretence for looking
upon it as a payment exacted from the existing race of landlords.

These observations are applicable to a land-tax, only in so far as it is
a peculiar tax, and not when it is merely a mode of levying from the
landlords the equivalent of what is taken from other classes. In France,
for example, there are [1848] peculiar taxes on other kinds of property
and income (the mobilier and the patente); and supposing the land-tax to
be not more than equivalent to these, there would be no ground for
contending that the State had reserved to itself a rent-charge on the
land. But wherever and in so far as income derived from land is
prescriptively subject to a deduction for public purposes beyond the
rate of taxation levied on other incomes, the surplus is not properly
taxation, but a share of the property in the soil, reserved by the
state. In this country there are no peculiar taxes on other classes,
corresponding to, or intended to countervail, the land-tax. The whole of
it, therefore, is not taxation, but a rent-charge, and is as if the
state had retained, not a portion of the rent, but a portion of the
land. It is no more a burthen on the landlord, than the share of one
joint tenant is a burthen on the other. The landlords are entitled to no
compensation for it, nor have they any claim to its being allowed for,
as part of their Edition: current; Page: [821] taxes. Its continuance on
the existing footing is no infringement of the principle of Equal
Taxation.∗

We shall hereafter consider, in treating of Indirect Taxation, how far,
and with what modifications, the rule of equality is applicable to that
department.

§ 7. In addition to the preceding rules, another general rule of
taxation is sometimes laid down, namely, that it should fall on income,
and not on capital. That taxation should not encroach upon the amount of
the national capital, is indeed of the greatest importance; but this
encroachment, when it occurs, is not so much a consequence of any
particular mode of taxation, as of its excessive amount. Over-taxation,
carried to a sufficient extent, is quite capable of ruining the most
industrious community, especially when it is in any degree arbitrary, so
that the payer is never certain how much or how little he shall be
allowed to keep; or when it is so laid on as to render industry and
economy a bad calculation. But if these errors be avoided, and the
amount of taxation be not greater than it is at present even in the most
heavily taxed country of Europe, there is no danger lest it should
deprive the country of a portion of its capital.

To provide that taxation shall fall entirely on income, and not at all
on capital, is beyond the power of any system of fiscal arrangements.
There is no tax which is not partly paid from what would otherwise have
been saved; no tax, the amount of which, if remitted, would be wholly
employed in increased expenditure, and no part whatever laid by as an
addition to capital. All taxes, therefore, are in some sense partly paid
out of capital; and in a poor country it is impossible to impose any tax
which will not impede the increase of the national wealth. But in a
country where capital abounds, and the spirit of accumulation is strong,
this effect of taxation is scarcely felt. Capital having reached the
stage in which, were it not for a perpetual succession of improvements
in production, any further increase would soon be stopped—and having so
strong a tendency even to outrun those improvements, that profits are
only kept above the minimum by emigration of capital, or by a periodical
Edition: current; Page: [822] sweep called a commercial crisis; to take
from capital by taxation what emigration would remove, or a commercial
crisis destroy, is only to do what either of those causes would have
done, namely, to make a clear space for further saving.

I cannot, therefore, attach any importance, in a wealthy country, to the
objection made against taxes on legacies and inheritances, that they are
taxes on capital. It is perfectly true that they are so. As Ricardo
observes, if 100l. are taken from any one in a tax on houses or on wine,
he will probably save it, or a part of it, by living in a cheaper house,
consuming less wine, or retrenching from some other of his expenses; but
if the same sum be taken from him because he has received a legacy of
1000l., he considers the legacy as only 900l., and feels no more
inducement than at any other time (probably feels rather less
inducement) to economize in his expenditure. The tax, therefore, is
wholly paid out of capital: and there are countries in which this would
be a serious objection. But in the first place, the argument cannot
apply to any country which has a national debt, and devotes any portion
of revenue to paying it off; since the produce of the tax, thus applied,
still remains capital, and is merely transferred from the tax-payer to
the fundholder. But the objection is never applicable in a country which
increases rapidly in wealth. The amount which would be derived, even
from a very high legacy duty, in each year, is but a small fraction of
the annual increase of capital in such a country; and its abstraction
would but make room for saving to an equivalent amount: while the effect
of not taking it, is to prevent that amount of saving, or cause the
savings, when made, to be sent abroad for investment. A country which,
like England, accumulates capital not only for itself, but for half the
world, may be said to defray the whole of its public expenses from its
overflowings; and its wealth is probably at this moment as great as if
it had no taxes at all. What its taxes really do is, to subtract from
its means, not of production, but of enjoyment; since whatever any one
pays in taxes, he could, if it were not taken for that purpose, employ
in indulging his ease, or in gratifying some want or taste which at
present remains unsatisfied.

Edition: current; Page: [823]


CHAPTER III: of direct taxes

§ 1. Taxes are either direct or indirect. A direct tax is one which is
demanded from the very persons who, it is intended or desired, should
pay it. Indirect taxes are those which are demanded from one person in
the expectation and intention that he shall indemnify himself at the
expense of another: such as the excise or customs. The producer or
importer of a commodity is called upon to pay a tax on it, not with the
intention to levy a peculiar contribution upon him, but to tax through
him the consumers of the commodity, from whom it is supposed that he
will recover the amount by means of an advance in price.

Direct taxes are either on income, or on expenditure. Most taxes on
expenditure are indirect, but some are direct, being imposed not on the
producer or seller of an article, but immediately on the consumer. A
house-tax, for example, is a direct tax on expenditure, if levied, as it
usually is, on the occupier of the house. If levied on the builder or
owner, it would be an indirect tax. A window-tax is a direct tax on
expenditure; so are the taxes on horses and carriages, and the rest of
what are called the assessed taxes.

The sources of income are rent, profits, and wages. This includes every
sort of income, except gift or plunder. Taxes may be laid on any one of
the three kinds of income, or an uniform tax on all of them. We will
consider these in their order.

§ 2. A tax on rent falls wholly on the landlord. There are no means by
which he can shift the burthen upon any one else. It does not affect the
value or price of agricultural produce, for this is determined by the
cost of production in the most unfavourable circumstances, and in those
circumstances, as we have so often demonstrated, no rent is paid. A tax
on rent, therefore, has no Edition: current; Page: [824] effect, other
than its obvious one. It merely takes so much from the landlord, and
transfers it to the state.

This, however, is, in strict exactness, only true of the rent which is
the result either of natural causes, or of improvements made by tenants.
When the landlord makes improvements which increase the productive power
of his land, he is remunerated for them by an extra payment from the
tenant; and this payment, which to the landlord is properly a profit on
capital, is blended and confounded with rent; which indeed it really is,
to the tenant, and in respect of the economical laws which determine its
amount. A tax on rent, if extending to this portion of it, would
discourage landlords from making improvements: but it does not follow
that it would raise the price of agricultural produce. The same
improvements might be made with the tenant's capital, or even with the
landlord's if lent by him to the tenant; provided he is willing to give
the tenant so long a lease as will enable him to indemnify himself
before it expires. But whatever hinders improvements from being made in
the manner in which people prefer to make them, will often prevent them
from being made at all: and on this account a tax on rent would be
inexpedient, unless some means could be devised of excluding from its
operation that portion of the nominal rent which may be regarded as
landlord's profit. This argument, however, is not needed for the
condemnation of such a tax. A peculiar tax on the income of any class,
not balanced by taxes on other classes, is a violation of justice, and
amounts to a partial confiscation. I have already shown grounds for
excepting from this censure a tax which, sparing existing rents, should
content itself with appropriating a portion of any future increase
arising from the mere action of natural causes. But even this could not
be justly done, without offering as an alternative the market price of
the land. In the case of a tax on rent which is not peculiar, but
accompanied by an equivalent tax on other incomes, the objection
grounded on its reaching the profit arising from improvements is less
applicable: since, profits being taxed as well as rent, the profit which
assumes the form of rent is liable to its share in common with other
profits; 1 but since profits altogether ought, for reasons formerly
stated, to be taxed somewhat lower than rent properly so called, the
objection is only diminished, not removed.

§ 3. A tax on profits, like a tax on rent, must, at least in its
Edition: current; Page: [825] immediate operation, fall wholly on the
payer. All profits being alike affected, no relief can be obtained by a
change of employment. If a tax were laid on the profits of any one
branch of productive employment, the tax would be virtually an increase
of the cost of production, and the value and price of the article would
rise accordingly; by which the tax would be thrown upon the consumers of
the commodity, and would not affect profits. But a general and equal tax
on all profits would not affect general prices, and would fall, at least
in the first instance, on capitalists alone.

There is, however, an ulterior effect, which, in a rich and prosperous
country, requires to be taken into account. When the capital accumulated
is so great and the rate of annual accumulation so rapid, that the
country is only kept from attaining the stationary state by the
emigration of capital, or by continual improvements in production; any
circumstance which virtually lowers the rate of profit cannot be without
a decided influence on these phenomena. It may operate in different
ways. The curtailment of profit, and the consequent increased difficulty
in making a fortune or obtaining a subsistence by the employment of
capital, may act as a stimulus to inventions, and to the use of them
when made. If improvements in production are much accelerated, and if
these improvements cheapen, directly or indirectly, any of the things
habitually consumed by the labourer, profits may rise, and rise
sufficiently to make up for all that is taken from them by the tax. In
that case the tax will have been realized without loss to any one, the
produce of the country being increased by an equal, or what would in
that case be a far greater, amount. The tax, however, must even in this
case be considered as paid from profits, because the receivers of
profits are those who would be benefited if it were taken off.

But though the artificial abstraction of a portion of profits would have
a real tendency to accelerate improvements in production, no
considerable improvements might actually result, or only of such a kind
as not to raise general profits at all, or not to raise them so much as
the tax had diminished them. If so, the rate of profit would be brought
closer to that practical minimum to which it is constantly approaching:
and this diminished return to capital would either give a decided check
to further accumulation, or would cause a greater proportion than before
of the annual increase to be sent abroad, or wasted in unprofitable
speculations. At its first imposition the tax falls wholly on profits:
but the amount of increase of capital, which the tax prevents, would, if
it had been Edition: current; Page: [826] allowed to continue, have
tended to reduce profits to the same level; and at every period of ten
or twenty years there will be found less difference between profits as
they are, and profits as they would in that case have been: until at
last there is no difference, and the tax is thrown either upon the
labourer or upon the landlord. The real effect of a tax on profits is to
make the country possess at any given period, a smaller capital and a
smaller aggregate production, and to make the stationary state be
attained earlier, and with a smaller sum of national wealth. It is
possible that a tax on profits might even diminish the existing capital
of the country. If the rate of profit is already at the practical
minimum, that is, at the point at which all that portion of the annual
increment which would tend to reduce profits is carried off either by
exportation or by speculation; then if a tax is imposed which reduces
profits still lower, the same causes which previously carried off the
increase would probably carry off a portion of the existing capital. A
tax on profits is thus, in a state of capital and accumulation like that
in England, extremely detrimental to the national wealth. And this
effect is not confined to the case of a peculiar, and therefore
intrinsically unjust, tax on profits. The mere fact that profits have to
bear their share of a heavy general taxation, tends, in the same manner
as a peculiar tax, to drive capital abroad, to stimulate imprudent
speculations by diminishing safe gains, to discourage further
accumulation, and to accelerate the attainment of the stationary state.
This is thought to have been the principal cause of the decline of
Holland, or rather of her having ceased to make progress.

Even in countries which do not accumulate so fast as to be always within
a short interval of the stationary state, it seems impossible that, if
capital is accumulating at all, its accumulation should not be in some
degree retarded by the abstraction of a portion of its profit; and
unless the effect in stimulating improvements be a full counter-balance,
it is inevitable that a part of the burthen will be thrown off the
capitalist, upon the labourer or the landlord. One or other of these is
always the loser by a diminished rate of accumulation. If population
continues to increase as before, the labourer suffers: if not,
cultivation is checked in its advance, and the landlords lose the
accession of rent which would have accrued to them. The only countries
in which a tax on profits seems likely to be permanently a burthen on
capitalists exclusively, are those in which capital is stationary,
because there is no new accumulation. In such countries the tax might
not prevent the old capital from Edition: current; Page: [827] being
kept up through habit, or from unwillingness to submit to
impoverishment, and so the capitalist might continue to bear the whole
of the tax. It is seen from these considerations that the effects of a
tax on profits are much more complex, more various, and in some points
more uncertain, than writers on this subject have commonly supposed.

§ 4. We now turn to Taxes on Wages. The incidence of these is very
different, according as the wages taxed are those of ordinary unskilled
labour, or are the remuneration of such skilled or privileged
employments, whether manual or intellectual, as are taken out of the
sphere of competition by a natural or conferred monopoly.

I have already remarked, that in the present low state of popular
education, all the higher grades of mental or educated labour are at a
monopoly price; exceeding the wages of common workmen in a degree very
far beyond that which is due to the expense, trouble, and loss of time
required in qualifying for the employment. Any tax levied on these
gains, which still leaves them above (or not below) their just
proportion, falls on those who pay it; they have no means of relieving
themselves at the expense of any other class. The same thing is true of
ordinary wages, in cases like that of the United States, or of a new
colony, where, capital increasing as rapidly as population can increase,
wages are kept up by the increase of capital, and not by the adherence
of the labourers to a fixed standard of comforts. In such a case some
deterioration of their condition, whether by a tax or otherwise, might
possibly take place without checking the increase of population. The tax
would in that case fall on the labourers themselves, and would reduce
them prematurely to that lower state to which, on the same supposition
with regard to their habits, they would in any case have been reduced
ultimately, by the inevitable diminution in the rate of increase of
capital, through the occupation of all the fertile land.

Some will object that, even in this case, a tax on wages cannot be
detrimental to the labourers, since the money raised by it, being
expended in the country, comes back to the labourers again through the
demand for labour. The fallacy, however, of this doctrine has been so
completely exhibited in the First Book,∗ that I need do little more than
refer to that exposition. It was there shown that funds expended
unproductively have no tendency to raise or keep up wages, unless when
expended in the direct purchase of labour. If Edition: current; Page:
[828] the government took a tax of a shilling a week from every
labourer, and laid it all out in hiring labourers for military service,
public works, or the like, it would, no doubt, indemnify the labourers
as a class for all that the tax took from them. That would really be
“spending the money among the people.” But if it expended the whole in
buying goods, or in adding to the salaries of employés who bought goods
with it, this would not increase the demand for labour, or tend to raise
wages. Without, however, reverting to general principles, we may rely on
an obvious reductio ad absurdum. If to take money from the labourers and
spend it in commodities is giving it back to the labourers, then, to
take money from other classes, and spend it in the same manner, must be
giving it to the labourers; consequently, the more a government takes in
taxes, the greater will be the demand for labour, and the more opulent
the condition of the labourers. A proposition the absurdity of which no
one can fail to see.

In the condition of most communities, wages are regulated by the
habitual standard of living to which the labourers adhere, and on less
than which they will not multiply. Where there exists such a standard, a
tax on wages will indeed for a time be borne by the labourers
themselves; but unless this temporary depression has the effect of
lowering the standard itself, the increase of population will receive a
check, which will raise wages, and restore the labourers to their
previous condition. On whom, in this case, will the tax fall? According
to Adam Smith, on the community generally, in their character of
consumers; since the rise of wages, he thought, would raise general
prices. We have seen, however, that general prices depend on other
causes, and are never raised by any circumstance which affects all kinds
of productive employment in the same manner and degree. A rise of wages
occasioned by a tax, must, like any other increase of the cost of
labour, be defrayed from profits. To attempt to tax day-labourers, in an
old country, is merely to impose an extra tax upon all employers of
common labour; unless the tax has the much worse effect of permanently
lowering the standard of comfortable subsistence in the minds of the
poorest class.

We find in the preceding considerations an additional argument for the
opinion already expressed, that direct taxation should stop short of the
class of incomes which do not exceed what is necessary for healthful
existence. These very small incomes are mostly derived from manual
labour; and, as we now see, any tax imposed on Edition: current; Page:
[829] these, either permanently degrades the habits of the labouring
class, or falls on profits, and burthens capitalists with an indirect
tax, in addition to their share of the direct taxes; which is doubly
objectionable, both as a violation of the fundamental rule of equality,
and for the reasons which, as already shown, render a peculiar tax on
profits detrimental to the public wealth, and consequently to the means
which society possesses of paying any taxes whatever.

§ 5. We now pass, from taxes on the separate kinds of income, to a tax
attempted to be assessed fairly upon all kinds; in other words, an
Income Tax. The discussion of the conditions necessary for making this
tax consistent with justice, has been anticipated in the last chapter.
We shall suppose, therefore, that these conditions are complied with.
They are, first, that incomes below a certain amount should be
altogether untaxed. This minimum should not be higher than the amount
which suffices for the necessaries of the existing population. The
exemption from the present [1857] income tax, of all incomes under
100l., a year, and the lower percentage formerly levied on those between
100l., and 150l., are only defensible on the ground that almost all the
indirect taxes press more heavily on incomes between 50l., and 150l.,
than on any others whatever.1 The second condition is, that incomes
above the limit should be taxed only in proportion to the surplus by
which they exceed the limit. 2 Thirdly, that all sums saved from income
and invested, should be exempt from the tax: or if this be found
impracticable, that life incomes, and incomes from business and
professions, should be less heavily taxed than inheritable incomes, in a
degree as nearly as possible equivalent to the increased need of economy
arising from their terminable character: allowance being also made, in
the case of variable incomes, for their precariousness.

An income-tax, fairly assessed on these principles, would be, in point
of justice, the least exceptionable of all taxes. The objection to it,
in the present low state of public morality,3 is the impossibility of
ascertaining the real incomes of the contributors. The supposed Edition:
current; Page: [830] hardship of compelling people to disclose the
amount of their incomes, ought not, in my opinion, to count for much.
One of the social evils of this country is the practice, amounting to a
custom, of maintaining, or attempting to maintain, the appearance to the
world of a larger income than is possessed; and it would be far better
for the interest of those who yield to this weakness, if the extent of
their means were universally and exactly known, and the temptation
removed to expending more than they can afford, stinting real wants in
order to make a false show externally. At the same time, the reason of
the case, even on this point, is not so exclusively on one side of the
argument as is sometimes supposed. So long as the vulgar of any country
are in the debased state of mind which this national habit
presupposes—so long as their respect (if such a word can be applied to
it) is proportioned to what they suppose to be each person's pecuniary
means—it may be doubted whether anything which would remove all
uncertainty as to that point, would not considerably increase the
presumption and arrogance of the vulgar rich, and their insolence
towards those above them in mind and character, but below them in
fortune.

Notwithstanding, too, what is called the inquisitorial nature of the
tax, no amount of inquisitorial power which would be tolerated by a
people the most disposed to submit to it, could enable the revenue
officers to assess the tax from actual knowledge of the circumstances of
contributors. Rent, salaries, annuities, and all fixed incomes, can be
exactly ascertained. But the variable gains of professions, and still
more the profits of business, which the person interested cannot always
himself exactly ascertain, can still less be estimated with any approach
to fairness by a tax-collector. The main reliance must be placed, and
always has been placed, on the returns made by the person himself. No
production of accounts is of much avail, except against the more
flagrant cases of falsehood; and even against these the check is very
imperfect, for if fraud is intended, false accounts can generally be
framed which it will baffle any means of inquiry possessed by the
revenue officers to detect: the easy resource of omitting entries on the
credit side being often sufficient without the aid of fictitious debts
or disbursements. The tax, therefore, on whatever principles of equality
it may be imposed, is in practice unequal in one of the worst ways,
falling heaviest on the most conscientious. The unscrupulous succeed in
evading a great proportion of what they should pay; even persons of
integrity in their ordinary transactions are tempted to Edition:
current; Page: [831] palter with their consciences, at least to the
extent of deciding in their own favour all points on which the smallest
doubt or discussion could arise: while the strictly veracious may be
made to pay more than the state intended, by the powers of arbitrary
assessment necessarily intrusted to the Commissioners, as the last
defence against the tax-payer's power of concealment.

It is to be feared, therefore, that the fairness which belongs to the
principle of an income tax, cannot1 be made to attach to it in practice:
and that this tax, while apparently the most just of all modes of
raising a revenue, is in effect more unjust than many others which are
primâ facie more objectionable. This consideration would lead us to
concur in the opinion which, until of late, has usually prevailed—that
direct taxes on income should be reserved as an extraordinary resource
for great national emergencies, in which the necessity of a large
additional revenue overrules all objections.

The difficulties of a fair income tax have elicited a proposition for a
direct tax of so much per cent, not on income, but on expenditure; the
aggregate amount of each person's expenditure being ascertained, as the
amount of income now is, from statements furnished by the contributors
themselves. The author of this suggestion, Mr. Revans, in a clever
pamphlet on the subject,∗ contends that the returns which persons would
furnish of their expenditure would be more trustworthy than those which
they now make of their income, inasmuch as expenditure is in its own
nature more public than income, and false representations of it more
easily detected. He cannot, I think, have sufficiently considered, how
few of the items in the annual expenditure of most families can be
judged of with any approximation to correctness from the external signs.
The only security would still be the veracity of individuals, and there
is no reason for supposing that their statements would be more
trustworthy on the subject of their expenses than that of their
revenues; especially as, the expenditure of most persons being composed
of many more items than their income, there would be more scope for
concealment and suppression in the detail of expenses than even of
receipts.

The taxes on expenditure at present in force, either in this or in other
countries, fall only on particular kinds of expenditure, and Edition:
current; Page: [832] differ no otherwise from taxes on commodities than
in being paid directly by the person who consumes or uses the article,
instead of being advanced by the producer or seller, and reimbursed in
the price. The taxes on horses and carriages, on dogs, on servants, are
all of this nature. They evidently fall on the persons from whom they
are levied—those who use the commodity taxed. A tax of a similar
description, and more important, is a house-tax; which must be
considered at somewhat greater length.

§ 6. The rent of a house consists of two parts, the ground-rent, and
what Adam Smith calls the building-rent. The first is determined by the
ordinary principles of rent. It is the remuneration given for the use of
the portion of land occupied by the house and its appurtenances; and
varies from a mere equivalent for the rent which the ground would afford
in agriculture to the monopoly rents paid for advantageous situations in
populous thoroughfares. The rent of the house itself, as distinguished
from the ground, is the equivalent given for the labour and capital
expended on the building. The fact of its being received in quarterly or
half-yearly payments, makes no difference in the principles by which it
is regulated. It comprises the ordinary profit on the builder's capital,
and an annuity, sufficient at the current rate of interest, after paying
for all repairs chargeable on the proprietor, to replace the original
capital by the time the house is worn out, or by the expiration of the
usual term of a building lease.

A tax of so much per cent on the gross rent, falls on both those
portions alike. The more highly a house is rented, the more it pays to
the tax, whether the quality of the situation or that of the house
itself is the cause. The incidence, however, of these two portions of
the tax must be considered separately.

As much of it as is a tax on building-rent, must ultimately fall on the
consumer, in other words the occupier. For as the profits of building
are already not above the ordinary rate, they would, if the tax fell on
the owner and not on the occupier, become lower than the profits of
untaxed employments, and houses would not be built. It is probable
however that for some time after the tax was first imposed, a great part
of it would fall, not on the renter, but on the owner of the house. A
large proportion of the consumers either could not afford, or would not
choose, to pay their former rent with the tax in addition, but would
content themselves with a lower scale of accommodation. Houses therefore
would be for a time in Edition: current; Page: [833] excess of the
demand. The consequence of such excess, in the case of most other
articles, would be an almost immediate diminution of the supply: but so
durable a commodity as houses does not rapidly diminish in amount. New
buildings indeed, of the class for which the demand had decreased, would
cease to be erected, except for special reasons; but in the meantime the
temporary superfluity would lower rents, and the consumers would obtain
perhaps nearly the same accommodation as formerly for the same aggregate
payment, rent and tax together. By degrees, however, as the existing
houses wore out, or as increase of population demanded a greater supply,
rents would again rise; until it became profitable to recommence
building, which would not be until the tax was wholly transferred to the
occupier. In the end, therefore, the occupier bears that portion of a
tax on rent, which falls on the payment made for the house itself,
exclusively of the ground it stands on.

The case is partly different with the portion which is a tax on
ground-rent. As taxes on rent, properly so called, fall on the landlord,
a tax on ground-rent, one would suppose, must fall on the
ground-landlord, at least after the expiration of the building lease. It
will not, however, fall wholly on the landlord, unless with the tax on
ground-rent there is combined an equivalent tax on agricultural rent.
The lowest rent of land let for building is very little above the rent
which the same ground would yield in agriculture: since it is reasonable
to suppose that land, unless in case of exceptional circumstances, is
let or sold for building as soon as it is decidedly worth more for that
purpose than for cultivation. If, therefore, a tax were laid on
ground-rents without being also laid on agricultural rents, it would,
unless of trifling amount, reduce the return from the lowest
ground-rents below the ordinary return from land, and would check
further building quite as effectually as if it were a tax on
building-rents, until either the increased demand of a growing
population, or a diminution of supply by the ordinary causes of
destruction, had raised the rent by a full equivalent for the tax. But
whatever raises the lowest ground-rents, raises all others, since each
exceeds the lowest by the market value of its peculiar advantages. 1 If,
therefore, the tax on ground-rents were a fixed Edition: current; Page:
[834] sum per square foot, the more valuable situations paying no more
than those least in request, this fixed payment would ultimately fall on
the occupier. Suppose the lowest ground-rent to be 10l. per acre, and
the highest 1000l., a tax of 1l. per acre on ground-rents would
ultimately raise the former to 11l., and the latter consequently to
1001l., since the difference of value between the two situations would
be exactly what it was before: the annual pound, therefore, would be
paid by the occupier. But a tax on ground-rent is supposed to be a
portion of a house-tax, which is not a fixed payment, but a percentage
on the rent. The cheapest site, therefore, being supposed as before to
pay 1l., the dearest would pay 100l., of which only the 1l. could be
thrown upon the occupier, since the rent would still be only raised to
100l. Consequently, 99l. of the 100l. levied from the expensive site,
would fall on the ground-landlord. A house-tax thus requires to be
considered in a double aspect, as a tax on all occupiers of houses, and
a tax on ground-rents.

In the vast majority of houses, the ground-rent forms but a small
proportion of the annual payment made for the house, and nearly all the
tax falls on the occupier. It is only in exceptional cases, like that of
the favourite situations in large towns, that the predominant element in
the rent of the house is the ground-rent; and among the very few kinds
of income which are fit subjects for peculiar taxation, these
ground-rents hold the principal place, being the most gigantic example
extant of enormous accessions of riches acquired rapidly, and in many
cases unexpectedly, by a few families, from the mere accident of their
possessing certain tracts of land, without their having themselves aided
in the acquisition by the smallest exertion, outlay, or risk. So far
therefore as a house-tax falls on the ground-landlord, it is liable to
no valid objection.

In so far as it falls on the occupier, if justly proportioned to the
value of the house, it is one of the fairest and most unobjectionable of
all taxes. No part of a person's expenditure is a better criterion of
his means, or bears, on the whole, more nearly the same proportion to
them. A house-tax is a nearer approach to a fair income tax, than a
direct assessment on income can easily be; having the great advantage,
that it makes spontaneously all the allowances which it is so difficult
to make, and so impracticable to make exactly, Edition: current; Page:
[835] in assessing an income tax: for if what a person pays in
house-rent is a test of anything, it is a test not of what he possesses,
but of what he thinks he can afford to spend. The equality of this tax
can only be seriously questioned on two grounds. The first is, that a
miser may escape it. This objection applies to all taxes on expenditure:
nothing but a direct tax on income can reach a miser. But as misers do
not now hoard their treasure, but invest it in productive employments,
it not only adds to the national wealth, and consequently to the general
means of paying taxes, but the payment claimable from itself is only
transferred from the principal sum to the income afterwards derived from
it, which pays taxes as soon as it comes to be expended. The second
objection is, that a person may require a larger and more expensive
house, not from having greater means, but from having a larger family.
Of this, however, he is not entitled to complain; since having a large
family is at a person's own choice: and, so far as concerns the public
interest, is a thing rather to be discouraged than promoted.∗

A large portion of the taxation of this country is raised by a
house-tax. The parochial taxation of the towns entirely, and of the
rural districts partially, consists of an assessment on house-rent. The
window-tax, which was also a house-tax, but of a bad kind, operating as
a tax on light, and a cause of deformity in building, was exchanged in
1851 for a house-tax properly so called, but on a much lower scale than
that which existed previously to 1834. It is to be lamented that the new
tax retains the unjust principle on Edition: current; Page: [836] which
the old house-tax was assessed, and which contributed quite as much as
the selfishness of the middle classes to produce the outcry against the
tax. The public were justly scandalized on learning that residences like
Chatsworth or Belvoir were only rated on an imaginary rent of perhaps
200l. a year, under the pretext that owing to the great expense of
keeping them up, they could not be let for more. Probably, indeed, they
could not be let even for that, and if the argument were a fair one,
they ought not to have been taxed at all. But a house-tax is not
intended as a tax on incomes derived from houses, but on expenditure
incurred for them. The thing which it is wished to ascertain is what a
house costs to the person who lives in it, not what it would bring in if
let to some one else. When the occupier is not the owner, and does not
hold on a repairing lease, the rent he pays is the measure of what the
house costs him: but when he is the owner, some other measure must be
sought. A valuation should be made of the house, not at what it would
sell for, but at what would be the cost of rebuilding it, and this
valuation might be periodically corrected by an allowance for what it
had lost in value by time, or gained by repairs and improvements. The
amount of the amended valuation would form a principal sum, the interest
of which, at the current price of the public funds, would form the
annual value at which the building should be assessed to the tax.

As incomes below a certain amount ought to be exempt from income tax, so
ought houses below a certain value from house-tax, on the universal
principle of sparing from all taxation the absolute necessaries of
healthful existence. In order that the occupiers of lodgings, as well as
of houses, might benefit, as in justice they ought, by this exemption,
it might be optional with the owners to have every portion of a house
which is occupied by a separate tenant, valued and assessed separately,
as is now usually the case with chambers.

Edition: current; Page: [837]


CHAPTER IV: of taxes on commodities

§ 1. By taxes on commodities are commonly meant, those which are levied
either on the producers or on the carriers or dealers who intervene
between them and the final purchasers for consumption. Taxes imposed
directly on the consumers of particular commodities, such as a
house-tax, or the tax in this country on horses and carriages, might be
called taxes on commodities, but are not; the phrase being, by custom,
confined to indirect taxes those which are advanced by one person, to
be, as is expected and intended, reimbursed by another. Taxes on
commodities are either on production within the country, or on
importation into it, or on conveyance or sale within it; and are classed
respectively as excise, customs, or tolls and transit duties. To
whichever class they belong, and at whatever stage in the progress of
the community they may be imposed, they are equivalent to an increase of
the cost of production; using that term in its most enlarged sense,
which includes the cost of transport and distribution, or, in common
phrase, of bringing the commodity to market.

When the cost of production is increased artificially by a tax, the
effect is the same as when it is increased by natural causes. If only
one or a few commodities are affected, their value and price rise, so as
to compensate the producer or dealer for the peculiar burthen; but if
there were a tax on all commodities, exactly proportioned to their
value, no such compensation would be obtained: there would neither be a
general rise of values, which is an absurdity, nor of prices, which
depend on causes entirely different. There would, however, as Mr.
M'Culloch has pointed out, be a disturbance of values, some falling,
others rising, owing to a circumstance, the effect of which on values
and prices we formerly discussed; the different durability of the
capital employed in different occupations. The gross produce of industry
consists of two parts; one portion Edition: current; Page: [838] serving
to replace the capital consumed, while the other portion is profit. Now
equal capitals in two branches of production must have equal
expectations of profit; but if a greater portion of the one than of the
other is fixed capital, or if that fixed capital is more durable, there
will be a less consumption of capital in the year, and less will be
required to replace it, so that the profit, if absolutely the same, will
form a greater proportion of the annual returns. To derive from a
capital of 1000l. a profit of 100l., the one producer may have to sell
produce to the value of 1100l., the other only to the value of 500l. If
on these two branches of industry a tax be imposed of five per cent ad
valorem, the last will be charged only with 25l., the first with 55l.;
leaving to the one 75l. profit, to the other only 45l. To equalize,
therefore, their expectation of profit, the one commodity must rise in
price, or the other must fall, or both: commodities made chiefly by
immediate labour must rise in value, as compared with those which are
chiefly made by machinery. It is unnecessary to prosecute this branch of
the inquiry any further.

§ 2. A tax on any one commodity, whether laid on its production, its
importation, its carriage from place to place, or its sale, and whether
the tax be a fixed sum of money for a given quantity of the commodity,
or an ad valorem duty, will, as a general rule, raise the value and
price of the commodity by at least the amount of the tax. There are few
cases in which it does not raise them by more than that amount. In the
first place, there are few taxes on production on account of which it is
not found or deemed necessary to impose restrictive regulations on the
manufacturers or dealers, in order to check evasions of the tax. These
regulations are always sources of trouble and annoyance, and generally
of expense, for all of which, being peculiar disadvantages, the
producers or dealers must have compensation in the price of their
commodity. These restrictions also frequently interfere with the
processes of manufacture, requiring the producer to carry on his
operations in the way most convenient to the revenue, though not the
cheapest, or most efficient for purposes of production. Any regulations
whatever, enforced by law, make it difficult for the producer to adopt
new and improved processes. Further, the necessity of advancing the tax
obliges producers and dealers to carry on their business with larger
capitals than would otherwise be necessary, on the whole of which they
must receive the ordinary Edition: current; Page: [839] rate of profit,
though a part only is employed in defraying the real expenses of
production or importation. The price of the article must be such as to
afford a profit on more than its natural value, instead of a profit on
only its natural value. A part of the capital of the country, in short,
is not employed in production, but in advances to the state, repaid in
the price of goods; and the consumers must give an indemnity to the
sellers, equal to the profit which they could have made on the same
capital if really employed in production.∗ Neither ought it to be
forgotten, that whatever renders a larger capital necessary in any trade
or business, limits the competition in that business; and by giving
something like a monopoly to a few dealers, may enable them either to
keep up the price beyond what would afford the ordinary rate of profit,
or to obtain the ordinary rate of profit with a less degree of exertion
for improving and cheapening their commodity. In these several modes,
taxes on commodities often cost to the consumer, through the increased
price of the article, much more than they bring into the treasury of the
state. There is still another consideration. The higher price
necessitated by the tax, almost always checks the demand for the
commodity; and since there are many improvements in production which, to
make them practicable, require a certain extent of demand, such
improvements are obstructed, and many of them prevented altogether. It
is a well-known fact that the branches of production in which fewest
improvements are made are those with which the revenue officer
interferes; and that nothing, in general, gives a greater impulse to
improvements in the production of a commodity, than taking off a tax
which narrowed the market for it.

§ 3. Such are the effects of taxes on commodities, considered
generally;. but as there are some commodities (those composing the
necessaries of the labourer) of which the values have an influence on
the distribution of wealth among different classes of the community, it
is requisite to trace the effects of taxes on those particular articles
somewhat farther. If a tax be laid, say on corn, and the Edition:
current; Page: [840] price rises in proportion to the tax, the rise of
price may operate in two ways. First: it may lower the condition of the
labouring classes; temporarily indeed it can scarcely fail to do so. If
it diminishes their consumption of the produce of the earth, or makes
them resort to a food which the soil produces more abundantly, and
therefore more cheaply, it to that extent contributes to throw back
agriculture upon more fertile lands or less costly processes, and to
lower the value and price of corn; which therefore ultimately settles at
a price, increased not by the whole amount of the tax, but by only a
part of its amount. Secondly, however, it may happen that the dearness
of the taxed food does not lower the habitual standard of the labourer's
requirements, but that wages, on the contrary, through an action on
population, rise, in a shorter or longer period, so as to compensate the
labourers for their portion of the tax; the compensation being of course
at the expense of profits. Taxes on necessaries must thus have one of
two effects. Either they lower the condition of the labouring classes;
or they exact from the owners of capital, in addition to the amount due
to the state on their own necessaries, the amount due on those consumed
by the labourers. In the last case, the tax on necessaries, like a tax
on wages, is equivalent to a peculiar tax on profits; which is, like all
other partial taxation, unjust, and is specially prejudicial to the
increase of the national wealth.

It remains to speak of the effect on rent. Assuming (what is usually the
fact) that the consumption of food is not diminished, the same
cultivation as before will be necessary to supply the wants of the
community; the margin of cultivation, to use Dr. Chalmers expression,
remains where it was; and the same land or capital which, as the least
productive, already regulated the value and price of the whole produce,
will continue to regulate them. The effect which a tax on agricultural
produce will have on rent, depends on its affecting or not affecting the
difference between the return to this least productive land or capital,
and the returns to other lands and capitals. Now this depends on the
manner in which the tax is imposed. If it is an ad valorem tax, or what
is the same thing, a fixed proportion of the produce, such as tithe for
example, it evidently lowers corn-rents. For it takes more corn from the
better lands than from the worse; and exactly in the degree in which
they are better; land of twice the productiveness paying twice as much
to the tithe. Whatever takes more from the greater of two quantities
than from the less, diminishes the difference between Edition: current;
Page: [841] them. The imposition of a tithe on corn would take a tithe
also from corn-rent: for if we reduce a series of numbers by a tenth
each, the differences between them are reduced one-tenth.

For example, let there be five qualities of land, which severally yield,
on the same extent of ground, and with the same expenditure, 100, 90,
80, 70, and 60 bushels of wheat; the last of these being the lowest
quality which the demand for food renders it necessary to cultivate. The
rent of these lands will be as follows:—

[lf0199_figure_004.jpg]

Now let a tithe be imposed, which takes from these five pieces of land
10, 9, 8, 7, and 6 bushels respectively, the fifth quality still being
the one which regulates the price, but returning to the farmer, after
payment of tithe, no more than 54 bushels:—

[lf0199_figure_005.jpg]

and that producing 60 bushels, reduced to 54, will yield, as before, no
rent. So that the rent of the first quality of land has lost four
bushels; of the second, three; of the third, two; and of the fourth,
one: that is, each has lost exactly one-tenth. A tax, therefore, of a
fixed proportion of the produce, lowers, in the same proportion,
corn-rent.

But it is only corn-rent that is lowered, and not rent estimated in
money, or in any other commodity. For, in the same proportion as
corn-rent is reduced in quantity, the corn composing it is raised in
value. Under the tithe, 54 bushels will be worth in the market what 60
were before; and nine-tenths will in all cases sell for as much as the
whole ten-tenths previously sold for. The landlords will therefore be
compensated in value and price for what they lose in quantity; and will
suffer only so far as they consume their rent in kind, or after
receiving it in money, expend it in agricultural produce: that is, they
only suffer as consumers of agricultural produce, and in common with all
the other consumers. Considered Edition: current; Page: [842] as
landlords, they have the same income as before; the tithe, therefore,
falls on the consumer, and not on the landlord.

The same effect would be produced on rent, if the tax, instead of being
a fixed proportion of the produce, were a fixed sum per quarter or per
bushel. A tax which takes a shilling for every bushel, takes more
shillings from one field than from another, just in proportion as it
produces more bushels; and operates exactly like tithe, except that
tithe is not only the same proportion on all lands, but is also the same
proportion at all times, while a fixed sum of money per bushel will
amount to a greater or a less proportion, according as corn is cheap or
dear.

There are other modes of taxing agriculture, which would affect rent
differently. A tax proportioned to the rent would fall wholly on the
rent and would not at all raise the price of corn, which is regulated by
the portion of the produce that pays no rent. A fixed tax of so much per
cultivated acre, without distinction of value, would have effects
directly the reverse. Taking no more from the best qualities of land
than from the worst, it would leave the differences the same as before,
and consequently the same corn-rents, and the landlords would profit to
the full extent of the rise of price. To put the thing in another
manner; the price must rise sufficiently to enable the worst land to pay
the tax; thus enabling all lands which produce more than the worst, to
pay not only the tax, but also an increased rent to the landlords.
These, however, are not so much taxes on the produce of land, as taxes
on the land itself. Taxes on the produce, properly so called, whether
fixed or ad valorem, do not affect rent, but fall on the consumer:
profits, however, generally bearing either the whole or the greatest
part of the portion which is levied on the consumption of the labouring
classes.

§ 4. The preceding is, I apprehend, a correct statement of the manner in
which taxes on agricultural produce operate when first laid on. When,
however, they are of old standing, their effect may be different, as was
first pointed out, I believe, by Mr. Senior. It is, as we have seen, an
almost infallible consequence of any reduction of profits, to retard the
rate of accumulation. Now the effect of accumulation, when attended by
its usual accompaniment, an increase of population, is to increase the
value and price of food, to raise rent, and to lower profits: that is,
to do precisely what is done by a tax on agricultural produce, except
that this does not raise rent. The tax, therefore, merely anticipates
the rise of price, and fall Edition: current; Page: [843] of profits,
which would have taken place ultimately through the mere progress of
accumulation; while it at the same time prevents, or at least retards,
that progress. If the rate of profit was such, previous to the
imposition of a tithe, that the effect of the tithe reduces it to the
practical minimum, the tithe will put a stop to all further
accumulation, or cause it to take place out of the country; and the only
effect which the tithe will then have had on the consumer is to make him
pay earlier the price which he would have had to pay somewhat later—part
of which, indeed, in the gradual progress of wealth and population, he
would have almost immediately begun to pay. After a lapse of time which
would have admitted of a rise of one-tenth through the natural progress
of wealth, the consumer will be paying no more than he would have paid
if the tithe had never existed; he will have ceased to pay any portion
of it, and the person who will really pay it is the landlord, whom it
deprives of the increase of rent which would by that time have accrued
to him. At every successive point in this interval of time, less of the
burthen will rest on the consumer, and more of it on the landlord: and
in the ultimate result, the minimum of profits will be reached with a
smaller capital and population, and a lower rental, than if the course
of things had not been disturbed by the imposition of the tax. If, on
the other hand, the tithe or other tax on agricultural produce does not
reduce profits to the minimum, but to something above the minimum,
accumulation will not be stopped, but only slackened: and if population
also increases, the two-fold increase will continue to produce its
effects—a rise of the price of corn, and an increase of rent. These
consequences, however, will not take place with the same rapidity as if
the higher rate of profit had continued. At the end of twenty years the
country will have a smaller population and capital than, but for the
tax, it would by that time have had; the landlords will have a smaller
rent; and the price of corn, having increased less rapidly than it would
otherwise have done, will not be so much as a tenth higher than what, if
there had been no tax, it would by that time have become. A part of the
tax, therefore, will already have ceased to fall on the consumer, and
devolved upon the landlord; and the proportion will become greater and
greater by lapse of time.

Mr. Senior illustrates this view of the subject by likening the effects
of tithes, or other taxes on agricultural produce to those of natural
sterility of soil. If the land of a country without access to foreign
supplies were suddenly smitten with a permanent deterioration of
quality, to an extent which would make a tenth more Edition: current;
Page: [844] labour necessary to raise the existing produce, the price of
corn would undoubtedly rise one-tenth. But it cannot hence be inferred
that if the soil of the country had from the beginning been one-tenth
worse than it is, corn would at present have been one-tenth dearer than
we find it. It is far more probable, that the smaller return to labour
and capital, ever since the first settlement of the country, would have
caused in each successive generation a less rapid increase than has
taken place: that the country would now have contained less capital, and
maintained a smaller population, so that notwithstanding the inferiority
of the soil, the price of corn would not have been higher, nor profits
lower, than at present; rent alone would certainly have been lower. We
may suppose two islands, which, being alike in extent, in natural
fertility, and industrial advancement, have up to a certain time been
equal in population and capital, and have had equal rentals, and the
same price of corn. Let us imagine a tithe imposed in one of these
islands, but not in the other. There will be immediately a difference in
the price of corn, and therefore probably in profits. While profits are
not tending downwards in either country, that is, while improvements in
the production of necessaries fully keep pace with the increase of
population, this difference of prices and profits between the islands
may continue. But if, in the untithed island, capital increases, and
population along with it, more than enough to counterbalance any
improvements which take place, the price of corn will gradually rise,
profits will fall, and rent will increase; while in the tithed island
capital and population will either not increase (beyond what is balanced
by the improvements), or if they do, will increase in a less degree; so
that rent and the price of corn will either not rise at all, or rise
more slowly. Rent, therefore, will soon be higher in the untithed than
in the tithed island, and profits not so much higher, nor corn so much
cheaper, as they were on the first imposition of the tithe. These
effects will be progressive. At the end of every ten years there will be
a greater difference between the rentals and between the aggregate
wealth and population of the two islands, and a less difference in
profits and in the price of corn.

At what point will these last differences entirely cease, and the
temporary effect of taxes on agricultural produce, in raising the price,
have entirely given place to the ultimate effect, that of limiting the
total produce of the country? Though the untithed island is always
verging towards the point at which the price of food would overtake that
in the tithed island, its progress towards Edition: current; Page: [845]
that point naturally slackens as it draws nearer to attaining it;
since—the difference between the two islands in the rapidity of
accumulation depending upon the difference in the rates of profit—in
proportion as these approximate, the movement which draws them closer
together abates of its force. The one may not actually overtake the
other, until both islands reach the minimum of profits: up to that
point, the tithed island may continue more or less ahead of the untithed
island in the price of corn: considerably ahead if it is far from the
minimum, and is therefore accumulating rapidly. very little ahead if it
is near the minimum, and accumulating slowly.

But whatever is true of the tithed and untithed islands in our
hypothetical case, is true of any country having a tithe, compared with
the same country if it had never had a tithe.

In England the great emigration of capital, and the almost periodical
occurrence of commercial crises through the speculations occasioned by
the habitually low rate of profit, are indications that profit has
attained the practical, though not the ultimate minimum, and that all
the savings which take place (beyond what improvements, tending to the
cheapening of necessaries, make room for) are either sent abroad for
investment, or periodically swept away. There can therefore, I think, be
little doubt that if England had never had a tithe, or any tax on
agricultural produce, the price of corn would have been by this time as
high, and the rate of profits as low, as at present. Independently of
the more rapid accumulation which would have taken place if profits had
not been prematurely lowered by these imposts; the mere saving of a part
of the capital which has been wasted in unsuccessful speculations, and
the keeping at home a part of that which has been sent abroad, would
have been quite sufficient to produce the effect. I think, therefore,
with Mr. Senior, that the tithe, even before its commutation, had ceased
to be a cause of high prices or low profits, and had become a mere
deduction from rent; its other effects being, that it caused the country
to have no greater capital, no larger production, and no more numerous
population than if it had been one-tenth less fertile than it is; or let
us rather say one-twentieth (considering how great a portion of the land
of Great Britain was tithe-free).

But though tithes and other taxes on agricultural produce, when of long
standing, either do not raise the price of food and lower profits at
all, or, if at all, not in proportion to the tax; yet the abrogation of
such taxes, when they exist, does not the less Edition: current; Page:
[846] diminish price, and, in general, raise the rate of profit. The
abolition of a tithe takes one-tenth from the cost of production, and
consequently from the price, of all agricultural produce; and unless it
permanently raises the labourer's requirements, it lowers the cost of
labour, and raises profits. Rent, estimated in money or in commodities,
generally remains as before; estimated in agricultural produce, it is
raised. The country adds as much by the repeal of a tithe, to the margin
which intervenes between it and the stationary state, as is cut off from
that margin by a tithe when first imposed. Accumulation is greatly
accelerated; and if population also increases, the price of corn
immediately begins to recover itself, and rent to rise; thus gradually
transferring the benefit of the remission, from the consumer to the
landlord.

The effects which thus result from abolishing tithe, result equally from
what has been done by the arrangements under the Commutation Act for
converting it into a rent-charge. When the tax, instead of being levied
on the whole produce of the soil, is levied only from the portions which
pay rent, and does not touch any fresh extension of cultivation, the tax
no longer forms any part of the cost of production of the portion of the
produce which regulates the price of all the rest. The land or capital
which pays no rent, can now send its produce to market one-tenth
cheaper. The commutation of tithe ought therefore to have produced a
considerable fall in the average price of corn. If it had not come so
gradually into operation, and if the price of corn had not during the
same period been under the influence of several other causes of change,
the effect would probably have been markedly conspicuous. As it is,
there can be no doubt that this circumstance has had its share in the
fall which has taken place in the cost of production and in the price of
home-grown produce; though the effects of the great agricultural
improvements which have been simultaneously advancing, and of the free
admission of agricultural produce from foreign countries,1 have masked
those of the other cause. This fall of price would not in itself have
any tendency injurious to the landlord, since corn-rents are increased
in the same ratio in which the price of corn is diminished. But neither
does it in any way tend to increase his income. The rent-charge,
therefore, which is substituted for tithe, is a dead loss to him at the
expiration of existing leases: and the commutation of tithe was not a
mere alteration in the mode Edition: current; Page: [847] in which the
landlord bore an existing burthen, but the imposition of a new one;
relief being afforded to the consumer at the expense of the landlord,
who, however, begins immediately to receive progressive indemnification
at the consumer's expense, by the impulse given to accumulation and
population.

§ 5. We have hitherto inquired into the effects of taxes on commodities,
on the assumption that they are levied impartially on every mode in
which the commodity can be produced or brought to market. Another class
of considerations is opened, if we suppose that this impartiality is not
maintained, and that the tax is imposed, not on the commodity, but on
some particular mode of obtaining it.

Suppose that a commodity is capable of being made by two different
processes; as a manufactured commodity may be produced either by hand or
by steam-power; sugar may be made either from the sugar-cane or from
beet-root, cattle fattened either on hay and green crops, or on oil-cake
and the refuse of breweries. It is the interest of the community that,
of the two methods, producers should adopt that which produces the best
article at the lowest price. This being also the interest of the
producers, unless protected against competition, and shielded from the
penalties of indolence; the process most advantageous to the community
is that which, if not interfered with by government, they ultimately
find it to their advantage to adopt. Suppose however that a tax is laid
on one of the processes, and no tax at all, or one of smaller amount, on
the other. If the taxed process is the one which the producers would not
have adopted, the measure is simply nugatory. But if the tax falls, as
it is of course intended to do, upon the one which they would have
adopted, it creates an artificial motive for preferring the untaxed
process, though the inferior of the two. If, therefore, it has any
effect at all, it causes the commodity to be produced of worse quality,
or at a greater expense of labour; it causes so much of the labour of
the community to be wasted, and the capital employed in supporting and
remunerating the labour to be expended as uselessly as if it were spent
in hiring men to dig holes and fill them up again. This waste of labour
and capital constitutes an addition to the cost of production of the
commodity, which raises its value and price in a corresponding ratio,
and thus the owners of the capital are indemnified. The loss falls on
the consumers; though the capital of the country is also eventually
Edition: current; Page: [848] diminished, by the diminution of their
means of saving, and in some degree, of their inducements to save.

The kind of tax, therefore, which comes under the general denomination
of a discriminating duty, transgresses the rule that taxes should take
as little as possible from the tax-payer beyond what they bring into the
treasury of the state. A discriminating duty makes the consumer pay two
distinct taxes, only one of which is paid to the government, and that
frequently the less onerous of the two. If a tax were laid on sugar
produced from the cane, leaving the sugar from beet-root untaxed, then
in so far as cane sugar continued to be used, the tax on it would be
paid to the treasury, and might be as objectionable as most other taxes;
but if cane sugar, having previously been cheaper than beet-root sugar,
was now dearer, and beet-root sugar was to any considerable amount
substituted for it, and fields laid out and manufactories established in
consequence, the government would gain no revenue from the beet-root
sugar, while the consumers of it would pay a real tax. They would pay
for beet-root sugar more than they had previously paid for cane sugar,
and the difference would go to indemnify producers for a portion of the
labour of the country actually thrown away, in producing by the labour
of (say) three hundred men, what could be obtained by the other process
with the labour of two hundred.

One of the commonest cases of discriminating duties, is that of a tax on
the importation of a commodity capable of being produced at home,
unaccompanied by an equivalent tax on the home production. A commodity
is never permanently imported, unless it can be obtained from abroad at
a smaller cost of labour and capital on the whole, than is necessary for
producing it. If, therefore, by a duty on the importation, it is
rendered cheaper to produce the article than to import it, an extra
quantity of labour and capital is expended, without any extra result.
The labour is useless, and the capital is spent in paying people for
laboriously doing nothing. All custom duties which operate as an
encouragement to the home production of the taxed article, are thus an
eminently wasteful mode of raising a revenue.

This character belongs in a peculiar degree to custom duties on the
produce of land, unless countervailed by excise duties on the home
production. Such taxes bring less into the public treasury, compared
with what they take from the consumers, than any other imposts to which
civilized nations are usually subject. If the Edition: current; Page:
[849] wheat produced in a country is twenty millions of quarters, and
the consumption twenty-one millions, a million being annually imported,
and if on this million a duty is laid which raises the price ten
shillings per quarter, the price which is raised is not that of the
million only, but of the whole twenty-one millions. Taking the most
favourable, but extremely improbable, supposition, that the importation
is not at all checked, nor the home production enlarged, the state gains
a revenue of only half a million, while the consumers are taxed ten
millions and a half; the ten millions being a contribution to the home
growers, who are forced by competition to resign it all to the
landlords. The consumer thus pays to the owners of land an additional
tax, equal to twenty times that which he pays to the state. Let us now
suppose that the tax really checks importation. Suppose importation
stopped altogether in ordinary years; it being found that the million of
quarters can be obtained, by a more elaborate cultivation, or by
breaking up inferior land, at a less advance than ten shillings upon the
previous price—say, for instance, five shillings a quarter. The revenue
now obtains nothing, except from the extraordinary imports which may
happen to take place in a season of scarcity. But the consumers pay
every year a tax of five shillings on the whole twenty-one millions of
quarters, amounting to 5¼ millions sterling. Of this the odd 250,000l.
goes to compensate the growers of the last million of quarters for the
labour and capital wasted under the compulsion of the law. The remaining
five millions go to enrich the landlords as before.

Such is the operation of what are technically termed Corn Laws, when
first laid on; and such continues to be their operation, so long as they
have any effect at all in raising the price of corn. But I am by no
means of opinion that in the long run they keep up either prices or
rents in the degree which these considerations might lead us to suppose.
What we have said respecting the effect of tithes and other taxes on
agricultural produce, applies in a great degree to corn laws: they
anticipate artificially a rise of price and of rent, which would at all
events have taken place through the increase of population and of
production. The difference between a country without corn laws, and a
country which has long had corn laws, is not so much that the last has a
higher price or a larger rental, but that it has the same price and the
same rental with a smaller aggregate capital and a smaller population.
The imposition of corn laws raises rents, but retards that progress of
accumulation which would in no long period have raised them fully as
much. The repeal of Edition: current; Page: [850] corn laws tends to
lower rents, but it unchains a force which, in a progressive state of
capital and population, restores and even increases the former amount.
There is every reason to expect that under the virtually free
importation of agricultural produce, at last extorted from the ruling
powers of this country, the price of food, if population goes on
increasing, will gradually but steadily rise; though this effect may for
a time be postponed by the strong current which in this country has set
in (and the impulse is extending itself to other countries) towards the
improvement of agricultural science, and its increased application to
practice.

What we have said of duties on importation generally, is equally
applicable to discriminating duties which favour importation from one
place or in one particular manner, in contradistinction to others: such
as the preference given to the produce of a colony, or of a country with
which there is a commercial treaty: or the higher duties formerly
imposed by our navigation laws on goods imported in other than British
shipping. Whatever else may be alleged in favour of such distinctions,
whenever they are not nugatory, they are economically wasteful. They
induce a resort to a more costly mode of obtaining a commodity, in lieu
of one less costly, and thus cause a portion of the labour which the
country employs in providing itself with foreign commodities, to be
sacrificed without return.

§ 6. There is one more point relating to the operation of taxes on
commodities conveyed from one country to another, which requires notice:
the influence which they exert on international exchanges. Every tax on
a commodity tends to raise its price, and consequently to lessen the
demand for it in the market in which it is sold. All taxes on
international trade tend, therefore, to produce a disturbance and a
readjustment of what we have termed the Equation of International
Demand. This consideration leads to some rather curious consequences,
which have been pointed out in the separate essay on International
Commerce, already several times referred to in this treatise.

Taxes on foreign trade are of two kinds—taxes on imports, and on
exports. On the first aspect of the matter it would seem that both these
taxes are paid by the consumers of the commodity; that taxes on exports
consequently fall entirely on foreigners, taxes on imports wholly on the
home consumer. The true state of the case, however, is much more
complicated.

“By taxing exports, we may, in certain circumstances, produce Edition:
current; Page: [851] a division of the advantage of the trade more
favourable to ourselves. In some cases we may draw into our coffers, at
the expense of foreigners, not only the whole tax, but more than the
tax: in other cases, we should gain exactly the tax; in others, less
than the tax. In this last case, a part of the tax is borne by
ourselves: possibly the whole, possibly even, as we shall show, more
than the whole.”

Reverting to the supposititious case employed in the Essay, of a trade
between Germany and England in broadcloth and linen, “suppose that
England taxes her export of cloth, the tax not being supposed high
enough to induce Germany to produce cloth for herself. The price at
which cloth can be sold in Germany is augmented by the tax. This will
probably diminish the quantity consumed. It may diminish it so much
that, even at the increased price, there will not be required so great a
money value as before. Or it may not diminish it at all, or so little,
that in consequence of the higher price, so great a money value will be
purchased than before. In this last case, England will gain, at the
expense of Germany, not only the whole amount of the duty, but more;
for, the money value of her exports to Germany being increased, while
her imports remain the same, money will flow into England from Germany.
The price of cloth will rise in England, and consequently in Germany;
but the price of linen will fall in Germany, and consequently in
England. We shall export less cloth, and import more linen, till the
equilibrium is restored. It thus appears (what is at first sight
somewhat remarkable) that by taxing her exports, England would, in some
conceivable circumstances, not only gain from her foreign customers the
whole amount of the tax, but would also get her imports cheaper. She
would get them cheaper in two ways; for she would obtain them for less
money, and would have more money to purchase them with. Germany, on the
other hand, would suffer doubly: she would have to pay for her cloth a
price increased not only by the duty, but by the influx of money into
England, while the same change in the distribution of the circulating
medium would leave her less money to purchase it with.

“This, however, is only one of three possible cases. If, after the
imposition of the duty, Germany requires so diminished a quantity of
cloth, that its total value is exactly the same as before, the balance
of trade would be undisturbed; England will gain the duty, Germany will
lose it, and nothing more. If, again, the imposition of the duty
occasions such a falling off in the demand that Germany requires a less
pecuniary value than before, our Edition: current; Page: [852] exports
will no longer pay for our imports; money must pass from England into
Germany; and Germany's share of the advantage of the trade will be
increased. By the change in the distribution of money, cloth will fall
in England; and therefore it will, of course, fall in Germany. Thus
Germany will not pay the whole of the tax. From the same cause, linen
will rise in Germany, and consequently in England. When this alteration
of prices has so adjusted the demand, that the cloth and the linen again
pay for one another, the result is that Germany has paid only a part of
the tax, and the remainder of what has been received into our treasury
has come indirectly out of the pockets of our own consumers of linen,
who pay a higher price for that imported commodity in consequence of the
tax on our exports, while at the same time they, in consequence of the
efflux of money and the fall of prices, have smaller money incomes
wherewith to pay for the linen at that advanced price.

“It is not an impossible supposition that by taxing our exports we might
not only gain nothing from the foreigner, the tax being paid out of our
own pockets, but might even compel our own people to pay a second tax to
the foreigner. Suppose, as before, that the demand of Germany for cloth
falls off so much on the imposition of the duty, that she requires a
smaller money value than before, but that the case is so different with
linen in England, that when the price rises the demand either does not
fall off at all, or so little that the money value required is greater
than before. The first effect of laying on the duty is, as before, that
the cloth exported will no longer pay for the linen imported. Money will
therefore flow out of England into Germany. One effect is to raise the
price of linen in Germany, and consequently in England. But this, by the
supposition, instead of stopping the efflux of money, only makes it
greater, because the higher the price, the greater the money value of
the linen consumed. The balance, therefore, can only be restored by the
other effect, which is going on at the same time, namely, the fall of
cloth in the English and consequently in the German market. Even when
cloth has fallen so low that its price with the duty is only equal to
what its price without the duty was at first, it is not a necessary
consequence that the fall will stop; for the same amount of exportation
as before will not now suffice to pay the increased money value of the
imports; and although the German consumers have now not only cloth at
the old price, but likewise increased money incomes, it is not certain
that they will be inclined to employ the increase of their incomes in
increasing their purchases of cloth. Edition: current; Page: [853] The
price of cloth, therefore, must perhaps fall, to restore the
equilibrium, more than the whole amount of the duty; Germany may be
enabled to import cloth at a lower price when it is taxed, than when it
was untaxed: and this gain she will acquire at the expense of the
English consumers of linen, who, in addition, will be the real payers of
the whole of what is received at their own custom-house under the name
of duties on the export of cloth.”

It is almost unnecessary to remark that cloth and linen are here merely
representatives of exports and imports in general; and that the effect
which a tax on exports might have in increasing the cost of imports,
would affect the imports from all countries, and not peculiarly the
articles which might be imported from the particular country to which
the taxed exports were sent.

“Such are the extremely various effects which may result to ourselves
and to our customers from the imposition of taxes on our exports; and
the determining circumstances are of a nature so imperfectly
ascertainable, that it must be almost impossible to decide with any
certainty, even after the tax has been imposed, whether we have been
gainers by it or losers.” In general, however, there could be little
doubt that a country which imposed such taxes would succeed in making
foreign countries contribute something to its revenue; but unless the
taxed article be one for which their demand is extremely urgent, they
will seldom pay the whole of the amount which the tax brings in.∗ “In
any case, whatever we gain is lost by somebody else, and there is the
expense of the collection besides: if international morality, therefore,
were rightly understood and acted upon, such taxes, as being contrary to
the universal weal, would not exist.”

Thus far of duties on exports. We now proceed to the more ordinary case
of duties on imports. “We have had an example of a tax on exports, that
is, on foreigners, falling in part on ourselves. We shall therefore not
be surprised if we find a tax on imports, that is, on ourselves, partly
falling upon foreigners.

“Instead of taxing the cloth which we export, suppose that we tax the
linen which we import. The duty which we are now supposing must not be
what is termed a protecting duty, that is, a duty sufficiently high to
induce us to produce the article at home. Edition: current; Page: [854]
If it had this effect, it would destroy entirely the trade both in cloth
and in linen, and both countries would lose the whole of the advantage
which they previously gained by exchanging those commodities with one
another. We suppose a duty which might diminish the consumption of the
article, but which would not prevent us from continuing to import, as
before, whatever linen we did consume.

“The equilibrium of trade would be disturbed if the imposition of the
tax diminished, in the slightest degree, the quantity of linen consumed.
For, as the tax is levied at our own custom-house, the German exporter
only receives the same price as formerly, though the English consumer
pays a higher one. If, therefore, there be any diminution of the
quantity bought, although a larger sum of money may be actually laid out
in the article, a smaller one will be due from England to Germany: this
sum will no longer be an equivalent for the sum due from Germany to
England for cloth, the balance therefore must be paid in money. Prices
will fall in Germany and rise in England; linen will fall in the German
market; cloth will rise in the English. The Germans will pay a higher
price for cloth, and will have smaller money incomes to buy it with;
while the English will obtain linen cheaper, that is, its price will
exceed what it previously was by less than the amount of the duty, while
their means of purchasing it will be increased by the increase of their
money incomes.

“If the imposition of the tax does not diminish the demand, it will
leave the trade exactly as it was before. We shall import as much, and
export as much; the whole of the tax will be paid out of our own
pockets.

“But the imposition of a tax on a commodity almost always diminishes the
demand more or less; and it can never, or scarcely ever, increase the
demand. It may, therefore, be laid down as a principle, that a tax on
imported commodities, when it really operates as a tax, and not as a
prohibition either total or partial, almost always falls in part upon
the foreigners who consume our goods; and that this is a mode in which a
nation may appropriate to itself, at the expense of foreigners, a larger
share than would otherwise belong to it of the increase in the general
productiveness of the labour and capital of the world, which results
from the interchange of commodities among nations.”

Those are, therefore, in the right who maintain that taxes on imports
are partly paid by foreigners; but they are mistaken when Edition:
current; Page: [855] they say, that it is by the foreign producer. It is
not on the person from whom we buy, but on all those who buy from us,
that a portion of our custom-duties spontaneously falls. It is the
foreign consumer of our exported commodities, who is obliged to pay a
higher price for them because we maintain revenue duties on foreign
goods.

There are but two cases in which duties on commodities can in any
degree, or in any manner, fall on the producer. One is, when the article
is a strict monopoly, and at a scarcity price. The price in this case
being only limited by the desires of the buyer; the sum obtained from
the restricted supply being the utmost which the buyers would consent to
give rather than go without it; if the treasury intercepts a part of
this, the price cannot be further raised to compensate for the tax, and
it must be paid from the monopoly profits. A tax on rare and high-priced
wines will fall wholly on the growers, or rather, on the owners of the
vineyards. The second case in which the producer sometimes bears a
portion of the tax, is more important: the case of duties on the produce
of land or of mines. These might be so high as to diminish materially
the demand for the produce, and compel the abandonment of some of the
inferior qualities of land or mines. Supposing this to be the effect,
the consumers, both in the country itself and in those which dealt with
it, would obtain the produce at smaller cost; and a part only, instead
of the whole, of the duty would fall on the purchaser, who would be
indemnified chiefly at the expense of the landowners or mine-owners in
the producing country.

Duties on importation may, then, be divided “into two classes: those
which have the effect of encouraging some particular branch of domestic
industry, and those which have not. The former are purely mischievous,
both to the country imposing them, and to those with whom it trades.
They prevent a saving of labour and capital, which, if permitted to be
made, would be divided in some proportion or other between the importing
country and the countries which buy what that country does or might
export.

“The other class of duties are those which do not encourage one mode of
procuring an article at the expense of another, but allow interchange to
take place just as if the duty did not exist, and to produce the saving
of labour which constitutes the motive to international, as to all other
commerce. Of this kind are duties on the importation of any commodity
which could not by any possibility be produced at home; and duties not
sufficiently high to counterbalance the difference of expense between
the production of the Edition: current; Page: [856] article at home and
its importation. Of the money which is brought into the treasury of any
country by taxes of this last description, a part only is paid by the
people of that country; the remainder by the foreign consumers of their
goods.

“Nevertheless, this latter kind of taxes are in principle as ineligible
as the former, though not precisely on the same ground. A protecting
duty can never be a cause of gain, but always and necessarily of loss,
to the country imposing it, just so far as it is efficacious to its end.
A non-protecting duty, on the contrary, would in most cases be a source
of gain to the country imposing it, in so far as throwing part of the
weight of its taxes upon other people is a gain; but it would be a means
which it could seldom be advisable to adopt, being so easily
counteracted by a precisely similar proceeding on the other side.

“If England, in the case already supposed, sought to obtain for herself
more than her natural share of the advantage of the trade with Germany,
by imposing a duty upon linen, Germany would only have to impose a duty
upon cloth, sufficient to diminish the demand for that article about as
much as the demand for linen had been diminished in England by the tax.
Things would then be as before, and each country would pay its own tax.
Unless, indeed, the sum of the two duties exceeded the entire advantage
of the trade; for in that case the trade, and its advantage, would cease
entirely.

“There would be no advantage, therefore, in imposing duties of this
kind, with a view to gain by them in the manner which has been pointed
out. But when any part of the revenue is derived from taxes on
commodities, these may often be as little objectionable as the rest. It
is evident, too, that considerations of reciprocity, which are quite
unessential when the matter in debate is a protecting duty, are of
material importance when the repeal of duties of this other description
is discussed. A country cannot be expected to renounce the power of
taxing foreigners, unless foreigners will in return practise towards
itself the same forbearance. The only mode in which a country can save
itself from being a loser by the revenue duties imposed by other
countries on its commodities, is to impose corresponding revenue duties
on theirs. Only it must take care that those duties be not so high as to
exceed all that remains of the advantage of the trade, and put an end to
importation altogether, causing the article to be either produced at
home, or imported from another and a dearer market.”

Edition: current; Page: [857]


CHAPTER V: of some other taxes

§ 1. Besides direct taxes on income, and taxes on consumption, the
financial systems of most countries comprise a variety of miscellaneous
imposts, not strictly included in either class. The modern European
systems retain many such taxes, though in much less number and variety
than those semi-barbarous governments which European influence has not
yet reached. In some of these, scarcely any incident of life has escaped
being made an excuse for some fiscal exaction; hardly any act, not
belonging to daily routine, can be performed by any one, without
obtaining leave from some agent of government, which is only granted in
consideration of a payment: especially when the act requires the aid or
the peculiar guarantee of a public authority. In the present treatise we
may confine our attention to such taxes as lately existed, or still
exist, in countries usually classed as civilized.

In almost all nations a considerable revenue is drawn from taxes on
contracts. These are imposed in various forms. One expedient is that of
taxing the legal instrument which serves as evidence of the contract,
and which is commonly the only evidence legally admissible. In England,
scarcely any contract is binding unless executed on stamped paper, which
has paid a tax to government; and until very lately, when the contract
related to property the tax was proportionally much heavier on the
smaller than on the larger transactions; which is still true of some of
those taxes.1 There are also stamp-duties on the legal instruments which
are evidence of the fulfilment of contracts; such as acknowledgments of
receipt, and deeds of release. Taxes on contracts are not always levied
by means of stamps. The duty on sales by auction, abrogated by Sir
Robert Peel, was an Edition: current; Page: [858] instance in point. The
taxes on transfers of landed property, in France, are another: in
England there are stamp-duties. In some countries, contracts of many
kinds are not valid unless registered, and their registration is made an
occasion for a tax.

Of taxes on contracts, the most important are those on the transfer of
property; chiefly on purchases and sales. Taxes on the sale of
consumable commodities are simply taxes on those commodities. If they
affect only some particular commodities, they raise the prices of those
commodities, and are paid by the consumer. If the attempt were made to
tax all purchases and sales, which, however absurd, was for centuries
the law of Spain, the tax, if it could be enforced, would be equivalent
to a tax on all commodities, and would not affect prices: if levied from
the sellers, it would be a tax on profits, if from the buyers, a tax on
consumption; and neither class could throw the burthen upon the other.
If confined to some one mode of sale, as for example by auction, it
discourages recourse to that mode, and if of any material amount,
prevents it from being adopted at all, unless in a case of emergency; in
which case as the seller is under a necessity to sell, but the buyer
under no necessity to buy, the tax falls on the seller; and this was the
strongest of the objections to the auction duty: it almost always fell
on a necessitous person, and in the crisis of his necessities.

Taxes on the purchase and sale of land are, in most countries, liable to
the same objection. Landed property in old countries is seldom parted
with, except from reduced circumstances, or some urgent need: the
seller, therefore, must take what he can get, while the buyer, whose
object is an investment, makes his calculations on the interest which he
can obtain for his money in other ways, and will not buy if he is
charged with a government tax on the transaction.∗ It has indeed been
objected, that this argument would not apply if all modes of permanent
investment, such as the purchase of government securities, shares in
joint-stock companies, mortgages, and the like, were subject to the same
tax. But even then, if paid by the buyer, it would be equivalent to a
tax on interest: if sufficiently heavy to be of any importance, it would
disturb the established relation between interest and profit; and the
disturbance would Edition: current; Page: [859] redress itself by a rise
in the rate of interest, and a fall of the price of land and of all
securities. It appears to me, therefore, that the seller is the person
by whom such taxes, unless under peculiar circumstances, will generally
be borne.

All taxes must be condemned which throw obstacles in the way of the sale
of land, or other instruments of production. Such sales tend naturally
to render the property more productive. The seller, whether moved by
necessity or choice, is probably some one who is either without the
means, or without the capacity, to make the most advantageous use of the
property for productive purposes; while the buyer, on the other hand, is
at any rate not needy, and is frequently both inclined and able to
improve the property, since, as it is worth more to such a person than
to any other, he is likely to offer the highest price for it. All taxes,
therefore, and all difficulties and expenses, annexed to such contracts,
are decidedly detrimental; especially in the case of land, the source of
subsistence, and the original foundation of all wealth, on the
improvement of which, therefore, so much depends. Too great facilities
cannot be given to enable land to pass into the hands, and assume the
modes of aggregation or division, most conducive to its productiveness.
If landed properties are too large, alienation should be free, in order
that they may be subdivided; if too small, in order that they may be
united. All taxes on the transfer of landed property should be
abolished; but, as the landlords have no claim to be relieved from any
reservation which the state has hitherto made in its own favour from the
amount of their rent, an annual impost equivalent to the average produce
of these taxes should be distributed over the land generally, in the
form of a land-tax.1

Some of the taxes on contracts are very pernicious, imposing a virtual
penalty upon transactions which it ought to be the policy of the
legislator to encourage. Of this sort is the stamp-duty on leases, which
in a country of large properties are an essential condition of good
agriculture; and the taxes on insurances, a direct discouragement to
prudence and forethought.2

Edition: current; Page: [860]
§ 2. Nearly allied to the taxes on contracts are those on communication.
The principal of these is the postage tax; to which may be added taxes
on advertisements, and on newspapers, which are taxes on the
communication of information.

The common mode of levying a tax on the conveyance of letters, is by
making the government the sole authorized carrier of them, and demanding
a monopoly price. When this price is so moderate as it is in this
country under the uniform penny postage, scarcely if at all exceeding
what would be charged under the freest competition by any private
company, it can hardly be considered as taxation, but rather as the
profits of a business; whatever excess there is above the ordinary
profits of stock being a fair result of the saving of expense, caused by
having only one establishment and one set of arrangements for the whole
country, instead of many competing ones. The business, too, being one
which both can and ought to be conducted on fixed rules, is one of the
few businesses which it is not unsuitable to a government to conduct.
The post office, therefore, is at present one of the best of the sources
from which this country derives its revenue. But a postage much
exceeding what would be paid for the same service in a system of
freedom, is not a desirable tax. Its chief weight falls on letters of
business, and increases the expense of mercantile relations between
distant places. It is like an attempt to raise a large revenue by heavy
tolls: it obstructs all operations by which goods are conveyed from
place to place, and discourages the production of commodities in one
place for consumption in another; which is not only in itself one of the
greatest sources of economy of labour, but is a necessary condition of
almost all improvements in production, and one of the strongest
stimulants to industry, and promoters of civilization.

The tax on advertisements was not1 free from the same objection, since
in whatever degree advertisements are useful to business, by
facilitating the coming together of the dealer or producer and the
consumer, in that same degree, if the tax be high enough to be a serious
discouragement to advertising, it prolongs the period during which goods
remain unsold, and capital locked up in idleness.2

Edition: current; Page: [861]
A tax on newspapers is objectionable, not so much where it does fall as
where is does not, that is, where it prevents newspapers from being
used. To the generality of those who buy them, newspapers are a luxury
which they can as well afford to pay for as any other indulgence, and
which is as unexceptionable a source of revenue. But to that large part
of the community who have been taught to read, but have received little
other intellectual education, newspapers are the source of nearly all
the general information which they possess, and of nearly all their
acquaintance with the ideas and topics current among mankind; and an
interest is more easily excited in newspapers, than in books or other
more recondite sources of instruction. Newspapers contribute so little,
in a direct way, to the origination of useful ideas, that many persons
undervalue the importance of their office in disseminating them. They
correct many prejudices and superstitions, and keep up a habit of
discussion, and interest in public concerns, the absence of which is a
great cause of stagnation of mind usually found in the lower and middle,
if not in all, ranks, of those countries where newspapers of an
important or interesting character do not exist. There ought to be no
taxes (as in this country there now are not)1 which render this great
diffuser of information, of mental excitement, and mental exercise, less
accessible to that portion of the public which most needs to be carried
into a region of ideas and interests beyond its own limited horizon.

§ 3. In the enumeration of bad taxes, a conspicuous place must be
assigned to law taxes; which extract a revenue for the state from the
various operations involved in an application to the tribunals. Like all
needless expenses attached to law proceedings, they are a tax on
redress, and therefore a premium on injury. Although such taxes have
been abolished in this country as a general source of revenue, they
still exist in the form of fees of court, for defraying the expense of
the courts of justice; under the idea, apparently, that those may fairly
be required to bear the expenses of the administration of justice, who
reap the benefit of it. The fallacy of this doctrine was powerfully
exposed by Bentham. As he remarked, those who are under the necessity of
going to law, are those who benefit least, not Edition: current; Page:
[862] most, by the law and its administration. To them the protection
which the law affords has not been complete, since they have been
obliged to resort to a court of justice to ascertain their rights, or
maintain those rights against infringement: while the remainder of the
public have enjoyed the immunity from injury conferred by the law and
the tribunals, without the inconvenience of an appeal to them.

§ 4. Besides the general taxes of the State, there are in all or most
countries local taxes, to defray any expenses of a public nature which
it is thought best to place under the control or management of a local
authority. Some of these expenses are incurred for purposes in which the
particular locality is solely or chiefly interested; as the paving,
cleansing, and lighting of the streets; or the making and repairing of
roads and bridges, which may be important to people from any part of the
country, but only in so far as they, or goods in which they have an
interest, pass along the roads or over the bridges. In other cases
again, the expenses are of a kind as nationally important as any others,
but are defrayed locally because supposed more likely to be well
administered by local bodies; as, in England, the relief of the poor,
and the support of gaols, and in some other countries, of schools. To
decide for what public objects local superintendence is best suited, and
what are those which should be kept immediately under the central
government, or under a mixed system of local management and central
superintendence, is a question not of political economy, but of
administration. It is an important principle, however, that taxes
imposed by a local authority, being less amenable to publicity and
discussion than the acts of the government, should always be
special—laid on for some definite service, and not exceeding the expense
actually incurred in rendering the service. Thus limited, it is
desirable, whenever practicable, that the burthen should fall on those
to whom the service is rendered; that the expense, for instance, of
roads and bridges, should be defrayed by a toll on passengers and goods
conveyed by them, thus dividing the cost between those who use them for
pleasure or convenience, and the consumers of the goods which they
enable to be brought to and from the market at a diminished expense.
When, however, the tolls have repaid with interest the whole of the
expenditure, the road or bridge should be thrown open free of toll, that
it may be used also by those to whom, unless open gratuitously, it would
be valueless; provision being made for Edition: current; Page: [863]
repairs either from the funds of the state, or by a rate levied on the
localities which reap the principal benefit.

In England, almost all local taxes are direct, (the coal duty of the
City of London, and a few similar imposts, being the chief exceptions),
though the greatest part of the taxation for general purposes is
indirect. On the contrary, in France, Austria, and other countries where
direct taxation is much more largely employed by the state, the local
expenses of towns are principally defrayed by taxes levied on
commodities when entering them. These indirect taxes are much more
objectionable in towns than on the frontier, because the things which
the country supplies to the towns are chiefly the necessaries of life
and the materials of manufacture, while, of what a country imports from
foreign countries, the greater part usually [1848] consists of luxuries.
An octroi cannot produce a large revenue, without pressing severely upon
the labouring classes of the towns; unless their wages rise
proportionally, in which case the tax falls in a great measure on the
consumers of town produce, whether residing in town or country, since
capital will not remain in the towns if its profits fall below their
ordinary proportion as compared with the rural districts.1

Edition: current; Page: [864]


CHAPTER VI: comparison between direct and indirect taxation

§ 1. Are direct or indirect taxes the most eligible? This question, at
all times interesting, has of late excited a considerable amount of
discussion. In England there is a popular feeling, of old standing, in
favour of indirect, or it should rather be said in opposition to direct,
taxation. The feeling is not grounded on the merits of the case, and is
of a puerile kind. An Englishman dislikes, not so much the payment, as
the act of paying. He dislikes seeing the face of the tax-collector, and
being subjected to his peremptory demand. Perhaps, too, the money which
he is required to pay directly out of his pocket is the only taxation
which he is quite sure that he pays at all. That a tax of one shilling
per pound on tea, or of two shillings per bottle on wine, raises the
price of each pound of tea and bottle of wine which he consumes, by that
and more than that amount, cannot indeed be denied; it is the fact, and
is intended to be so, and he himself, at times, is perfectly aware of
it; but it makes hardly any impression on his practical feelings and
associations, serving to illustrate the distinction between what is
merely known to be true and what is felt to be so. The unpopularity of
direct taxation, contrasted with the easy manner in which the public
consent to let themselves be fleeced in the prices of commodities, has
generated in many friends of improvement a directly opposite mode of
thinking to the foregoing. They contend that the very reason which makes
direct taxation disagreeable, makes it preferable. Under it, every one
knows how much he really pays; and if he votes for a war, or any other
expensive national luxury, he does so with his eyes open to what it
costs him. If all taxes were direct, taxation would be much more
perceived than at present; and there would be a security which now there
is not, for economy in the public expenditure.

Although this argument is not without force, its weight is likely
Edition: current; Page: [865] to be constantly diminishing. The real
incidence of indirect taxation is every day more generally understood
and more familiarly recognized: and whatever else may be said of the
changes which are taking place in the tendencies of the human mind, it
can scarcely, I think, be denied, that things are more and more
estimated according to their calculated value, and less according to
their non-essential accompaniments. The mere distinction between paying
money directly to the tax-collector, and contributing the same sum
through the intervention of the tea-dealer or the wine-merchant, no
longer makes the whole difference between dislike or opposition and
passive acquiescence. But further, while any such infirmity of the
popular mind subsists, the argument grounded on it tells partly on the
other side of the question. If our present revenue of about seventy
[1862] millions were all raised by direct taxes, an extreme
dissatisfaction would certainly arise at having to pay so much; but
while men's minds are so little guided by reason, as such a change of
feeling from so irrelevant a cause would imply, so great an aversion to
taxation might not be an unqualified good. Of the seventy millions in
question, nearly thirty are pledged, under the most binding obligations,
to those whose property has been borrowed and spent by the state: and
while this debt remains unredeemed, a greatly increased impatience of
taxation would involve no little danger of a breach of faith, similar to
that which, in the defaulting states of America, has been produced, and
in some of them still continues, from the same cause. That part, indeed,
of the public expenditure, which is devoted to the maintenance of civil
and military establishments, (that is, all except the interest of the
national debt) affords, in many of its details, ample scope for
retrenchment.1 But while much of the revenue is wasted under the mere
pretence of public service, so much of the most important business of
government is left undone, that whatever can be rescued from useless
expenditure is urgently required for useful. Whether the object be
education; a more efficient and accessible administration of justice;
reforms of any kind which, like the Slave Emancipation, require
compensation to individual interests; or what is as important as any of
these, the entertainment of a sufficient staff of able and educated
public Edition: current; Page: [866] servants, to conduct in a better
than the present awkward manner the business of legislation and
administration; every one of these things implies considerable expense,
and many of them have again and again been prevented by the reluctance
which existed to apply to Parliament for an increased grant of public
money, though (besides that the existing means would probably be
sufficient if applied to the proper purposes) the cost would be repaid,
often a hundredfold, in mere pecuniary advantage to the community
generally. If so great an addition were made to the public dislike of
taxation as might be the consequence of confining it to the direct form,
the classes who profit by the misapplication of public money might
probably succeed in saving that by which they profit, at the expense of
that which would only be useful to the public.

There is, however, a frequent plea in support of indirect taxation,
which must be altogether rejected, as grounded on a fallacy. We are
often told that taxes on commodities are less burthensome than other
taxes, because the contributor can escape from them by ceasing to use
the taxed commodity. He certainly can, if that be his object, deprive
the government of the money: but he does so by a sacrifice of his own
indulgences, which (if he chose to undergo it) would equally make up to
him for the same amount taken from him by direct taxation. Suppose a tax
laid on wine, sufficient to add five pounds to the price of the quantity
of wine which he consumes in a year. He has only (we are told) to
diminish his consumption of wine by 5l., and he escapes the burthen.
True: but if the 5l., instead of being laid on wine, had been taken from
him by an income tax, he could, by expending 5l. less in wine, equally
save the amount of the tax, so that the difference between the two cases
is really illusory. If the government takes from the contributor five
pounds a year, whether in one way or another, exactly that amount must
be retrenched from his consumption to leave him as well off as before;
and in either way the same amount of sacrifice, neither more nor less,
is imposed on him.

On the other hand, it is some advantage on the side of indirect taxes,
that what they exact from the contributor is taken at a time and in a
manner likely to be convenient to him. It is paid at a time when he has
at any rate a payment to make; it causes, therefore, no additional
trouble, nor (unless the tax be on necessaries) any inconvenience but
what is inseparable from the payment of the amount. He can also, except
in the case of very perishable articles, Edition: current; Page: [867]
select his own time for laying in a stock of the commodity, and
consequently for payment of the tax. The producer or dealer who advances
these taxes, is, indeed, sometimes subjected to inconvenience; but, in
the case of imported goods, this inconvenience is reduced to a minimum
by what is called the Warehousing System, under which, instead of paying
the duty at the time of importation, he is only required to do so when
he takes out the goods for consumption, which is seldom done until he
has either actually found, or has the prospect of immediately finding, a
purchaser.

1 The strongest objection, however, to raising the whole or the greater
part of a large revenue by direct taxes, is the impossibility of
assessing them fairly without a conscientious co-operation on the part
of the contributors, not to be hoped for in the present low state of
public morality. In the case of an income tax, we have already seen that
unless it be found practicable to exempt savings altogether from the
tax, the burthen cannot be apportioned with any tolerable approach to
fairness upon those whose incomes are derived from business or
professions; and this is in fact admitted by most of the advocates of
direct taxation, who, I am afraid, generally get over the difficulty by
leaving those classes untaxed, and confining their projected income tax
to “realized property,” in which form it certainly has the merit of
being a very easy form of plunder. But enough has been said in
condemnation of this expedient. We have seen, however, that a house-tax
is a form of direct taxation not liable to the same objections as an
income tax, and indeed liable to as few objections of any kind as
perhaps any of our indirect taxes. But it would be impossible to raise
by a house tax alone, the greatest part of the revenue of Great Britain,
without producing a very objectionable overcrowding of the population,
through the strong motive which all persons would have to avoid the tax
by restricting their house accommodation. Besides, even a house tax has
inequalities, and consequent injustices; no tax is exempt from them, and
it is neither just nor politic to make all the inequalities fall in the
same places, by calling upon one tax to defray the whole or the chief
part of the public expenditure. So much of Edition: current; Page: [868]
the local taxation, in this country, being already in the form of a
house tax, it is probable that ten millions a year would be fully as
much as could beneficially be levied, through this medium, for general
purposes.

A certain amount of revenue may, as we have seen, be obtained without
injustice by a peculiar tax on rent. Besides the present land-tax, and
an equivalent for the revenue now derived from stamp duties on the
conveyance of land, some further taxation might, I have contended, at
some future period be imposed, to enable the state to participate in the
progressive increase of the incomes of landlords from natural causes.
Legacies and inheritances, we have also seen, ought to be subjected to
taxation sufficient to yield a considerable revenue. With these taxes,
and a house tax of suitable amount; we should, I think, have reached the
prudent limits of direct taxation, save in a national emergency so
urgent as to justify the government in disregarding the amount of
inequality and unfairness which may ultimately be found inseparable from
an income tax.1 The remainder of the revenue would have to be provided
by taxes on consumption, and the question is, which of these are the
least objectionable.

§ 2. There are some forms of indirect taxation which must be
peremptorily excluded. Taxes on commodities, for revenue purposes, must
not operate as protecting duties, but must be levied impartially on
every mode in which the articles can be obtained, whether produced in
the country itself or imported. An exclusion must also be put upon all
taxes on the necessaries of life, or on the materials or instruments
employed in producing those necessaries. Such taxes are always liable to
encroach on what should be left untaxed, the incomes barely sufficient
for healthful existence; and on the most favourable supposition, namely,
that wages rise to compensate the labourers for the tax, it operates as
a peculiar tax on profits, which is at once unjust, and detrimental to
national wealth.∗ Edition: current; Page: [869] What remain are taxes on
luxuries. And these have some properties which strongly recommend them.
In the first place, they can never, by any possibility, touch those
whose whole income is expended on necessaries; while they do reach those
by whom what is required for necessaries, is expended on indulgences. In
the next place, they operate in some cases as an useful, and the only
useful, kind of sumptuary law. I disclaim all asceticism, and by no
means wish to see discouraged, either by law or opinion, any indulgence
(consistent with the means and obligations of the person using it) which
is sought from a genuine inclination for, and enjoyment of, the thing
itself; but a great portion of the expenses of the higher and middle
classes in most countries, and the greatest in this, is not incurred for
the sake of the pleasure afforded by the things on which the money is
spent, but from regard to opinion, and an idea that certain expenses are
expected from them, as an appendage of station; and I cannot but think
that expenditure of this sort is a most desirable subject of taxation.
If taxation discourages it, some good is done, and if not, no harm; for
in so far as taxes are levied on things which are desired and possessed
from motives of this description, nobody is the worse for them. When a
thing is bought not for its use but for its costliness, cheapness is no
recommendation. As Sismondi remarks, the consequence of cheapening
articles of vanity, is not that less is expended on such things, but
that the buyers substitute for the cheapened article some other which is
more costly, or a more elaborate quality of the same thing; and as the
inferior quality answered the purpose of vanity equally well when it was
equally expensive, a tax on the article is really paid by nobody: it is
a creation of public revenue by which nobody loses.∗

Edition: current; Page: [870]
§ 3. In order to reduce as much as possible the inconveniences, and
increase the advantages, incident to taxes on commodities, the following
are the practical rules which suggest themselves. 1st. To raise as large
a revenue as conveniently may be, from those classes of luxuries which
have most connexion with vanity, and least with positive enjoyment; such
as the more costly qualities of all kinds of personal equipment and
ornament. 2ndly. Whenever possible, to demand the tax, not from the
producer, but directly from the consumer, since when levied on the
producer it raises the price always by more, and often by much more,
than the mere amount of the tax. Most of the minor assessed taxes in
this country are recommended by both these considerations. But with
regard to horses and carriages, as there are many persons to whom, from
health or constitution, these are not so much luxuries as necessaries,
the tax paid by those who have but one riding horse, or but one
carriage, especially of the cheaper descriptions, should be low; while
taxation should rise very rapidly with the number of horses and
carriages, and with their costliness. 3rdly. But as the only indirect
taxes which yield a large revenue are those which fall on articles of
universal or very general consumption, and as it is therefore necessary
to have some taxes on real luxuries, that is, on things which afford
pleasure in themselves, and are valued on that account rather than for
their cost; these taxes should, if possible, be so adjusted as to fall
with the same proportional weight on small, on moderate, and on large
incomes. This is not an easy matter; since the things which are the
subjects of the more productive taxes, are in proportion more largely
consumed by the poorer members of the community than by the rich. Tea,
coffee, sugar, tobacco, fermented drinks, can hardly be so taxed that
the poor shall not bear Edition: current; Page: [871] more than their
due share of the burthen. Something might be done by making the duty on
the superior qualities, which are used by the richer consumers, much
higher in proportion to the value (instead of much lower, as is almost
universally the practice, under the present [1848] English system); but
in some cases the difficulty of at all adjusting the duty to the value,
so as to prevent evasion, is said, with what truth I know not, to be
insuperable; so that it is thought necessary to levy the same fixed duty
on all the qualities alike: a flagrant injustice to the poorer class of
contributors, unless compensated by the existence of other taxes from
which, as from the present income tax, they are altogether exempt.
4thly. As far as is consistent with the preceding rules, taxation should
rather be concentrated on a few articles than diffused over many, in
order that the expenses of collection may be smaller, and that as few
employments as possible may be burthensomely and vexatiously interfered
with. 5thly. Among luxuries of general consumption, taxation should by
preference attach itself to stimulants, because these, though in
themselves as legitimate indulgences as any others, are more liable than
most others to be used in excess, so that the check to consumption,
naturally arising from taxation, is on the whole better applied to them
than to other things. 6thly. As far as other considerations permit,
taxation should be confined to imported articles, since these can be
taxed with a less degree of vexatious interference, and with fewer
incidental bad effects, than when a tax is levied on the field or on the
workshop. Custom-duties are, caeteris paribus, much less objectionable
than excise: but they must be laid only on things which either cannot,
or at least will not, be produced in the country itself; or else their
production there must be prohibited (as in England is the case with
tobacco), or subjected to an excise duty of equivalent amount. 7thly. No
tax ought to be kept so high as to furnish a motive to its evasion, too
strong to be counteracted by ordinary means of prevention: and
especially no commodity should be taxed so highly as to raise up a class
of lawless characters, smugglers, illicit distillers, and the like.

Of the excise and custom duties lately existing in this country, all
which are intrinsically unfit to form part of a good system of taxation,
have, since the last reforms by Mr. Gladstone, been got rid of.1
Edition: current; Page: [872] Among these are all duties on ordinary
articles of food,1 whether for human beings or for cattle; those on
timber, as falling on the materials of lodging, which is one of the
necessaries of life; all duties on the metals, and on implements made of
them; taxes on soap, which is a necessary of cleanliness, and on tallow,
the material both of that and of some other necessaries; the tax on
paper, an indispensable instrument of almost all business and of most
kinds of instruction. The duties which now yield nearly the whole of the
customs and excise revenue, those on sugar, coffee, tea, wine, beer,
spirits, and tobacco, are in themselves where a large amount of revenue
is necessary, extremely proper taxes; but at present grossly unjust,
from the disproportionate weight with which they press on the poorer
classes; and some of them (those on spirits and tobacco) are so high as
to cause a considerable2 amount of smuggling. It is probable that most
of these taxes might bear a great reduction without any material loss of
revenue. In what manner the finer articles of manufacture, consumed by
the rich, might most advantageously be taxed, I must leave to be decided
by those who have the requisite practical knowledge. The difficulty
would be, to effect it without an inadmissible degree of interference
with production. In countries which, like the United States, import the
principal part of the finer manufactures which they consume, there is
little difficulty in the matter: and even where nothing is imported but
the raw material, that may be taxed, especially the qualities of it
which are exclusively employed for the fabrics used by the richer class
of consumers. Thus, in England a high custom-duty on raw silk would be
consistent with principle; and it might perhaps be practicable to tax
the finer qualities of cotton or linen yarn, whether spun in the country
itself or imported.

Edition: current; Page: [873]


CHAPTER VII: of a National debt

§ 1. The question must now be considered, how far it is right or
expedient to raise money for the purpose of government, not by laying on
taxes to the amount required, but by taking a portion of the capital of
the country in the form of a loan, and charging the public revenue with
only the interest. Nothing needs be said about providing for temporary
wants by taking up money; for instance, by an issue of exchequer bills,
destined to be paid off, at furthest in a year or two, from the proceeds
of the existing taxes. This is a convenient expedient, and when the
government does not possess a treasure or hoard, is often a necessary
one, on the occurrence of extraordinary expenses, or of a temporary
failure in the ordinary sources of revenue. What we have to discuss is
the propriety of contracting a national debt of a permanent character;
defraying the expenses of a war, or of any season of difficulty, by
loans, to be redeemed either very gradually and at a distant period, or
not at all.

This question has already been touched upon in the First Book.∗ We
remarked, that if the capital taken in loans is abstracted from funds
either engaged in production, or destined to be employed in it, their
diversion from that purpose is equivalent to taking the amount from the
wages of the labouring classes. Borrowing, in this case, is not a
substitute for raising the supplies within the year. A government which
borrows does actually take the amount within the year, and that too by a
tax exclusively on the labouring classes: than which it could have done
nothing worse, if it had supplied its wants by avowed taxation; and in
that case the transaction, and its evils, would have ended with the
emergency; while by the circuitous mode adopted, the value extracted
from the labourers is gained, not by the state, but by the employers of
labour, the state remaining Edition: current; Page: [874] charged with
the debt besides, and with its interest in perpetuity. The system of
public loans, in such circumstances, may be pronounced the very worst
which, in the present state of civilization, is still included in the
catalogue of financial expedients.

We however remarked that there are other circumstances in which loans
are not chargeable with these pernicious consequences: namely, first,
when what is borrowed is foreign capital, the overflowings of the
general accumulation of the world; or, secondly, when it is capital
which either would not have been saved at all unless this mode of
investment had been open to it, or, after being saved, would have been
wasted in unproductive enterprises, or sent to seek employment in
foreign countries. When the progress of accumulation has reduced profits
either to the ultimate or to the practical minimum,—to the rate less
than which would either put a stop to the increase of capital, or send
the whole of the new accumulations abroad; government may annually
intercept these new accumulations, without trenching on the employment
or wages of the labouring classes in the country itself, or perhaps in
any other country. To this extent, therefore, the loan system may be
carried, without being liable to the utter and peremptory condemnation
which is due to it when it overpasses this limit. What is wanted is an
index to determine whether, in any given series of years, as during the
last great war for example [i.e. 1793–1815], the limit has been exceeded
or not.

Such an index exists, at once a certain and an obvious one. Did the
government, by its loan operations, augment the rate of interest? If it
only opened a channel for capital which would not otherwise have been
accumulated, or which, if accumulated, would not have been employed
within the country; this implies that the capital, which the government
took and expended, could not have found employment at the existing rate
of interest. So long as the loans do no more than absorb this surplus,
they prevent any tendency to a fall of the rate of interest, but they
cannot occasion any rise. When they do raise the rate of interest, as
they did in a most extraordinary degree during the French war, this is
positive proof that the government is a competitor for capital with the
ordinary channels of productive investment, and is carrying off, not
merely funds which would not, but funds which would, have found
productive employment within the country. To the full extent, therefore,
to which the loans of government, during the war, caused the rate of
interest to exceed what it was before, and what it has been since, those
loans are chargeable with all the evils which have been described. If it
be Edition: current; Page: [875] objected that interest only rose
because profits rose, I reply that this does not weaken, but
strengthens, the argument. If the government loans produced the rise of
profits by the great amount of capital which they absorbed, by what
means can they have had this effect, unless by lowering the wages of
labour? It will perhaps be said, that what kept profits high during the
war was not the drafts made on the national capital by the loans, but
the rapid progress of industrial improvements. This, in a great measure,
was the fact; and it no doubt alleviated the hardship to the labouring
classes, and made the financial system which was pursued less actively
mischievous, but not less contrary to principle. These very improvements
in industry, made room for a larger amount of capital; and the
government, by draining away a great part of the annual accumulations,
did not indeed prevent that capital from existing ultimately (for it
started into existence with great rapidity after the peace), but
prevented it from existing at the time, and subtracted just so much,
while the war lasted, from distribution among productive labourers. If
the government had abstained from taking this capital by loan, and had
allowed it to reach the labourers, but had raised the supplies which it
required by a direct tax on the labouring classes, it would have
produced (in every respect but the expense and inconvenience of
collecting the tax) the very same economical effects which it did
produce, except that we should not now have had the debt. The course it
actually took was therefore worse than the very worst mode which it
could possibly have adopted of raising the supplies within the year; 1
and the only excuse, or justification, which it admits of, (so far as
that excuse could be truly pleaded), was hard necessity; the
impossibility of raising so enormous an annual sum by taxation, without
resorting to taxes which from their odiousness, or from the facility of
evasion, it would have been found impracticable to enforce.

When government loans are limited to the overflowings of the national
capital, or to those accumulations which would not take place at all
unless suffered to overflow, they are at least not liable to this grave
condemnation: they occasion no privation to any one at the time, except
by the payment of the interest, and may even be beneficial to the
labouring class during the term of their expenditure, Edition: current;
Page: [876] by employing in the direct purchase of labour, as that of
soldiers, sailors, &c., funds which might otherwise have quitted the
country altogether. In this case therefore the question really is, what
it is commonly supposed to be in all cases, namely, a choice between a
great sacrifice at once, and a small one indefinitely prolonged. On this
matter it seems rational to think, that the prudence of a nation will
dictate the same conduct as the prudence of an individual; to submit to
as much of the privation immediately, as can easily be borne, and only
when any further burthen would distress or cripple them too much, to
provide for the remainder by mortgaging their future income. It is an
excellent maxim to make present resources suffice for present wants; the
future will have its own wants to provide for. On the other hand, it may
reasonably be taken into consideration that in a country increasing in
wealth, the necessary expenses of government do not increase in the same
ratio as capital or population; any burthen, therefore, is always less
and less felt: and since those extraordinary expenses of government
which are fit to be incurred at all, are most beneficial beyond the
existing generation, there is no injustice in making posterity pay a
part of the price, if the inconvenience would be extreme of defraying
the whole of it by the exertions and sacrifices of the generation which
first incurred it.

§ 2. When a country, wisely or unwisely, has burthened itself with a
debt, is it expedient to take steps for redeeming that debt? In
principle it is impossible not to maintain the affirmative. It is true
that the payment of the interest, when the creditors are members of the
same community, is no national loss, but a mere transfer. The transfer,
however, being compulsory, is a serious evil, and the raising a great
extra revenue by any system of taxation necessitates so much expense,
vexation, disturbance of the channels of industry, and other mischiefs
over and above the mere payment of the money wanted by the government,
that to get rid of the necessity of such taxation is at all times worth
a considerable effort. The same amount of sacrifice which would have
been worth incurring to avoid contracting the debt, it is worth while to
incur, at any subsequent time, for the purpose of extinguishing it.

Two modes have been contemplated of paying off a national debt: either
at once by a general contribution, or gradually by a surplus revenue.
The first would be incomparably the best, if it were practicable; and it
would be practicable if it could justly be done by Edition: current;
Page: [877] assessment on property alone. If property bore the whole
interest of the debt, property might, with great advantage to itself,
pay it off; since this would be merely surrendering to a creditor the
principal sum, the whole annual proceeds of which were already his by
law; and would be equivalent to what a landowner does when he sells part
of his estate to free the remainder from a mortgage. But property, it
needs hardly be said, does not pay, and cannot just be required to pay,
the whole interest of the debt. Some indeed affirm that it can, on the
plea that the existing generation is only bound to pay the debts of its
predecessors from the assets it has received from them, and not from the
produce of its own industry. But has no one received anything from
previous generations except those who have succeeded to property? Is the
whole difference between the earth as it is, with its clearings and
improvements, its roads and canals, its towns and manufactories, and the
earth as it was when the first human being set foot on it, of no benefit
to any but those who are called the owners of the soil? Is the capital
accumulated by the labour and abstinence of all former generations, of
no advantage to any but those who have succeeded to the legal ownership
of part of it? And have we not inherited a mass of acquired knowledge,
both scientific and empirical, due to the sagacity and industry of those
who preceded us, the benefits of which are the common wealth of all?
Those who are born to the ownership of property have, in addition to
these common benefits, a separate inheritance, and to this difference it
is right that advertence should be had in regulating taxation. It
belongs to the general financial system of the country to take due
account of this principle, and I have indicated, as in my opinion a
proper mode of taking account of it, a considerable tax on legacies and
inheritances. Let it be determined directly and openly what is due from
property to the state, and from the state to property, and let the
institutions of the state be regulated accordingly. Whatever is the
fitting contribution from property to the general expenses of the state,
in the same and in no greater proportion should it contribute towards
either the interest or the repayment of the national debt.

This, however, if admitted, is fatal to any scheme for the extinction of
the debt by a general assessment on the community. Persons of property
could pay their share of the amount by a sacrifice of property, and have
the same net income as before; but if those who have no accumulations,
but only incomes, were required to make up by a single payment the
equivalent of the annual charge laid on Edition: current; Page: [878]
them by the taxes maintained to pay the interest of the debt, they could
only do so by incurring a private debt equal to their share of the
public debt; while, from the insufficiency, in most cases, of the
security which they could give, the interest would amount to a much
larger annual sum than their share of that now paid by the state.
Besides, a collective debt defrayed by taxes, has over the same debt
parcelled out among individuals, the immense advantage, that it is
virtually a mutual insurance among the contributors. If the fortune of a
contributor diminishes, his taxes diminish; if he is ruined, they cease
altogether, and his portion of the debt is wholly transferred to the
solvent members of the community. If it were laid on him as a private
obligation, he would still be liable to it even when penniless.

When the state possesses property, in land or otherwise, which there are
not strong reasons of public utility for its retaining at its disposal,
this should be employed, as far as it will go, in extinguishing debt.
Any casual gain, or godsend, is naturally devoted to the same purpose.
Beyond this, the only mode which is both just and feasible, of
extinguishing or reducing a national debt, is by means of a surplus
revenue.

§ 3. The desirableness, per se, of maintaining a surplus for this
purpose, does not, I think, admit of a doubt. We sometimes, indeed, hear
it said that the amount should rather be left to “fructify in the
pockets of the people.” This is a good argument, as far as it goes,
against levying taxes unnecessarily for purposes of unproductive
expenditure, but not against paying off a national debt. For, what is
meant by the word fructify? If it means anything, it means productive
employment; and as an argument against taxation, we must understand it
to assert, that if the amount were left with the people they would save
it, and convert it into capital. It is probable, indeed, that they would
save a part, but extremely improbable that they would save the whole:
while if taken by taxation, and employed in paying off debt, the whole
is saved, and made productive. To the fundholder who receives the
payment it is already capital, not revenue, and he will make it
“fructify,” that it may continue to afford him an income. The objection,
therefore, is not only groundless, but the real argument is on the other
side: the amount is much more certain of fructifying if it is not “left
in the pockets of the people.”

It is not, however, advisable in all cases to maintain a surplus
Edition: current; Page: [879] revenue for the extinction of debt. The
advantage of paying off the national debt of Great Britain, for
instance, is that it would enable us to get rid of the worse half of our
taxation. But of this worse half some portions must be worse than
others, and to get rid of those would be a greater benefit
proportionally than to get rid of the rest. If renouncing a surplus
revenue would enable us to dispense with a tax, we ought to consider the
very worst of all our taxes as precisely the one which we are keeping up
for the sake of ultimately abolishing taxes not so bad as itself. In a
country advancing in wealth, whose increasing revenue gives it the power
of ridding itself from time to time of the most inconvenient portions of
its taxation, I conceive that the increase of revenue should rather be
disposed of by taking off taxes, than by liquidating debt, as long as
any very objectionable imposts remain. In the present state of England
[1848], therefore, I hold it to be good policy in the government, when
it has a surplus of an apparently permanent character, to take off
taxes, provided these are rightly selected. Even when no taxes remain
but such as are not unfit to form part of a permanent system, it is wise
to continue the same policy by experimental reductions of those taxes,
until the point is discovered at which a given amount of revenue can be
raised with the smallest pressure on the contributors. After this, such
surplus revenue as might arise from any further increase of the produce
of the taxes, should not, I conceive, be remitted, but applied to the
redemption of debt. Eventually, it might be expedient to appropriate the
entire produce of particular taxes to this purpose; since there would be
more assurance that the liquidation would be persisted in, if the fund
destined to it were kept apart, and not blended with the general
revenues of state. The succession duties would be peculiarly suited to
such a purpose, since taxes paid, as they are, out of capital would be
better employed in reimbursing capital than in defraying current
expenditure. If this separate appropriation were made, any surplus
afterwards arising from the increasing produce of the other taxes, and
from the saving of interest on the successive portions of debt paid off,
might form a ground for a remission of taxation.

It has been contended that some amount of national debt is desirable,
and almost indispensable, as an investment for the savings of the poorer
or more inexperienced part of the community. Its convenience in that
respect is undeniable; but (besides that the progress of industry is
gradually affording other modes of investment almost as safe and
untroublesome, such as the shares or obligations Edition: current; Page:
[880] of great public companies) the only real superiority of an
investment in the funds consists in the national guarantee, and this
could be afforded by other means than that of a public debt involving
compulsory taxation. One mode which would answer the purpose would be a
national bank of deposit and discount, with ramifications throughout the
country; which might receive any money confided to it, and either fund
it at a fixed rate of interest, or allow interest on a floating balance,
like the joint stock banks; the interest given being of course lower
than the rate at which individuals can borrow, in proportion and to the
greater security of a government investment; and the expenses of the
establishment being defrayed by the difference between the interest
which the bank would pay, and that which it would obtain, by lending its
deposits on mercantile, landed, or other security. There are no
insuperable objections in principle, nor, I should think, in practice,
to an institution of this sort, as a means of supplying the same
convenient mode of investment now afforded by the public funds. It would
constitute the state a great insurance company, to insure that part of
the community who live on the interest of their property, against the
risk of losing it by the bankruptcy of those to whom they might
otherwise be under the necessity of confiding it.

Edition: current; Page: [881]


CHAPTER VIII: of the ordinary functions of government, considered as to their economical effects

§ 1. Before we discuss the line of demarcation between the things with
which government should, and those with which they should not, directly
interfere, it is necessary to consider the economical effects, whether
of a bad or of a good complexion, arising from the manner in which they
acquit themselves of the duties which devolve on them in all societies,
and which no one denies to be incumbent on them.

The first of these is the protection of person and property. There is no
need to expatiate on the influence exercised over the economical
interests of society by the degree of completeness with which this duty
of government is performed. Insecurity of person and property is as much
as to say uncertainty of the connexion between all human exertion or
sacrifice and the attainment of the ends for the sake of which they are
undergone. It means, uncertainty whether they who sow shall reap,
whether they who produce shall consume, and they who spare to-day shall
enjoy tomorrow. It means, not only that labour and frugality are not the
road to acquisition, but that violence is. When person and property are
to a certain degree insecure, all the possessions of the weak are at the
mercy of the strong. No one can keep what he has produced, unless he is
more capable of defending it, than others who give no part of their time
and exertions to useful industry are of taking it from him. The
productive classes, therefore, when the insecurity surpasses a certain
point, being unequal to their own protection against the predatory
population, are obliged to place themselves individually in a state of
dependence on some member of the predatory class, that it may be his
interest to shield them from all depredation except his own. In this
manner, in the Middle Ages, allodial property generally became feudal,
and numbers of the poorer freemen Edition: current; Page: [882]
voluntarily made themselves and their posterity serfs of some military
lord.

Nevertheless, in attaching to this great requisite, security of person
and property, the importance which is justly due to it, we must not
forget that even for economical purposes there are other things quite as
indispensable, the presence of which will often make up for a very
considerable degree of imperfection in the protective arrangements of
government. As was observed in a previous chapter,∗ the free cities of
Italy, Flanders, and the Hanseatic league, were habitually in a state of
such internal turbulence, varied by such destructive external wars, that
person and property enjoyed very imperfect protection; yet during
several centuries they increased rapidly in wealth and prosperity,
brought many of the industrial arts to a high degree of advancement,
carried on distant and dangerous voyages of exploration and commerce
with extraordinary success, became an overmatch in power for the
greatest feudal lords, and could defend themselves even against the
sovereigns of Europe: because in the midst of turmoil and violence, the
citizens of those towns enjoyed a certain rude freedom, under conditions
of union and co-operation, which, taken together, made them a brave,
energetic, and high-spirited people, and fostered a great amount of
public spirit and patriotism. The prosperity of these and other free
states in a lawless age shows that a certain degree of insecurity, in
some combinations of circumstances, has good as well as bad effects, by
making energy and practical ability the conditions of safety. Insecurity
paralyzes only when it is such in nature and in degree that no energy of
which mankind in general are capable affords any tolerable means of
self-protection. And this is a main reason why oppression by the
government, whose power is generally irresistible by any efforts that
can be made by individuals, has so much more baneful an effect on the
springs of national prosperity, than almost any degree of lawlessness
and turbulence under free institutions. Nations have acquired some
wealth, and made some progress in improvement, in states of social union
so imperfect as to border on anarchy: but no countries in which the
people were exposed without limit to arbitrary exactions from the
officers of government ever yet continued to have industry or wealth. A
few generations of such a government never fail to extinguish both. Some
of the fairest, and once the most prosperous, regions of the Edition:
current; Page: [883] earth, have, under the Roman and afterwards under
the Turkish dominion, been reduced to a desert, solely by that cause. I
say solely, because they would have recovered with the utmost rapidity,
as countries always do, from the devastations of war, or any other
temporary calamities. Difficulties and hardships are often but an
incentive to exertion: what is fatal to it, is the belief that it will
not be suffered to produce its fruits.

§ 2. Simple over-taxation by government, though a great evil, is not
comparable in the economical part of its mischiefs to exactions much
more moderate in amount, which either subject the contributor to the
arbitrary mandate of government officers, or are so laid on as to place
skill, industry, and frugality at a disadvantage. The burthen of
taxation in our own country is very great, yet as every one knows its
limit, and is seldom made to pay more than he expects and calculates on,
and as the modes of taxation are not of such a kind as much to impair
the motives to industry and economy, the sources of prosperity are
little diminished by the pressure of taxation; they may even, as some
think, be increased, by the extra exertions made to compensate for the
pressure of the taxes. But in the barbarous despotisms of many countries
of the East, where taxation consists in fastening upon those who have
succeeded in acquiring something, in order to confiscate it, unless the
possessor buys its release by submitting to give some large sum as a
compromise, we cannot expect to find voluntary industry, or wealth
derived from any source but plunder. And even in comparatively civilized
countries, bad modes of raising a revenue have had effects similar in
kind, though in an inferior degree. French writers before the Revolution
represented the taille as a main cause of the backward state of
agriculture, and of the wretched condition of the rural population; not
from its amount, but because, being proportioned to the visible capital
of the cultivator, it gave him a motive for appearing poor, which
sufficed to turn the scale in favour of indolence. The arbitrary powers
also of fiscal officers, of intendants and subdélégués, were more
destructive of prosperity than a far larger amount of exactions, because
they destroyed security: there was a marked superiority in the condition
of the pays d'états, which were exempt from this scourge. The universal
venality ascribed [1848] to Russian functionaries must be an immense
drag on the capabilities of economical improvement possessed so
abundantly by the Russian empire: since the emoluments of public
officers must depend on the success Edition: current; Page: [884] with
which they can multiply vexations, for the purpose of being bought off
by bribes.

Yet mere excess of taxation, even when not aggravated by uncertainty,
is, independently of its injustice, a serious economical evil. It may be
carried so far as to discourage industry by insufficiency of reward.
Very long before it reaches this point it prevents or greatly checks
accumulation, or causes the capital accumulated to be sent for
investment to foreign countries. Taxes which fall on profits, even
though that kind of income may not pay more than its just share,
necessarily diminish the motive to any saving, except for investment in
foreign countries where profits are higher. Holland, for example, seems
to have long ago reached the practical minimum of profits: already in
the last century her wealthy capitalists had a great part of their
fortunes invested in the loans and joint-stock speculations of other
countries: and this low rate of profit is ascribed to the heavy
taxation, which had been in some measure forced on her by the
circumstances of her position and history. The taxes indeed, besides
their great amount, were many of them on necessaries, a kind of tax
peculiarly injurious to industry and accumulation. But when the
aggregate amount of taxation is very great, it is inevitable that
recourse must be had for part of it to taxes of an objectionable
character. And any taxes on consumption, when heavy, even if not
operating on profits, have something of the same effect, by driving
persons of moderate means to live abroad, often taking their capital
with them. Although I by no means join with those political economists
who think no state of national existence desirable in which there is not
a rapid increase of wealth, I cannot overlook the many disadvantages to
an independent nation from being brought prematurely to a stationary
state, while the neighbouring countries continue advancing.

§ 3. The subject of protection to person and property, considered as
afforded by government, ramifies widely, into a number of indirect
channels. It embraces, for example, the whole subject of the perfection
or inefficiency of the means provided for the ascertainment of rights
and the redress of injuries. Person and property cannot be considered
secure where the administration of justice is imperfect, either from
defect of integrity or capacity in the tribunals, or because the delays,
vexation, and expense accompanying their operation impose a heavy tax on
those who appeal to them, and make it preferable to submit to any
endurable amount of the evils Edition: current; Page: [885] which they
are designed to remedy. In England there is no fault to be found with
the administration of justice, in point of pecuniary integrity; a result
which the progress of social improvement may also be supposed to have
brought about in several other nations of Europe. But legal and judicial
imperfections of other kinds are abundant; and, in England especially,
are a large abatement from the value of the services which the
government renders back to the people in return for our enormous
taxation. In the first place, the incognoscibility (as Bentham termed
it) of the law, and its extreme uncertainty, even to those who best know
it, render a resort to the tribunals often necessary for obtaining
justice, when, there being no dispute as to facts, no litigation ought
to be required. In the next place, the procedure of the tribunals is so
replete with delay, vexation, and expense, that the price at which
justice is at last obtained is an evil outweighing a very considerable
amount of injustice; and the wrong side, even that which the law
considers such, has many chances of gaining its point, through the
abandonment of litigation by the other party for want of funds, or
through a compromise in which a sacrifice is made of just rights to
terminate the suit, or through some technical quirk, whereby a decision
is obtained on some other ground than the merits. This last detestable
incident often happens without blame to the judge, under a system of law
of which a great part rests on no rational principles adapted to the
present state of society, but was originally founded partly on a kind of
whims and conceits, and partly on the principles and incidents of feudal
tenure (which now survive only as legal fictions); and has only been
very imperfectly adapted, as cases arose, to the changes which had taken
place in society. Of all parts of the English legal system, the Court of
Chancery, which has the best substantive law, has been incomparably the
worst as to delay, vexation, and expense; and this is the only tribunal
for most of the classes of cases which are in their nature the most
complicated, such as cases of partnership, and the great range and
variety of cases which come under the denomination of trust. 1 The
recent reforms in this Court have abated the mischief, but are still far
from having removed it.

Fortunately for the prosperity of England, the greater part of the
mercantile law is comparatively modern, and was made by the tribunals,
by the simple process of recognizing and giving force of law to the
usages which, from motives of convenience, had grown up among merchants
themselves: so that this part of the law, at Edition: current; Page:
[886] least, was substantially made by those who were most interested in
its goodness: while the defects of the tribunals have been the less
practically pernicious in reference to commercial transactions, because
the importance of credit, which depends on character, renders the
restraints of opinion (though, as daily experience proves, an
insufficient) yet a very powerful, protection against those forms of
mercantile dishonesty which are generally recognized as such.

The imperfections of the law, both in its substance and in its
procedure, fall heaviest upon the interests connected with what is
technically called real property; in the general language of European
jurisprudence, immoveable property. With respect to all this portion of
the wealth of the community, the law fails egregiously in the protection
which it undertakes to provide. It fails, first, by the uncertainty, and
the maze of technicalities, which make it impossible for any one, at
however great an expense, to possess a title to land which he can
positively know to be unassailable. It fails, secondly, in omitting to
provide due evidence of transactions, by a proper registration of legal
documents. It fails, thirdly, by creating a necessity for operose and
expensive instruments and formalities (independently of fiscal burthens)
on occasion of the purchase and sale, or even the lease or mortgage, of
immoveable property. And, fourthly, it fails by the intolerable expense
and delay of law proceedings, in almost all cases in which real property
is concerned. There is no doubt that the greatest sufferers by the
defects of the higher courts of civil law are the landowners. Legal
expenses, either those of actual litigation, or of the preparation of
legal instruments, form, I apprehend, no inconsiderable item in the
annual expenditure of most persons of large landed property, and the
saleable value of their land is greatly impaired, by the difficulty of
giving to the buyer complete confidence in the title; independently of
the legal expenses which accompany the transfer. Yet the landowners,
though they have been masters of the legislation of England, to say the
least since 1688, have never made a single move in the direction of law
reform, and have been strenuous opponents of some of the improvements of
which they would more particularly reap the benefit; especially that
great one of a registration of contracts affecting land, which when
proposed by a Commission of eminent real property lawyers, and
introduced into the House of Commons by Lord Campbell, was so offensive
to the general body of landlords, and was rejected by so large a
majority, Edition: current; Page: [887] as to have long discouraged any
repetition of the attempt.∗ This irrational hostility to improvement, in
a case in which their own interest would be the most benefited by it,
must be ascribed to an intense timidity on the subject of their titles,
generated by the defects of the very law which they refuse to alter; and
to a conscious ignorance, and incapacity of judgment, on all legal
subjects, which makes them helplessly defer to the opinion of their
professional advisers, heedless of the fact that every imperfection of
the law, in proportion as it is burthensome to them, brings gain to the
lawyer.

In so far as the defects of legal arrangements are a mere burthen on the
landowner, they do not much affect the sources of production; but the
uncertainty of the title under which land is held, must often act as a
great discouragement to the expenditure of capital in its improvement;
and the expense of making transfers, operates to prevent land from
coming into the hands of those who would use it to most advantage; often
amounting, in the case of small purchases, to more than the price of the
land, and tantamount, therefore, to a prohibition of the purchase and
sale of land in small portions, unless in exceptional circumstances.
Such purchases, however, are almost everywhere extremely desirable,
there being hardly any country in which landed property is not either
too much or too little subdivided, requiring either that great estates
should be broken down, or that small ones should be bought up and
consolidated. To make land as easily transferable as stock would be one
of the greatest economical improvements which could be bestowed on a
country; and has been shown, again and again, to have no insuperable
difficulty attending it.

Besides the excellences or defects that belong to the law and judicature
of a country as a system of arrangements for attaining direct practical
ends, much also depends, even in an economical point of view, upon the
moral influences of the law. Enough has been said in a former place† on
the degree in which both the industrial and all other combined
operations of mankind depend for efficiency on their being able to rely
on one another for probity and fidelity to engagements; from which we
see how greatly even the economical prosperity of a country is liable to
be affected by anything in its institutions by which either integrity
and trustworthiness, or the contrary qualities, are encouraged. The law
everywhere ostensibly Edition: current; Page: [888] favours at least
pecuniary honesty and the faith of contracts; but if it affords
facilities for evading those obligations, by trick and chicanery, or by
the unscrupulous use of riches in instituting unjust or resisting just
litigation; if there are ways and means by which persons may attain the
ends of roguery, under the apparent sanction of the law; to that extent
the law is demoralizing, even in regard to pecuniary integrity. And such
cases are, unfortunately, frequent under the English system. If, again,
the law, by a misplaced indulgence, protects idleness or prodigality
against their natural consequences, or dismisses crime with inadequate
penalties, the effect, both on the prudential and on the social virtues,
is unfavourable. When the law, by its own dispensations and injunctions,
establishes injustice between individual and individual; as all laws do
which recognize any form of slavery; as the laws of all countries do,
though not all in the same degree, in respect to the family relations;
and as the laws of many countries do, though in still more unequal
degrees, as between rich and poor; the effect on the moral sentiments of
the people is still more disastrous. But these subjects introduce
considerations so much larger and deeper than those of political
economy, that I only advert to them in order not to pass wholly
unnoticed, things superior in importance to those of which I treat.

Edition: current; Page: [889]


CHAPTER IX: the same subject continued

§ 1. Having spoken thus far of the effects produced by the excellences
or defects of the general system of the law, I shall now touch upon
those resulting from the special character of parts of it. As a
selection must be made, I shall confine myself to a few leading topics.
The portions of the civil law of a country which are of most importance
economically (next to those which determine the status of the labourer,
as slave, serf, or free) are those relating to the two subjects of
Inheritance and Contract. Of the laws relating to contract, none are
more important economically, than the laws of partnership, and those of
insolvency. It happens that on all these three points, there is just
ground for condemning some of the provisions of the English law.

With regard to Inheritance, I have, in an early chapter, considered the
general principles of the subject, and suggested what appear to me to
be, putting all prejudices apart, the best dispositions which the law
could adopt. Freedom of bequest as the general rule, but limited by two
things: first, that if there are descendants, who, being unable to
provide for themselves, would become burthensome to the state, the
equivalent of whatever the state would accord to them should be reserved
from the property for their benefit: and secondly, that no one person
should be permitted to acquire, by inheritance, more than the amount of
a moderate independence. In case of intestacy, the whole property to
escheat to the state: which should be bound to make a just and
reasonable provision for descendants, that is, such a provision as the
parent or ancestor ought to have made, their circumstances, capacities,
and mode of bringing up being considered.

The laws of inheritance, however, have probably several phases of
improvement to go through, before ideas so far removed from present
modes of thinking will be taken into serious consideration: Edition:
current; Page: [890] and as, among the recognized modes of determining
the succession to property, some must be better and others worse, it is
necessary to consider which of them deserves the preference. As an
intermediate course, therefore, I would recommend the extension to all
property of the present English law of inheritance affecting personal
property (freedom of bequest, and in case of intestacy, equal division):
except that no rights should be acknowledged in collaterals, and that
the property of those who have neither descendants nor ascendants, and
make no will, should escheat to the state.

The laws of existing nations deviate from these maxims in two opposite
ways. In England, and in most of the countries where the influence of
feudality is still felt in the laws, one of the objects aimed at in
respect to land and other immoveable property is to keep it together in
large masses: accordingly, in cases of intestacy, it passes, generally
speaking (for the local custom of a few places is different),
exclusively to the eldest son. And though the rule of primogeniture is
not binding on testators, who in England have nominally the power of
bequeathing their property as they please, any proprietor may so
exercise this power as to deprive his immediate successor of it, by
entailing the property on one particular line of his descendants: which,
besides preventing it from passing by inheritance in any other than the
prescribed manner, is attended with the incidental consequence of
precluding it from being sold; since each successive possessor, having
only a life interest in the property, cannot alienate it for a longer
period than his own life. In some other countries, such as France, the
law, on the contrary, compels division of inheritances; not only, in
case of intestacy, sharing the property, both real and personal, equally
among all the children, or (if there are no children) among all
relatives in the same degree of propinquity; but also not recognizing
any power of bequest, or recognizing it over only a limited portion of
the property, the remainder being subjected to compulsory equal
division.

Neither of these systems, I apprehend, was introduced, or is perhaps
maintained, in the countries where it exists, from any general
considerations of justice, or any foresight of economical consequences,
but chiefly from political motives; in the one case to keep up large
hereditary fortunes, and a landed aristocracy; in the other, to break
these down, and prevent their resurrection. The first object, as an aim
of national policy, I conceive to be eminently undesirable: with regard
to the second, I have pointed out what seems to me a better mode of
attaining it. The merit, or Edition: current; Page: [891] demerit,
however, of either purpose, belongs to the general science of politics,
not to the limited department of that science which is here treated of.
Each of the two systems is a real and efficient instrument for the
purpose intended by it; but each, as it appears to me, achieves that
purpose at the cost of much mischief.

§ 2. There are two arguments of an economical character, which are urged
in favour of primogeniture. One is, the stimulus applied to the industry
and ambition of younger children, by leaving them to be the architects
of their own fortunes. This argument was put by Dr. Johnson in a manner
more forcible than complimentary to an hereditary aristocracy, when he
said, by way of recommendation of primogeniture, that it “makes but one
fool in a family.” It is curious that a defender of aristocratic
institutions should be the person to assert that to inherit such a
fortune as takes away any necessity for exertion is generally fatal to
activity and strength of mind: in the present state of education,
however, the proposition, with some allowance for exaggeration, may be
admitted to be true. But whatever force there is in the argument counts
in favour of limiting the eldest, as well as all the other children, to
a mere provision, and dispensing with even the “one fool” whom Dr.
Johnson was willing to tolerate. If unearned riches are so pernicious to
the character, one does not see why, in order to withhold the poison
from the junior members of a family, there should be no way but to unite
all their separate potions, and administer them in the largest possible
dose to one selected victim. It cannot be necessary to inflict this
great evil on the eldest son for want of knowing what else to do with a
large fortune.

Some writers, however, look upon the effect of primogeniture in
stimulating industry, as depending, not so much on the poverty of the
younger children, as on the contrast between that poverty and the riches
of the elder; thinking it indispensable to the activity and energy of
the hive that there should be a huge drone here and there, to impress
the working bees with a due sense of the advantages of honey. “Their
inferiority in point of wealth,” says Mr. M'Culloch, speaking of the
younger children, “and their desire to escape from this lower station,
and to attain to the same level with their elder brothers, inspires them
with an energy and vigour they could not otherwise feel. But the
advantage of preserving large estates from being frittered down by a
scheme of equal division, is not limited to its influence over the
younger children of their owners. Edition: current; Page: [892] It
raises universally the standard of competence, and gives new force to
the springs which set industry in motion. The manner of living among the
great landlords is that in which every one is ambitious of being able to
indulge; and their habits of expense, though sometimes injurious to
themselves, act as powerful incentives to the ingenuity and enterprise
of the other classes, who never think their fortunes sufficiently ample,
unless they will enable them to emulate the splendour of the richest
landlords; so that the custom of primogeniture seems to render all
classes more industrious, and to augment at the same time, the mass of
wealth and the scale of enjoyment.”∗

The portion of truth, I can hardly say contained in these observations,
but recalled by them, I apprehend to be, that a state of complete
equality of fortunes would not be favourable to active exertion for the
increase of wealth. Speaking of the mass, it is as true of wealth as of
most other distinctions—of talent, knowledge, virtue—that those who
already have, or think they have, as much of it as their neighbours,
will seldom exert themselves to acquire more. But it is not therefore
necessary that society should provide a set of persons with large
fortunes, to fulfil the social duty of standing to be looked at, with
envy and admiration, by the aspiring poor. The fortunes which people
have acquired for themselves, answer the purpose quite as well, indeed
much better; since a person is more powerfully stimulated by the example
of somebody who has earned a fortune, than by the mere sight of somebody
who possesses one; and the former is necessarily an example of prudence
and frugality as well as industry, while the latter much oftener sets an
example of profuse expense, which spreads, with pernicious effect, to
the very class on whom the sight of riches is supposed to have so
beneficial an influence, namely, those whose weakness of mind, and taste
for ostentation, makes “the splendour of the richest landlords” attract
them with the most potent spell. In America there are few or no
hereditary fortunes; yet industrial energy, and the ardour of
accumulation, are not supposed to be particularly backward in that part
of the world. When a country has once fairly entered into the industrial
career, which is the principal occupation of the modern, as war was that
of the ancient and medieval world, the desire of acquisition by industry
needs no factitious stimulus: the advantages naturally inherent in
riches, and the character they assume Edition: current; Page: [893] of a
test by which talent and success in life are habitually measured, are an
ample security for their being pursued with sufficient intensity and
zeal. As to the deeper consideration, that the diffusion of wealth, and
not its concentration, is desirable, and that the more wholesome state
of society is not that in which immense fortunes are possessed by a few
and coveted by all, but that in which the greatest possible numbers
possess and are contented with a moderate competency, which all may hope
to acquire; I refer to it in this place only to show how widely
separated, on social questions, is the entire mode of thought of the
defenders of primogeniture, from that which is partially promulgated in
the present treatise.

The other economical argument in favour of primogeniture has special
reference to landed property. It is contended that the habit of dividing
inheritances equally, or with an approach to equality, among children,
promotes the subdivision of land into portions too small to admit of
being cultivated in an advantageous manner. This argument, eternally
reproduced, has again and again been refuted by English and Continental
writers. It proceeds on a supposition entirely at variance with that on
which all the theorems of political economy are grounded. It assumes
that mankind in general will habitually act in a manner opposed to their
immediate and obvious pecuniary interest. For the division of the
inheritance does not necessarily imply division of the land; which may
be held in common, as is not unfrequently the case in France and
Belgium; or may become the property of one of the coheirs, being charged
with the shares of the others by way of mortgage; or they may sell it
outright, and divide the proceeds. When the division of the land would
diminish its productive power, it is the direct interest of the heirs to
adopt some one of these arrangements. Supposing, however, what the
argument assumes, that either from legal difficulties or from their own
stupidity and barbarism, they would not, if left to themselves, obey the
dictates of this obvious interest, but would insist upon cutting up the
land bodily into equal parcels, with the effect of impoverishing
themselves; this would be an objection to a law such as exists in
France, of compulsory division, but can be no reason why testators
should be discouraged from exercising the right of bequest in general
conformity to the rule of equality, since it would always be in their
power to provide that the division of the inheritance should take place
without dividing the land itself. That the attempts of the advocates of
primogeniture to make out a case by facts against the custom of equal
division, are equally abortive, Edition: current; Page: [894] has been
shown in a former place. In all countries, or parts of countries, in
which the division of inheritances is accompanied by small holdings, it
is because small holdings are the general system of the country, even on
the estates of the great proprietors.

Unless a strong case of social utility can be made out for
primogeniture, it stands sufficiently condemned by the general
principles of justice; being a broad distinction in the treatment of one
person and of another, grounded solely on an accident. There is no need,
therefore, to make out any case of economical evil against
primogeniture. Such a case, however, and a very strong one, may be made.
It is a natural effect of primogeniture to make the landlords a needy
class. The object of the institution, or custom, is to keep the land
together in large masses, and this it commonly accomplishes; but the
legal proprietor of a large domain is not necessarily the bonâ fide
owner of the whole income which it yields. It is usually charged, in
each generation, with provisions for the other children. It is often
charged still more heavily by the imprudent expenditure of the
proprietor. Great landowners are generally improvident in their
expenses; they live up to their incomes when at the highest, and if any
change of circumstances diminishes their resources, some time elapses
before they make up their minds to retrench. Spendthrifts in other
classes are ruined, and disappear from society; but the spendthrift
landlord usually holds fast to his land, even when he has become a mere
receiver of its rents for the benefit of creditors. The same desire to
keep up the “splendour” of the family, which gives rise to the custom of
primogeniture, indisposes the owner to sell a part in order to set free
the remainder; their apparent are therefore habitually greater than
their real means, and they are under a perpetual temptation to
proportion their expenditure to the former rather than to the latter.
From such causes as these, in almost all countries of great landowners,
the majority of landed estates are deeply mortgaged; and instead of
having capital to spare for improvements, it requires all the increased
value of land, caused by the rapid increase of the wealth and population
of the country, to preserve the class from being impoverished.

§ 3. To avert this impoverishment, recourse was had to the contrivance
of entails, whereby the order of succession was irrevocably fixed, and
each holder, having only a life interest, was unable to burthen his
successor. The land thus passing, free from debt, into the possession of
the heir, the family could not be ruined Edition: current; Page: [895]
by the improvidence of its existing representative. The economical evils
arising from this disposition of property were partly of the same kind,
partly different, but on the whole greater, than those arising from
primogeniture alone. The possessor could not now ruin his successors,
but he could still ruin himself: he was not at all more likely than in
the former case to have the means necessary for improving the property:
while, even if he had, he was still less likely to employ them for that
purpose, when the benefit was to accrue to a person whom the entail made
independent of him, while he had probably younger children to provide
for, in whose favour he could not now charge the estate. While thus
disabled from being himself an improver, neither could he sell the
estate to somebody who would; since entail precludes alienation. In
general he has even been unable to grant leases beyond the term of his
own life; “for,” says Blackstone, “if such leases had been valid, then,
under cover of long leases, the issue might have been virtually
disinherited;” and it has been necessary in Great Britain to relax, by
statute, the rigour of entails, in order to allow either of long leases,
or of the execution of improvements at the expense of the estate. It may
be added that the heir of entail, being assured of succeeding to the
family property, however undeserving of it, and being aware of this from
his earliest years, has much more than the ordinary chances of growing
up idle, dissipated, and profligate.

In England, the power of entail is more limited by law, than in Scotland
and in most other countries where it exists. A landowner can settle his
property upon any number of persons successively who are living at the
time, and upon one unborn person, on whose attaining the age of
twenty-one, the entail expires, and the land becomes his absolute
property. An estate may in this manner be transmitted through a son, or
a son and grandson, living when the deed is executed, to an unborn child
of that grandson. It has been maintained that this power of entail is
not sufficiently extensive to do any mischief: in truth, however, it is
much larger than it seems. Entails very rarely expire; the first heir of
entail, when of age, joins with the existing possessor in resettling the
estate, so as to prolong the entail for a further term. Large
properties, therefore, are rarely free, for any considerable period,
from the restraints of a strict settlement; 1 though the mischief is in
one respect mitigated, Edition: current; Page: [896] since in the
renewal of the settlement for one more generation, the estate is usually
charged with a provision for younger children.

In an economical point of view, the best system of landed property is
that in which land is most completely an object of commerce; passing
readily from hand to hand when a buyer can be found to whom it is worth
while to offer a greater sum for the land, than the value of the income
drawn from it by its existing possessor. This of course is not meant of
ornamental property, which is a source of expense, not profit; but only
of land employed for industrial uses, and held for the sake of the
income which it affords. Whatever facilitates the sale of land, tends to
make it a more productive instrument of the community at large; whatever
prevents or restricts its sale, subtracts from its usefulness. Now, not
only has entail this effect, but primo. geniture also. The desire to
keep land together in large masses, from other motives than that of
promoting its productiveness, often prevents changes and alienations
which would increase its efficiency as an instrument.

§ 4. On the other hand, a law which, like the French, restricts the
power of bequest to a narrow compass, and compels the equal division of
the whole or the greater part of the property among the children, seems
to me, though on different grounds, also very seriously objectionable.
The only reason for recognizing in the children any claim at all to more
than a provision, sufficient to launch them in life, and enable them to
find a livelihood, is grounded on the expressed or presumed wish of the
parent; whose claim to dispose of what is actually his own, cannot be
set aside by any pretensions of others to receive what is not theirs. To
control the rightful owner's liberty of gift, by creating in the
children a legal right superior to it, is to postpone a real claim to an
imaginary one. To this great and paramount objection to the law,
numerous secondary ones may be added. Desirable as it is that the parent
should treat the children with impartiality, and not make an eldest son
or a favourite, impartial division is not alway synonymous with equal
division. Some of the children may, without fault of their own, be less
capable than others of providing for themselves: some may, by other
means than their own exertions, be already provided for: and
impartiality may therefore require that the rule observed should not be
one of equality, but of compensation. Even when equality is the object,
there are sometimes better means of attaining it, than the inflexible
rules by which law must necessarily proceed. Edition: current; Page:
[897] If one of the coheirs, being of a quarrelsome or litigious
disposition, stands upon his utmost rights, the law cannot make
equitable adjustments; it cannot apportion the property as seems best
for the collective interest of all concerned; if there are several
parcels of land, and the heirs cannot agree about their value, the law
cannot give a parcel to each, but every separate parcel must be either
put up to sale or divided: if there is a residence, or a park or
pleasure-ground, which would be destroyed, as such, by subdivision, it
must be sold, perhaps at a great sacrifice both of money and of feeling.
But what the law could not do, the parent could. By means of the liberty
of be. quest, all these points might be determined according to reason
and the general interest of the persons concerned; and the spirit of the
principle of equal division might be the better observed, because the
testator was emancipated from its letter. Finally, it would not then be
necessary, as under the compulsory system it is, that the law should
interfere authoritatively in the concerns of individuals, not only on
the occurrence of a death, but throughout life, in order to guard
against the attempts of parents to frustrate the legal claims of their
heirs, under colour of gifts and other alienations inter vivos.

In conclusion; all owners of property should, I conceive, have power to
dispose by will of every part of it, but not to determine the person who
should succeed to it after the death of all who were living when the
will was made. Under what restrictions it should be allowable to
bequeath property to one person for life, with remainder to another
person already in existence, is a question belonging to general
legislation, not to political economy. Such settlements would be no
greater hindrance to alienation than any case of joint ownership, since
the consent of persons actually in existence is all that would be
necessary for any new arrangement respecting the property.

§ 5. From the subject of Inheritance I now pass to that of Contracts,
and among these, to the important subject of the Laws of Partnership.
How much of good or evil depends upon these laws, and how important it
is that they should be the best possible, is evident to all who
recognize in the extension of the co-operative principle in the larger
sense of the term, the great economical necessity of modern industry.
The progress of the productive arts requiring that many sorts of
industrial occupation should be carried on by larger and larger
capitals, the productive power of industry must suffer by Edition:
current; Page: [898] whatever impedes the formation of large capitals
through the aggregation of smaller ones. Capitals of the requisite
magnitude belonging to single owners, do not, in most countries, exist
in the needful abundance, and would be still less numerous if the laws
favoured the diffusion instead of the concentration of property: while
it is most undesirable that all those improved processes, and those
means of efficiency and economy in production, which depend on the
possession of large funds, should be monopolies in the hands of a few
rich individuals, through the difficulties experienced by persons of
moderate or small means in associating their capital. Finally, I must
repeat my conviction, that the industrial economy which divides society
absolutely into two portions, the payers of wages and the receivers of
them, the first counted by thousands and the last by millions, is
neither fit for, nor capable of, indefinite duration: and the
possibility of changing this system for one of combination without
dependence, and unity of interest instead of organized hostility,
depends altogether upon the future developments of the Partnership
principle.

Yet there is scarcely any country whose laws do not throw great, and in
most cases intentional obstacles in the way of the formation of any
numerous partnership. In England it is already a serious discouragement,
that differences among partners are, practically speaking, only capable
of adjudication by the Court of Chancery: which is often worse than
placing such questions out of the pale of all law; since any one of the
disputant parties, who is either dishonest or litigious, can involve the
others at his pleasure in the expense, trouble, and anxiety, which are
the unavoidable accompaniments of a Chancery suit, without their having
the power of freeing themselves from the infliction even by breaking up
the association.∗ Besides this, it required, until lately, a separate
Act Edition: current; Page: [899] of the legislature before any
joint-stock association could legally constitute itself, and be
empowered to act as one body. By a statute passed a few years ago, this
necessity is done away; but the statute in question is described by
competent authorities as a “mass of confusion,” of which they say that
there “never was such an infliction” on persons entering into
partnership.∗1 When a number of persons, whether few or many, freely
desire to unite their funds for a common undertaking, not asking any
peculiar privilege, nor the power to dispossess any one of property, the
law can have no good reason for throwing difficulties in the way of the
realization of the project. On compliance with a few simple conditions
of publicity, any body of persons ought to have the power of
constituting themselves into a joint-stock company, or société en nom
collectif, without asking leave either of any public officer or of
parliament.2 As an association of many partners must practically be
under the management of a few, every facility ought to be afforded to
the body for exercising the necessary control and check over those few,
whether they be themselves members of the association, or merely its
hired servants: and in this point the English system is still at a
lamentable distance from the standard of perfection.3

§ 6. Whatever facilities, however, English law might give to
associations formed on the principles of ordinary partnership, there is
one sort of joint-stock association which until the year 1855 it
absolutely disallowed, and which could only be called into existence by
a special act either of the legislature or of the crown.4 I mean,
associations with limited liability.

Associations with limited liability are of two kinds: in one, the
Edition: current; Page: [900] liability of all the partners is limited,
in the other that of some of them only. The first is the société anonyme
of the French law, which in England had until lately no other name than
that of “chartered company” meaning thereby a joint-stock company whose
shareholders, by a charter from the crown or a special enactment of the
legislature, stood exempted from any liability for the debts of the
concern, beyond the amount of their subscriptions. The other species of
limited partnership is that known to the French law under the name of
commandite; of this, which in England is still unrecognized and illegal,
I shall speak presently.

If a number of persons chose to associate for carrying on any operation
of commerce or industry, agreeing among themselves and announcing to
those with whom they deal that the members of the association do not
undertake to be responsible beyond the amount of the subscribed capital;
is there any reason that the law should raise objections to this
proceeding, and should impose on them the unlimited responsibility which
they disclaim? For whose sake? Not for that of the partners themselves;
for it is they whom the limitation of responsibility benefits and
protects. It must therefore be for the sake of third parties; namely,
those who may have transactions with the association, and to whom it may
run in debt beyond what the subscribed capital suffices to pay. But
nobody is obliged to deal with the association: still less is any one
obliged to give it unlimited credit. The class of persons with whom such
associations have dealings are in general perfectly capable of taking
care of themselves, and there seems no reason that the law should be
more careful of their interests than they will themselves be; provided
no false representation is held out, and they are aware from the first
what they have to trust to. The law is warranted in requiring from all
joint-stock associations with limited responsibility, not only that the
amount of capital on which they profess to carry on business should
either be actually paid up or security given for it (if, indeed, with
complete publicity, such a requirement would be necessary), but also
that such accounts should be kept, accessible to individuals, and if
needful, published to the world, as shall render it possible to
ascertain at any time the existing state of the company's affairs, and
to learn whether the capital which is the sole security for the
engagements into which they enter, still subsists unimpaired: the
fidelity of such accounts being guarded by sufficient penalties. When
the law has thus afforded to individuals all practicable means of
knowing the circumstances which Edition: current; Page: [901] ought to
enter into their prudential calculations in dealing with the company,
there seems no more need for interfering with individual judgment in
this sort of transactions, than in any other part of the private
business of life.

The reason usually urged for such interference is, that the managers of
an association with limited responsibility, not risking their whole
fortunes in the event of loss, while in case of gain they might profit
largely, are not sufficiently interested in exercising due
circumspection, and are under the temptation of exposing the funds of
the association to improper hazards. It is, however, well ascertained
that associations with unlimited responsibility, if they have rich
shareholders, can obtain, even when known to be reckless in their
transactions, improper credit to an extent far exceeding what would be
given to companies equally ill-conducted whose creditors had only the
subscribed capital to rely on.∗1 To whichever side the balance of evil
inclines, it is a consideration of more importance to the shareholders
themselves than to third parties; since, with proper securities for
publicity, the capital of an association with limited liability could
not be engaged in hazards beyond those ordinarily incident to the
business it carries on, without the facts being known, and becoming the
subject of comments by which the credit of the body would be likely to
be affected in quite as great a degree as the circumstances would
justify. If, under securities for publicity, it were found in practice
that companies, formed on the principle of unlimited responsibility,
were more skilfully and more cautiously managed, companies with limited
liability would be unable to maintain an equal competition with them;
and would therefore rarely be formed, unless when such limitation was
the only condition on which the necessary amount of capital could be
raised: and in that case it would be very unreasonable to say that their
formation ought to be prevented.

It may further be remarked, that although, with equality of capital, a
company of limited liability offers a somewhat less security to those
who deal with it, than one in which every shareholder is responsible
with his whole fortune, yet even the weaker of these Edition: current;
Page: [902] two securities is in some respects stronger than that which
an individual capitalist can afford. In the case of an individual, there
is such security as can be founded on his unlimited liability, but not
that derived from publicity of transactions, or from a known and large
amount of paid-up capital. This topic is well treated in an able paper
by M. Coquelin, published in the Revue des Deux Mondes for July 1843.∗

“While third parties who trade with individuals,” says this writer,
“scarcely ever know, except by approximation, and even that most vague
and uncertain, what is the amount of capital responsible for the
performance of contracts made with them, those who trade with a société
anonyme can obtain full information if they seek it, and perform their
operations with a feeling of confidence that cannot exist in the other
case. Again, nothing is easier than for an individual trader to conceal
the extent of his engagements, as no one can know it certainly but
himself. Even his confidential clerk may be ignorant of it, as the loans
he finds himself compelled to make may not all be of a character to
require that they be entered in his day-book. It is a secret confined to
himself; one which transpires rarely, and always slowly; one which is
unveiled only when the catastrophe has occurred. On the contrary, the
société anonyme neither can nor ought to borrow, without the fact
becoming known to all the world—directors, clerks, shareholders, and the
public. Its operations partake in some respects, of the nature of those
of governments. The light of day penetrates in every direction, and
there can be no secrets from those who seek for information. Thus all is
fixed, recorded, known, of the capital and debts in the case of the
société anonyme, while all is uncertain and unknown in the case of the
individual trader. Which of the two, we would ask the reader, presents
the most favourable aspect, or the surest guarantee, to the view of
those who trade with them?

“Again, availing himself of the obscurity in which his affairs are
shrouded, and which he desires to increase, the private trader is
enabled, so long as his business appears prosperous, to produce
impressions in regard to his means far exceeding the reality, and thus
to establish a credit not justified by those means. When losses occur,
and he sees himself threatened with bankruptcy, the world is still
ignorant of his condition, and he finds himself enabled to Edition:
current; Page: [903] contract debts far beyond the possibility of
payment. The fatal day arrives, and the creditors find a debt much
greater than had been anticipated, while the means of payment are as
much less. Even this is not all. The same obscurity which has served him
so well thus far, when desiring to magnify his capital and increase his
credit, now affords him the opportunity of placing a part of that
capital beyond the reach of his creditors. It becomes diminished, if not
annihilated. It hides itself, and not even legal remedies, nor the
activity of creditors, can bring it forth from the dark corners in which
it is placed.... Our readers can readily determine for themselves if
practices of this kind are equally easy in the case of the société
anonyme. We do not doubt that such things are possible, but we think
that they will agree with us that from its nature, its organization, and
the necessary publicity that attends all its actions, the liability to
such occurrences is very greatly diminished.”

The laws of most countries, England included, have erred in a twofold
manner with regard to joint-stock companies. While they have been most
unreasonably jealous of allowing such associations to exist, especially
with limited responsibility, they have generally neglected the
enforcement of publicity; the best security to the public against any
danger which might arise from this description of partnerships; and a
security quite as much required in the case of those associations of the
kind in question, which, by an exception from their general practice,
they suffered to exist. Even in the instance of the Bank of England,
which holds a monopoly from the legislature, and has had partial control
over a matter of so much public interest as the state of the circulating
medium, it is only within these few years that any publicity has been
enforced; and the publicity was at first of an extremely incomplete
character, though now, for most practical purposes, probably at length
sufficient.

§ 7. The other kind of limited partnership which demands our attention,
is that in which the managing partner or partners are responsible with
their whole fortunes for the engagements of the concern, but have others
associated with them who contribute only definite sums, and are not
liable for anything beyond, though they participate in the profits
according to any rule which may be agreed on. This is called partnership
en commandite: and the partners with limited liability (to whom, by the
French law, all interference in the management of the concern is
interdicted) are known by the name commanditaires. Such partnerships are
not Edition: current; Page: [904] allowed by English law:1 in all
private partnerships, whoever shares in the profits is liable for the
debts, to as plenary an extent as the managing partner.

For such prohibition no satisfactory defence has ever, so far as I am
aware, been made. Even the insufficient reason given against limiting
the responsibility of shareholders in a joint-stock company does not
apply here; there being no diminution of the motives to circumspect
management, since all who take any part in the direction of the concern
are liable with their whole fortunes. To third parties again; the
security is improved by the existence of a commandite; since the amount
subscribed by commanditaires is all of it available to creditors, the
commanditaires losing their whole investment before any creditor can
lose anything; while, if instead of becoming partners to that amount,
they had lent the sum at an interest equal to the profit they derived
from it, they would have shared with the other creditors in the residue
of the estate, diminishing pro rata the dividend obtained by all. While
the practice of commandite thus conduces to the interest of creditors,
it is often highly desirable for the contracting parties themselves. The
managers are enabled to obtain the aid of a much greater amount of
capital than they could borrow on their own security; and persons are
induced to aid useful undertakings, by embarking limited portions of
capital in them, when they would not, and often could not prudently,
have risked their whole fortunes on the chances of the enterprise.

It may perhaps be thought that where due facilities are afforded to
joint-stock companies, commandite partnerships are not required. But
there are classes of cases to which the commandite principle must always
be better adapted than the joint-stock principle. “Suppose,” says M.
Coquelin, “an inventor seeking for a capital to carry his invention into
practice. To obtain the aid of capitalists, he must offer them a share
of the anticipated benefit; they must associate themselves with him in
the chances of its success. In such a case, which of the forms would he
select? Not a common partnership, certainly;” for various reasons, and
especially the extreme difficulty of finding a partner with capital,
willing to risk his whole fortune on the success of the invention.∗
“Neither would he Edition: current; Page: [905] select the société
anonyme,” or any other form of joint-stock company, “in which he might
be superseded as manager. He would stand, in such an association, on no
better footing than any other shareholder, and he might be lost in the
crowd; whereas, the association existing, as it were, by and for him,
the management would appear to belong to him as a matter of right. Cases
occur in which a merchant or a manufacturer, without being precisely an
inventor, has undeniable claims to the management of an undertaking,
from the possession of qualities peculiarly calculated to promote its
success. So great, indeed,” continues M. Coquelin, “is the necessity, in
many cases, for the limited partnership, that it is difficult to
conceive how we could dispense with or replace it:” and in reference to
his own country he is probably in the right.

Where there is so great a readiness as in England, on the part of the
public, to form joint-stock associations, even without the encouragement
of a limitation of responsibility; commandite partnership, though its
prohibition is in principle quite indefensible, cannot be deemed to be,
in a merely economical point of view, of the imperative necessity which
M. Coquelin ascribes to it. Yet the inconveniences are not small, which
arise indirectly from provisions of law by which every one who shares in
the profits of a concern is subject to the full liabilities of an
unlimited partnership. It is impossible to say how many or what useful
modes of combination are rendered impracticable by such a state of the
law. It is sufficient for its condemnation that, unless in some way
relaxed, it is inconsistent with the payment of wages in part by a
percentage on Edition: current; Page: [906] profits; in other words, the
association of the operatives as virtual partners with the capitalist.∗

It is, above all, with reference to the improvement and elevation of the
working classes that complete freedom in the conditions of partnership
is indispensable. Combinations such as the associations of workpeople,
described in a former chapter, are the most powerful means of effecting
the social emancipation of the labourers through their own moral
qualities. Nor is the liberty of association important solely for its
examples of success, but fully as much so for the sake of attempts which
would not succeed; but by their failure would give instruction more
impressive than can be afforded by anything short of actual experience.
Every theory of social improvement, the worth of which is capable of
being brought to an experimental test, should be permitted, and even
encouraged, to submit itself to that test. From such experiments the
active portion of the working classes would derive lessons, which they
would be slow to learn from the teaching of persons supposed to have
interests and prejudices adverse to their good; would obtain the means
of correcting, at no cost to society, whatever is now erroneous in their
notions of the means of establishing their independence; and of
discovering the conditions, moral, intellectual, and industrial, which
are indispensably necessary for effecting without injustice, or for
effecting at all, the social regeneration they aspire to.†

The French law of partnership is superior to the English in permitting
commandite; and superior, in having no such unmanageable instrument as
the Court of Chancery, all cases arising from commercial transactions
being adjudicated in a comparatively cheap and expeditious manner by a
tribunal of merchants. In other respects the French system was, and I
believe, still is, far worse than the English. A joint-stock company
with limited responsibility cannot be formed without the express
authorization of the department Edition: current; Page: [907] of
government called the Conseil d'Etat, a body of administrators,
generally entire strangers to industrial transactions, who have no
interest in promoting enterprises, and are apt to think that the purpose
of their institution is to restrain them; whose consent cannot in any
case be obtained without an amount of time and labour which is a very
serious hindrance to the commencement of an enterprise, while the
extreme uncertainty of obtaining that consent at all is a great
discouragement to capitalists who would be willing to subscribe. In
regard to joint-stock companies without limitation of responsibility,
which in England exist in such numbers and are formed with such
facility, these associations cannot, in France, exist at all; for, in
cases of unlimited partnership, the French law does not permit the
division of the capital into transferable shares.

The best existing [1848] laws of partnership appear to be those of the
New England States. According to Mr. Carey,∗ “nowhere is association so
little trammelled by regulations as in New England; the consequence of
which is, that it is carried to a greater extent there, and particularly
in Massachusetts and Rhode Island, than in any other part of the world.
In these states, the soil is covered with compagnies anonymes—chartered
companies—for almost every conceivable purpose. Every town is a
corporation for the management of its roads, bridges, and schools: which
are, therefore, under the direct control of those who pay for them, and
are consequently well managed. Academies and churches, lyceums and
libraries, saving fund societies, and trust companies, exist in numbers
proportioned to the wants of the people, and all are corporations. Every
district has its local bank, of a size to suit its wants, the stock of
which is owned by the small capitalists of the neighbourhood, and
managed by themselves; the consequence of which is, that in no part of
the world is the system of banking so perfect—so little liable to
vibration in the amount of loans—the necessary effect of which is, that
in none is the value of property so little affected by changes in the
amount or value of the currency resulting from the movements of their
own banking institutions. In the two states to which we have
particularly referred, they are almost two hundred in number.
Massachusetts, alone, offers to our view fifty-three insurance offices,
of various forms, scattered through the state, and all incorporated.
Factories are incorporated, and are owned in Edition: current; Page:
[908] shares; and every one that has any part in the management of their
concerns, from the purchase of the raw material to the sale of the
manufactured article, is a part owner; while every one employed in them
has a prospect of becoming one, by the use of prudence, exertion, and
economy. Charitable associations exist in large numbers, and all are
incorporated. Fishing vessels are owned in shares by those who navigate
them; and the sailors of a whaling ship depend in a great degree, if not
altogether, upon the success of the voyage for their compensation. Every
master of a vessel trading in the Southern Ocean is a part owner, and
the interest he possesses is a strong inducement to exertion and
economy, by aid of which the people of New England are rapidly driving
out the competition of other nations for the trade of that part of the
world. Wherever settled, they exhibit the same tendency to combination
of action. In New York they are the chief owners of the lines of packet
ships, which are divided into shares, owned by the shipbuilders, the
merchants, the master, and the mates; which last generally acquire the
means of becoming themselves masters, and to this is due their great
success. The system is the most perfectly democratic of any in the
world. It affords to every labourer, every sailor, every operative, male
or female, the prospect of advancement; and its results are precisely
such as we should have reason to expect. In no part of the world are
talent, industry, and prudence, so certain to be largely rewarded.”

The cases of insolvency and fraud on the part of chartered companies in
America, which have caused so much loss and so much scandal in Europe,
did not occur in the part of the Union to which this extract refers, but
in other States, in which the right of association is much more fettered
by legal restrictions, and in which, accordingly, joint-stock
associations are not comparable in number or variety to those of New
England. Mr. Carey adds, “A careful examination of the systems of the
several states, can scarcely, we think, fail to convince the reader of
the advantage resulting from permitting men to determine among
themselves the terms upon which they will associate, and allowing the
associations that may be formed to contract with the public as to the
terms upon which they will trade together, whether of the limited or
unlimited liability of the partners.” 1 This principle has been Edition:
current; Page: [909] adopted as the foundation of all recent English
legislation on the subject.

§ 8. I proceed to the subject of Insolvency Laws.

Good laws on this subject are important, first and principally, on the
score of public morals; which are on no point more under the influence
of the law, for good and evil, than in a matter belonging so
pre-eminently to the province of law as the preservation of pecuniary
integrity. But the subject is also, in a merely economical point of
view, of great importance. First, because the economical well-being of a
people, and of mankind, depends in an especial manner upon their being
able to trust each other's engagements. Secondly, because one of the
risks, or expenses, of industrial operations is the risk or expense of
what are commonly called bad debts, and every saving which can be
effected in this liability is a diminution of cost of production; by
dispensing with an item of outlay which in no way conduces to the
desired end, and which must be paid for either by the consumer of the
commodity, or from the general profits of capital, according as the
burthen is peculiar or general.

The laws and practice of nations on this subject have almost always been
in extremes. The ancient laws of most countries were all severity to the
debtor. They invested the creditor with a power of coercion, more or
less tyrannical, which he might use against his insolvent debtor, either
to extort the surrender of hidden property, or to obtain satisfaction of
a vindictive character, which might console him for the non-payment of
the debt. This arbitrary power has extended, in some countries, to
making the insolvent debtor serve the creditor as his slave: in which
plan there were at least some grains of common sense, since it might
possibly be regarded as a scheme for making him work out the debt by his
labour. In England the coercion assumed the milder form of ordinary
imprisonment. The one and the other were the barbarous expedients of a
rude age, repugnant to justice, as well as to humanity. Unfortunately
the reform of them, like that of the criminal law generally, has been
taken in hand as an affair of humanity only, not of justice: and the
modish humanity of the present time, which is essentially a thing of one
idea,1 has in this as in other cases, gone into a violent Edition:
current; Page: [910] reaction against the ancient severity, and might
almost be supposed to see in the fact of having lost or squandered other
people's property, a peculiar title to indulgence. Everything in the law
which attached disagreeable consequences to that fact, was gradually
relaxed, or entirely got rid of: until the demoralizing effects of this
laxity became so evident as to determine, by more recent legislation, a
salutary though very insufficient movement in the reverse direction.1

The indulgence of the laws to those who have made themselves unable to
pay their just debts is usually defended on the plea that the sole
object of the law should be, in case of insolvency, not to coerce the
person of the debtor, but to get at his property, and distribute it
fairly among the creditors. Assuming that this is and ought to be the
sole object, the mitigation of the law was in the first instance carried
so far as to sacrifice that object. Imprisonment at the discretion of a
creditor was really a powerful engine for extracting from the debtor any
property which he had concealed or otherwise made away with; and it
remains to be shown by experience whether, in depriving creditors of
this instrument, the law, even as last amended, has furnished them with
a sufficient equivalent.2 But the doctrine, that the law has done all
that ought to be expected from it, when it has put the creditors in
possession of the property of an insolvent, is in itself a totally
inadmissible piece of spurious humanity. It is the business of law to
prevent wrong-doing, and not simply to patch up the consequences of it
when it has been committed. The law is bound to take care that
insolvency shall not be a good pecuniary speculation; that men shall not
have the privilege of hazarding other people's property without their
knowledge or consent, taking the profits of the enterprise if it is
successful, and if it fails throwing the loss upon the Edition: current;
Page: [911] rightful owners; and that they shall not find it answer to
make themselves unable to pay their just debts, by spending the money of
their creditors in personal indulgence. It is admitted that what is
technically called fraudulent bankruptcy, the false pretence of
inability to pay, is, when detected, properly subject to punishment.1
But does it follow that insolvency is not the consequence of misconduct
because the inability to pay may be real? If a man has been a
spendthrift, or a gambler, with property on which his creditors had a
prior claim, shall he pass scot-free because the mischief is consummated
and the money gone? Is there any very material difference in point of
morality between this conduct, and those other kinds of dishonesty which
go by the names of fraud and embezzlement?

Such cases are not a minority, but a large majority among insolvencies.
The statistics of bankruptcy prove the fact. “By far the greater part of
all insolvencies arise from notorious misconduct; the proceedings of the
Insolvent Debtors Court and of the Bankruptcy Court will prove it.
Excessive and unjustifiable overtrading, or most absurd speculation in
commodities, merely because the poor speculator ‘thought they would get
up,’ but why he thought so he cannot tell; speculation in hops, in tea,
in silk, in corn—things with which he is altogether unacquainted; wild
and absurd investments in foreign funds, or in joint stocks; these are
among the most innocent causes of bankruptcy.”∗ The experienced and
intelligent writer from whom I quote, corroborates his assertion by the
testimony of several of the official assignees of the Bankruptcy Court.
One of them says, “As far as I can collect from the books and documents
furnished by the bankrupts, it seems to me that,” in the whole number of
cases which occurred during a given time in the court to which he was
attached, “fourteen have been ruined by speculations in things with
which they were unacquainted; three by neglecting bookkeeping; ten by
trading beyond their capital and means, and the consequent loss and
expense of accommodation bills; forty-nine by expending more than they
could reasonably hope their profits would be, though their business
yielded a fair return; none by any general distress, or the falling off
of any particular branch of trade.” Another of these officers Edition:
current; Page: [912] says that, during a period of eighteen months,
“fifty-two cases of bankruptcy have come under my care. It is my opinion
that thirty-two of these have arisen from an imprudent expenditure, and
five partly from that cause, and partly from a pressure on the business
in which the bankrupts were employed. Fifteen I attribute to improvident
speculations, combined in many instances with an extravagant mode of
life.”

To these citations the author adds the following statements from his
personal means of knowledge. “Many insolvencies are produced by
tradesmen's indolence: they keep no books, or at least imperfect ones,
which they never balance; they never take stock; they employ servants,
if their trade be extensive, whom they are too indolent even to
supervise, and then become insolvent. It is not too much to say, that
one-half of all the persons engaged in trade, even in London, never take
stock at all: they go on year after year without knowing how their
affairs stand, and at last, like the child at school, they find to their
surprise, but one halfpenny left in their pocket. I will venture to say
that not one-fourth of all the persons in the provinces, either
manufacturers, tradesmen, or farmers, ever take stock; nor in fact does
one-half of them ever keep account-books, deserving any other name than
memorandum books. I know sufficient of the concerns of five hundred
small tradesmen in the provinces, to be enabled to say, that not
one-fifth of them ever take stock, or keep even the most ordinary
accounts. I am prepared to say of such tradesmen, from carefully
prepared tables, giving every advantage where there has been any doubt
as to the causes of their insolvency, that where nine happen from
extravagance or dishonesty, one” at most “may be referred to misfortune
alone.”∗

Is it rational to expect among the trading classes any high sense of
justice, honour, or integrity, if the law enables men who act in this
manner to shuffle off the consequences of their misconduct upon those
who have been so unfortunate as to trust them; and practically proclaims
that it looks upon insolvency thus produced, as a “misfortune,” not an
offence?

It is, of course, not denied, that insolvencies do arise from causes
beyond the control of the debtor, and that, in many more cases, his
culpability is not of a high order; and the law ought to make a
distinction in favour of such cases, but not without a searching
investigation; nor should the case ever be let go without having
Edition: current; Page: [913] ascertained, in the most complete manner
practicable, not the fact of insolvency, but the cause of it. To have
been trusted with money or money's worth, and to have lost or spent it,
is primâ facie evidence of something wrong: and it is not for the
creditor to prove, which he cannot do in one case out of ten, that there
has been criminality, but for the debtor to rebut the presumption, by
laying open the whole state of affairs, and showing either that there
has been no misconduct, or that the misconduct has been of an excusable
kind. If he fail in this, he ought never to be dismissed without a
punishment proportioned to the degree of blame which seems justly
imputable to him; which punishment, however, might be shortened or
mitigated in proportion as he appeared likely to exert himself in
repairing the injury done.

It is a common argument with those who approve a relaxed system of
insolvency laws, that credit, except in the great operations of
commerce, is an evil; and that to deprive creditors of legal redress is
a judicious means of preventing credit from being given. That which is
given by retail dealers to unproductive consumers is, no doubt, to the
excess to which it is carried, a considerable evil. This, however, is
only true of large, and especially of long, credits; for there is credit
whenever goods are not paid for before they quit the shop, or, at least,
the custody of the seller; and there would be much inconvenience in
putting an end to this sort of credit. But a large proportion of the
debts on which insolvency laws take effect are those due by small
tradesmen to the dealers who supply them: and on no class of debts does
the demoralization occasioned by a bad state of the law, operate more
perniciously. These are commercial credits, which no one wishes to see
curtailed; their existence is of great importance to the general
industry of the country, and to numbers of honest, well-conducted
persons of small means, to whom it would be a great injury that they
should be prevented from obtaining the accommodation they need, and
would not abuse, through the omission of the law to provide just
remedies against dishonest or reckless borrowers.

But though it were granted that retail transactions, on any footing but
that of ready money payment, are an evil, and their entire suppression a
fit subject for legislation to aim at; a worse mode of compassing that
object could scarcely be invented, than to permit those who have been
trusted by others to cheat and rob them with impunity. The law does not
generally select the vices of mankind as the appropriate instrument for
inflicting chastisement Edition: current; Page: [914] on the
comparatively innocent. When it seeks to discourage any course of
action, it does so by applying inducements of its own, not by outlawing
those who act in the manner it deems objectionable, and letting loose
the predatory instincts of the worthless part of mankind to feed upon
them. If a man has committed murder the law condemns him to death; but
it does not promise impunity to anybody who may kill him for the sake of
taking his purse. The offence of believing another's word, even rashly,
is not so heinous that for the sake of discouraging it the spectacle
should be brought home to every door, of triumphant rascality, with the
law on its side, mocking the victims it has made. This pestilent example
has been very widely exhibited since the relaxation of the insolvency
laws. It is idle to expect that, even by absolutely depriving creditors
of all legal redress, the kind of credit which is considered
objectionable would really be very much checked. Rogues and swindlers
are still an exception among mankind, and people will go on trusting
each other's promises. Large dealers, in abundant business, would refuse
credit, as many of them already do: but in the eager competition of a
great town, or the dependent position of a village shopkeeper, what can
be expected from the tradesman to whom a single customer is of
importance, the beginner, perhaps, who is striving to get into business?
He will take the risk, even if it were still greater; he is ruined if he
cannot sell his goods, and he can be ruined if he is defrauded. Nor does
it avail to say, that he ought to make proper inquiries, and ascertain
the character of those to whom he supplies good on trust. In some of the
most flagrant cases of profligate debtors which have come before the
Bankruptcy Court, the swindler had been able to give, and had given,
excellent references.∗ Edition: current; Page: [915]

Edition: current; Page: [916]


CHAPTER X: of interferences of government grounded on erroneous theories

§ 1. From the necessary functions of government, and the effects
produced on the economical interests of society by their good or ill
discharge, we proceed to the functions which belong to what I have
termed, for want of a better designation, the optional class; those
which are sometimes assumed by governments and sometimes not, and which
it is not unanimously admitted that they ought to exercise.

Before entering on the general principles of the question, it will be
advisable to clear from our path all those cases, in which government
interference works ill because grounded on false views of the subject
interfered with. Such cases have no connexion with any theory respecting
the proper limits of interference. There are some things with which
governments ought not to meddle, and other things with which they ought;
but whether right or wrong in itself, the interference must work for
ill, if government, not understanding the subject which it meddles with,
meddles to bring about a result which would be mischievous. We will
therefore begin by passing in review various false theories, which have
from time to time formed the ground of acts of government more or less
economically injurious.

Former writers on political economy have found it needful to devote much
trouble and space to this department of their subject. It has now
happily become possible, at least in our own country, greatly to abridge
this purely negative part of our discussions. The false theories of
political economy which have done so much mischief in times past, are
entirely discredited among all who have not lagged behind the general
progress of opinion; and few of the enactments which were once grounded
on those theories still help to deform the statute-book. As the
principles on which their Edition: current; Page: [917] condemnation
rests have been fully set forth in other parts of this treatise, we may
here content ourselves with a few brief indications.

Of these false theories, the most notable is the doctrine of Protection
to Native Industry; a phrase meaning the prohibition, or the
discouragement by heavy duties, of such foreign commodities as are
capable of being produced at home. If the theory involved in this system
had been correct, the practical conclusions grounded on it would not
have been unreasonable. The theory was, that to buy things produced at
home was a national benefit, and the introduction of foreign commodities
generally a national loss. It being at the same time evident that the
interest of the consumer is to buy foreign commodities in preference to
domestic whenever they are either cheaper or better, the interest of the
consumer appeared in this respect to be contrary to the public interest;
he was certain, if left to his own inclinations, to do what according to
the theory was injurious to the public.

It was shown, however, in our analysis of the effects of international
trade, as it had been often shown by former writers, that the
importation of foreign commodities, in the common course of traffic,
never takes place, except when it is, economically speaking, a national
good, by causing the same amount of commodities to be obtained at a
smaller cost of labour and capital to the country. To prohibit,
therefore, this importation, or impose duties which prevent it, is to
render the labour and capital of the country less efficient in
production than they would otherwise be; and compel a waste of the
difference between the labour and capital necessary for the home
production of the commodity and that which is required for producing the
things with which it can be purchased from abroad. The amount of
national loss thus occasioned is measured by the excess of the price at
which the commodity is produced, over that at which it could be
imported. In the case of manufactured goods, the whole difference
between the two prices is absorbed in indemnifying the producers for
waste of labour, or of the capital which supports that labour. Those who
are supposed to be benefited, namely, the makers of the protected
articles, (unless they form an exclusive company, and have a monopoly
against their own countrymen as well as against foreigners,) do not
obtain higher profits than other people. All is sheer loss, to the
country as well as to the consumer. When the protected article is a
product of agriculture—the waste of labour not being incurred on the
whole produce, but only on what may be called the last instalment of
it—the extra Edition: current; Page: [918] price is only in part an
indemnity for waste, the remainder being a tax paid to the landlords.

The restrictive and prohibitory policy was originally grounded on what
is called the Mercantile System, which representing the advantage of
foreign trade to consist solely in bringing money into the country, gave
artificial encouragement to exportation of goods, and discountenanced
their importation. The only exceptions to the system were those required
by the system itself. The materials and instruments of production were
the subjects of a contrary policy, directed however to the same end;
they were freely imported, and not permitted to be exported, in order
that manufacturers, being more cheaply supplied with the requisites of
manufacture, might be able to sell cheaper, and therefore to export more
largely. For a similar reason, importation was allowed and even
favoured, when confined to the productions of countries which were
supposed to take from the country still more than it took from them,
thus enriching it by a favourable balance of trade. As part of the same
system, colonies were founded for the supposed advantage of compelling
them to buy our commodities, or at all events not to buy those of any
other country: in return for which restriction we were generally willing
to come under an equivalent obligation with respect to the staple
productions of the colonists. The consequences of the theory were pushed
so far, that it was not unusual even to give bounties on exportation,
and induce foreigners to buy from us rather than from other countries,
by a cheapness which we artificially produced, by paying part of the
price for them out of our own taxes. This is a stretch beyond the point
yet reached by any private tradesman in his competition for business. No
shopkeeper, I should think, ever made a practice of bribing customers by
selling goods to them at a permanent loss, making it up to himself from
other funds in his possession.

The principle of the Mercantile Theory is now given up even by writers
and governments who still cling to the restrictive system. Whatever hold
that system has over men's minds, independently of the private interests
exposed to real or apprehended loss by its abandonment, is derived from
fallacies other than the old notion of the benefits of heaping up money
in the country. The most effective of these is the specious plea of
employing our own countrymen and our national industry, instead of
feeding and supporting the industry of foreigners. The answer to this,
from the principles laid down in former chapters, is evident. Without
reverting to the fundamental Edition: current; Page: [919] theorem
discussed in an early part of the present treatise,∗ respecting the
nature and sources of employment for labour, it is sufficient to say,
what has usually been said by the advocates of free trade, that the
alternative is not between employing our own people and foreigners, but
between employing one class and another of our own people. The imported
commodity is always paid for, directly or indirectly, with the produce
of our own industry: that industry being at the same time rendered more
productive, since, with the same labour and outlay, we are enabled to
possess ourselves of a greater quantity of the article. Those who have
not well considered the subject are apt to suppose that our exporting an
equivalent in our own produce, for the foreign articles we consume,
depends on contingencies—on the consent of foreign countries to make
some corresponding relaxation of their own restrictions, or on the
question whether those from whom we buy are induced by that circumstance
to buy more from us; and that, if these things, or things equivalent to
them, do not happen, the payment must be made in money. Now, in the
first place, there is nothing more objectionable in a money payment than
in payment by any other medium, if the state of the market makes it the
most advantageous remittance; and the money itself was first acquired,
and would again be replenished, by the export of an equivalent value of
our own products. But, in the next place, a very short interval of
paying in money would so lower prices as either to stop a part of the
importation, or raise up a foreign demand for our produce, sufficient to
pay for the imports. I grant that this disturbance of the equation of
international demand would be in some degree to our disadvantage, in the
purchase of other imported articles; and that a country which prohibits
some foreign commodities, does, caeteris paribus, obtain those which it
does not prohibit, at a less price than it would otherwise have to pay.
To express the same thing in other words; a country which destroys or
prevents altogether certain branches of foreign trade, thereby
annihilating a general gain to the world, which would be shared in some
proportion between itself and other countries—does, in some
circumstances, draw to itself, at the expense of foreigners, a larger
share than would else belong to it of the gain arising from that portion
of its foreign trade which it suffers to subsist. But even this it can
only be enabled to do, if foreigners do not maintain equivalent
prohibitions or restrictions against its commodities. In any case, the
justice or expediency of destroying one of two gains, in order Edition:
current; Page: [920] to engross a rather larger share of the other, does
not require much discussion: the gain, too, which is destroyed, being,
in proportion to the magnitude of the transactions, the larger of the
two, since it is the one which capital, left to itself, is supposed to
seek by preference.

Defeated as a general theory, the Protectionist doctrine finds support
in particular cases, from considerations which, when really in point,
involve greater interests than mere saving of labour; the interests of
national subsistence and of national defence. The discussions on the
Corn Laws have familiarized everybody with the plea, that we ought to be
independent of foreigners for the food of the people; and the Navigation
Laws were grounded, in theory and profession, on the necessity of
keeping up a “nursery of seamen” for the navy. On this last subject I at
once admit, that the object is worth the sacrifice; and that a country
exposed to invasion by sea, if it cannot otherwise have sufficient ships
and sailors of its own to secure the means of manning on an emergency an
adequate fleet, is quite right in obtaining those means, even at an
economical sacrifice in point of cheapness of transport. When the
English Navigation Laws were enacted, the Dutch, from their maritime
skill and their low rate of profit at home, were able to carry for other
nations, England included, at cheaper rates than those nations could
carry for themselves: which placed all other countries at a great
comparative disadvantage in obtaining experienced seamen for their ships
of war. The Navigation Laws, by which this deficiency was remedied, and
at the same time a blow struck against the maritime power of a nation
with which England was then frequently engaged in hostilities, were
probably, though economically disadvantageous, politically expedient.
But English ships and sailors can now navigate as cheaply as those of
any other country; maintaining at least an equal competition with the
other maritime nations even in their own trade. The ends which may once
have justified Navigation Laws, require them no longer, and afforded no
reason for maintaining this invidious exception to the general rule of
free trade.

With regard to subsistence, the plea of the Protectionists has been so
often and so triumphantly met, that it requires little notice here. That
country is the most steadily as well as the most abundantly supplied
with food, which draws its supplies from the largest surface. It is
ridiculous to found a general system of policy on so improbable a danger
as that of being at war with all the nations of the world Edition:
current; Page: [921] at once; or to suppose that, even if inferior at
sea, a whole country could be blockaded like a town, or that the growers
of food in other countries would not be as anxious not to lose an
advantageous market, as we should be not to be deprived of their corn.
On the subject, however, of subsistence, there is one point which
deserves more especial consideration. In cases of actual or apprehended
scarcity, many countries of Europe are accustomed to stop the
exportation of food. Is this, or not, sound policy? There can be no
doubt that in the present state of international morality, a people
cannot, any more than an individual, be blamed for not starving itself
to feed others. But if the greatest amount of good to mankind on the
whole, were the end aimed at in the maxims of international conduct,
such collective churlishness would certainly be condemned by them.
Suppose that in ordinary circumstances the trade in food were perfectly
free, so that the price in one country could not habitually exceed that
in any other by more than the cost of carriage, together with a moderate
profit to the importer. A general scarcity ensues, affecting all
countries, but in unequal degrees. If the price rose in one country more
than in others, it would be a proof that in that country the scarcity
was severest, and that by permitting food to go freely thither from any
other country, it would be spared from a less urgent necessity to
relieve a greater. When the interests, therefore, of all countries are
considered, free exportation is desirable. To the exporting country
considered separately, it may, at least on the particular occasion, be
an inconvenience: but taking into account that the country which is now
the giver will in some future season be the receiver, and the one that
is benefited by the freedom, I cannot but think that even to the
apprehension of food rioters it might be made apparent, that in such
cases they should do to others what they would wish done to themselves.

In countries in which the Protection theory is [1848] declining, but not
yet given up, such as the United States, a doctrine has come into notice
which is a sort of compromise between free trade and restriction,
namely, that protection for protection's sake is improper, but that
there is nothing objectionable in having as much protection as may
incidentally result from a tariff framed solely for revenue. Even in
England, regret is sometimes expressed that a “moderate fixed duty” was
not preserved on corn, on account of the revenue it would yield.
Independently, however, of the general impolicy of taxes on the
necessaries of life, this doctrine overlooks the fact, that revenue is
received only on the quantity imported, but that the Edition: current;
Page: [922] tax is paid on the entire quantity consumed. To make the
public pay much that the treasury may receive a little, is not an
eligible mode of obtaining a revenue. In the case of manufactured
articles the doctrine involves a palpable inconsistency. The object of
the duty as a means of revenue, is inconsistent with its affording, even
incidentally, any protection. It can only operate as protection in so
far as it prevents importation; and to whatever degree it prevents
importation, it affords no revenue.

The only case in which, on mere principles of political economy,
protecting duties can be defensible, is when they are imposed
temporarily (especially in a young and rising nation) in hopes of
naturalizing a foreign industry, in itself perfectly suitable to the
circumstances of the country. The superiority of one country over
another in a branch of production, often arises only from having begun
it sooner. There may be no inherent advantage on one part, or
disadvantage on the other, but only a present superiority of acquired
skill and experience. A country which has this skill and experience yet
to acquire, may in other respects be better adapted to the production
than those which were earlier in the field: and besides, it is a just
remark of Mr. Rae, that nothing has a greater tendency to promote
improvements in any branch of production, than its trial under a new set
of conditions. But it cannot be expected that individuals should, at
their own risk, or rather to their certain loss, introduce a new
manufacture, and bear the burthen of carrying it on until the producers
have been educated up to the level of those with whom the processes are
traditional. A protecting duty, continued for a reasonable time, might1
sometimes be the least inconvenient mode in which the nation can tax
itself for the support of such an experiment. But it is essential that
the protection should be confined to cases in which there is good ground
of assurance that the industry which it fosters will after a time be
able to dispense with it; nor should the domestic producers ever be
allowed to expect that it will be continued to them beyond the time
necessary for a fair trial of what they are capable of accomplishing.

2 The only writer, of any reputation as a political economist, who now
[1865] adheres to the Protectionist doctrine, Mr. H. C. Carey, rests its
defence, in an economic point of view, principally on Edition: current;
Page: [923] two reasons. One is the great saving in cost of carriage,
consequent on producing commodities at or very near to the place where
they are to be consumed. The whole of the cost of carriage, both on the
commodities imported and on those exported in exchange for them, he
regards as a direct burthen on the producers, and not, as is obviously
the truth, on the consumers. On whomsoever it falls, it is, without
doubt, a burthen on the industry of the world. But it is obvious (and
that Mr. Carey does not see it, is one of the many surprising things in
his book) that the burthen is only borne for a more than equivalent
advantage. If the commodity is bought in a foreign country with domestic
produce in spite of the double cost of carriage, the fact proves that,
heavy as that cost may be, the saving in cost of production outweighs
it, and the collective labour of the country is on the whole better
remunerated than if the article were produced at home. Cost of carriage
is a natural protecting duty, which free trade has no power to abrogate:
and unless America gained more by obtaining her manufactures through the
medium of her corn and cotton than she loses in cost of carriage, the
capital employed in producing corn and cotton in annually increased
quantities for the foreign market would turn to manufactures instead.
The natural advantages attending a mode of industry in which there is
less cost of carriage to pay, can at most be only a justification for a
temporary and merely tentative protection. The expenses of production
being always greatest at first, it may happen that the home production,
though really the most advantageous, may not become so until after a
certain duration of pecuniary loss, which it is not to be expected that
private speculators should incur in order that their successors may be
benefited by their ruin. I have therefore conceded that in a new country
a temporary protecting duty may sometimes be economically defensible; on
condition, however, that it be strictly limited in point of time, and
provision be made that during the latter part of its existence it be on
a gradually decreasing scale. Such temporary protection is of the same
nature as a patent, and should be governed by similar conditions.

The remaining argument of Mr. Carey in support of the economic benefits
of Protectionism, applies only to countries whose exports consist of
agricultural produce. He argues, that by a trade of this description
they actually send away their soil: the distant consumers not giving
back to the land of the country, as home consumers would do, the
fertilizing elements which they abstract from it. This argument deserves
attention on account of the physical truth on Edition: current; Page:
[924] which it is founded; a truth which has only lately come to be
understood, but which is henceforth destined to be a permanent element
in the thoughts of statesmen, as it must always have been in the
destinies of nations. To the question of Protectionism, however, it is
irrelevant. That the immense growth of raw produce in America to be
consumed in Europe is progresssively exhausting the soil of the Eastern,
and even of the older Western States, and that both are already far less
productive than formerly, is credible in itself, even if no one bore
witness to it. But what I have already said respecting cost of carriage,
is true also of the cost of manuring. Free trade does not compel America
to export corn: she would cease to do so if it ceased to be to her
advantage. As, then, she would not persist in exporting raw produce and
importing manufactures any longer than the labour she saved by doing so
exceeded what the carriage cost her, so when it became necessary for her
to replace in the soil the elements of fertility which she had sent
away, if the saving in cost of production were more than equivalent to
the cost of carriage and of manure together, manure would be imported;
and if not, the export of corn would cease. It is evident that one of
these two things would already have taken place, if there had not been
near at hand a constant succession of new soils, not yet exhausted of
their fertility, the cultivation of which enables her, whether
judiciously or not, to postpone the question of manure. As soon as it no
longer answers better to break up new soils than to manure the old,
America will either become a regular importer of manure, or will,
without protecting duties, grow corn for herself only, and manufacturing
for herself, will make her manure, as Mr. Carey desires, at home.∗

For these obvious reasons, I hold Mr. Carey's economic arguments
Edition: current; Page: [925] for Protectionism to be totally invalid.
The economic, however, is far from being the strongest point of his
case. American Protectionists often reason extremely ill; but it is an
injustice to them to suppose that their Protectionist creed rests upon
nothing superior to an economic blunder. Many of them have been led to
it, much more by consideration for the higher interests of humanity,
than by purely economic reasons. They, and Mr. Carey at their head, deem
it a necessary condition of human improvement that towns should abound;
that men should combine their labour, by means of interchange—with near
neighbours, with people of pursuits, capacities, and mental cultivation
different from their own, sufficiently close at hand for mutual
sharpening of wits and enlarging of ideas—rather than with people on the
opposite side of the globe. They believe that a nation all engaged in
the same, or nearly the same, pursuit—a nation all agricultural—cannot
attain a high state of civilization and culture. And for this there is a
great foundation of reason. If the difficulty can be overcome, the
United States, with their free institutions, the universal schooling and
their omnipresent press, are the people to do it; but whether this is
possible or not is still a problem. So far, however, as it is an object
to check the excessive dispersion of the population, Mr. Wakefield has
pointed out a better way; to modify the existing method of disposing of
the unoccupied lands, by raising the price, instead of lowering it, or
giving away the land gratuitously, as is largely done since the passing
of the Homestead Act. To cut the knot in Mr. Carey's fashion, by
Protectionism, it would be necessary that Ohio and Michigan should be
protected against Massachusetts as well as against England: for the
manufactories of New England, no more than those of the old country,
accomplish his desideratum of bringing a manufacturing population to the
doors of the Western farmer. Boston and New York do not supply the want
of local towns to the Western prairies, any better than Manchester; and
it is as difficult to get back the manure from the one place as from the
other.

There is only one part of the Protectionist scheme which requires any
further notice: its policy towards colonies, and foreign dependencies;
that of compelling them to trade exclusively with the dominant country.
A country which thus secures to itself an extra foreign demand for its
commodities, undoubtedly gives itself some advantage in the distribution
of the general gains of the commercial world, Since, however, it causes
the industry and capital of the colony to be diverted from channels,
which are proved to be the most Edition: current; Page: [926]
productive, inasmuch as they are those into which industry and capital
spontaneously tend to flow; there is a loss, on the whole, to the
productive powers of the world, and the mother country does not gain so
much as she makes the colony lose. If, therefore, the mother country
refuses to acknowledge any reciprocity of obligation, she imposes a
tribute on the colony in an indirect mode, greatly more oppressive and
injurious that the direct. But if, with a more equitable spirit, she
submits herself to corresponding restrictions for the benefit of the
colony, the result of the whole transaction is the ridiculous one, that
each party loses much, in order that the other may gain a little.1

§ 2. Next to the system of Protection, among mischievous interferences
with the spontaneous course of industrial transactions, may be noticed
certain interferences with contracts. One instance is that of the Usury
Laws. These originated in a religious prejudice against receiving
interest on money, derived from that fruitful source of mischief in
modern Europe, the attempted adaptation to Christianity of doctrines and
precepts drawn from the Jewish law. In Mahomedan nations the receiving
of interest is formally interdicted, and rigidly abstained from: and
Sismondi has noticed, as one among the causes of the industrial
inferiority of the Catholic, compared with the Protestant parts of
Europe, that the Catholic Church in the middle ages gave its sanction to
the same prejudice; which subsists, impaired but not destroyed, wherever
that religion is acknowledged. Where law or conscientious scruples
prevent lending at interest, the capital which belongs to persons not in
business is lost to productive purposes, or can be applied to them only
in peculiar circumstances of personal connexion, or by a subterfuge.
Industry is thus limited to the capital of the undertakers, and to what
they can borrow from persons not bound by the same laws or religion as
themselves. In Mussulman countries the bankers and money dealers are
either Hindoos, Armenians, or Jews.

In more improved countries, legislation no longer discountenances the
receipt of an equivalent for money lent; but it has everywhere
interfered with the free agency of the lender and borrower, by fixing a
legal limit to the rate of interest, and making the receipt of more than
the appointed maximum a penal offence. This restriction, though approved
by Adam Smith, has been condemned by all Edition: current; Page: [927]
enlightened persons since the triumphant onslaught made upon it by
Bentham in his Letters on Usury, which may still be referred to as the
best extant writing on the subject.

Legislators may enact and maintain Usury Laws from one of two motives:
ideas of public policy, or concern for the interest of the parties in
the contract; in this case, of one party only, the borrower. As a matter
of policy, the notion may possibly be, that it is for the general good
that interest should be low. It is, however, a misapprehension of the
causes which influence commercial transactions, to suppose that the rate
of interest is really made lower by law, than it would be made by the
spontaneous play of supply and demand. If the competition of borrowers,
left unrestrained, would raise the rate of interest to six per cent,
this proves that at five there would be a greater demand for loans than
there is capital in the market to supply. If the law in these
circumstances permits no interest beyond five per cent, there will be
some lenders, who not choosing to disobey the law, and not being in a
condition to employ their capital otherwise, will content themselves
with the legal rate: but others, finding that in a season of pressing
demand, more may be made of their capital by other means than they are
permitted to make by lending it, will not lend it at all; and the
loanable capital, already too small for the demand, will be still
further diminished. Of the disappointed candidates there will be many at
such periods who must have their necessities supplied at any price, and
these will readily find a third section of lenders, who will not be
averse to join in a violation of the law, either by circuitous
transactions partaking of the nature of fraud, or by relying on the
honour of the borrower. The extra expense of the roundabout mode of
proceeding, and an equivalent for the risk of non-payment and of legal
penalties, must be paid by the borrower, over and above the extra
interest which would have been required of him by the general state of
the market. The laws which were intended to lower the price paid by him
for pecuniary accommodation, end thus in greatly increasing it. These
laws have also a directly demoralizing tendency. Knowing the difficulty
of detecting an illegal pecuniary transaction between two persons, in
which no third person is involved, so long as it is the interest of both
to keep the secret, legislators have adopted the expedient of tempting
the borrower to become the informer, by making the annulment of the debt
a part of the penalty for the offence; thus rewarding men for first
obtaining the property of others by false promises, and then not only
refusing payment, but Edition: current; Page: [928] invoking legal
penalties on those who have helped them in their need. The moral sense
of mankind very rightly infamizes those who resist an otherwise just
claim on the ground of usury, and tolerates such a plea only when
resorted to as the best legal defence available against an attempt
really considered as partaking of fraud or extortion. But this very
severity of public opinion renders the enforcement of the laws so
difficult, and the infliction of the penalties so rare, that when it
does occur it merely victimizes an individual, and has no effect on
general practice.

In so far as the motive of the restriction may be supposed to be, not
public policy, but regard for the interest of the borrower, it would be
difficult to point out any case in which such tenderness on the
legislator's part is more misplaced. A person of sane mind, and of the
age at which persons are legally competent to conduct their own
concerns, must be presumed to be a sufficient guardian of his pecuniary
interests. If he may sell an estate, or grant a release, or assign away
all his property, without control from the law, it seems very
unnecessary that the only bargain which he cannot make without its
intermeddling, should be a loan of money. The law seems to presume that
the money-lender, dealing with necessitous persons, can take advantage
of their necessities, and exact conditions limited only by his own
pleasure. It might be so if there were only one money-lender within
reach. But when there is the whole monied capital of a wealthy community
to resort to, no borrower is placed under any disadvantage in the market
merely by the urgency of his need. If he cannot borrow at the interest
paid by other people, it must be because he cannot give such good
security: and competition will limit the extra demand to a fair
equivalent for the risk of his proving insolvent. Though the law intends
favour to the borrower, it is to him above all that injustice is, in
this case, done by it. What can be more unjust than that a person who
cannot give perfectly good security, should be prevented from borrowing
of persons who are willing to lend money to him, by their not being
permitted to receive the rate of interest which would be a just
equivalent for their risk? Through the mistaken kindness of the law, he
must either go without the money which is perhaps necessary to save him
from much greater losses, or be driven to expedients of a far more
ruinous description, which the law either has not found it possible, or
has not happened, to interdict.

Adam Smith rather hastily expressed the opinion, that only two kinds of
persons, “prodigals and projectors,” could require Edition: current;
Page: [929] to borrow money at more than the market rate of interest. He
should have included all persons who are in any pecuniary difficulties,
however temporary their necessities may be. It may happen to any person
in business, to be disappointed of the resources on which he had
calculated for meeting some engagement, the non-fulfilment of which on a
fixed day would be bankruptcy. In periods of commercial difficulty, this
is the condition of many prosperous mercantile firms, who become
competitors for the small amount of disposable capital which, in a time
of general distrust, the owners are willing to part with. Under the
English usury laws, now happily abolished, the limitations imposed by
those laws were felt as a most serious aggravation of every commercial
crisis. Merchants who could have obtained the aid they required at an
interest of seven or eight per cent for short periods, were obliged to
give 20 or 30 per cent, or to resort to forced sales of goods at a still
greater loss. Experience having obtruded these evils on the notice of
Parliament, the sort of compromise took place, of which English
legislation affords so many instances, and which helps to make our laws
and policy the mass of inconsistency that they are. The law was reformed
as a person reforms a tight shoe, who cuts a hole in it where it pinches
hardest, and continues to wear it. Retaining the erroneous principle as
a general rule, Parliament allowed an exception in the case in which the
practical mischief was most flagrant. It left the usury laws unrepealed,
but exempted bills of exchange, of not more than three months date, from
their operation. Some years afterwards the laws were repealed in regard
to all other contracts, but left in force as to all those which relate
to land. Not a particle of reason could be given for making this
extraordinary distinction: but the “agricultural mind” was of opinion
that the interest on mortgages, though it hardly ever came up to the
permitted point, would came up to a still higher point; and the usury
laws were maintained that the landlords might, as they thought, be
enabled to borrow below the market rate, as the corn-laws were kept up
that the same class might be able to sell corn above the market rate.
The modesty of the pretension was quite worthy of the intelligence which
could think that the end aimed at was in any way forwarded by the means
used.

With regard to the “prodigals and projectors” spoken of by Adam Smith;
no law can prevent a prodigal from ruining himself, unless it lays him
or his property under actual restraint, according to the unjustifiable
practice of the Roman Law and some of the Continental systems founded on
it. The only effect of usury laws Edition: current; Page: [930] upon a
prodigal, is to make his ruin rather more expeditious, by driving him to
a disreputable class of money-dealers, and rendering the conditions more
onerous by the extra risk created by the law. As for projectors (a term,
in its unfavourable sense, rather unfairly applied to every person who
has a project), such laws may put a veto upon the prosecution of the
most promising enterprise, when planned, as it generally is, by a person
who does not possess capital adequate to its successful completion. Many
of the greatest improvements were at first looked shyly on by
capitalists, and had to wait long before they found one sufficiently
adventurous to be the first in a new path: many years elapsed before
Stephenson could convince even the enterprising mercantile public of
Liverpool and Manchester of the advantage of substituting railways for
turnpike roads; and plans on which great labour and large sums have been
expended with little visible result (the epoch in their progress when
predictions of failure are most rife) may be indefinitely suspended, or
altogether dropped, and the outlay all lost, if, when the original funds
are exhausted, the law will not allow more to be raised on the terms on
which people are willing to expose it to the chances of an enterprise
not yet secure of success.1

§ 3. Loans are not the only kind of contract, of which governments have
thought themselves qualified to regulate the conditions better than the
persons interested. There is scarcely any commodity which they have not,
at some place or time, endeavoured to make either dearer or cheaper than
it would be if left to itself. The most plausible case for artificially
cheapening a commodity, is that of food. The desirableness of the object
is in this case undeniable. But since the average price of food, like
that of other things, conforms to the cost of production, with the
addition of the usual profit; if this price is not expected by the
farmer, he will, unless compelled by law, produce no more than he
requires for his own consumption: and the law, therefore, if absolutely
determined to have food cheaper, must substitute, for the ordinary
motives to cultivation, a system of penalties. If it shrinks from doing
this, it has no resource but that of taxing the whole nation, to give a
bounty or premium to the grower or importer of corn, thus giving
everybody cheap bread at the expense of all: in reality a largess to
those who do not pay taxes, at the expense of those who do; one of the
Edition: current; Page: [931] forms of a practice essentially bad, that
of converting the working classes into unworking classes by making them
a present of subsistence.

It is not, however, so much the general or average price of food, as its
occasional high price in times of emergency, which governments have
studied to reduce. In some cases, as for example the famous “maximum” of
the revolutionary government of 1793, the compulsory regulation was an
attempt by the ruling powers to counteract the necessary consequences of
their own acts; to scatter an indefinite abundance of the circulating
medium with one hand, and keep down prices with the other; a thing
manifestly impossible under any régime except one of unmitigated terror.
In case of actual scarcity, governments are often urged, as they were in
the Irish emergency of 1847, to take measures of some sort for
moderating the price of food. But the price of a thing cannot be raised
by deficiency of supply, beyond what is sufficient to make a
corresponding reduction of the consumption; and if a government prevents
this reduction from being brought about by a rise of price, there
remains no mode of effecting it unless by taking possession of all the
food, and serving it out in rations, as in a besieged town. In a real
scarcity, nothing can afford general relief, except a determination by
the richer classes to diminish their own consumption. If they buy and
consume their usual quantity of food, and content themselves with giving
money, they do no good. The price is forced up until the poorest
competitors have no longer the means of competing, and the privation of
food is thrown exclusively upon the indigent, the other classes being
only affected pecuniarily. When the supply is insufficient, somebody
must consume less, and if every rich person is determined not to be that
somebody, all they do by subsidizing their poor competitors is to force
up the price so much the higher, with no effect but to enrich the
corn-dealers, the very reverse of what is desired by those who recommend
such measures. All that governments can do in these emergencies is to
counsel a general moderation in consumption, and to interdict such kinds
of it as are not of primary importance. Direct measures at the cost of
the state, to procure food from a distance, are expedient when from
peculiar reasons the thing is not likely to be done by private
speculation. In any other case they are a great error. Private
speculators, will not, in such cases, venture to compete with the
government; and though a government can do more than any one merchant,
it cannot do nearly so much as all merchants.

Edition: current; Page: [932]
§ 4. Governments, however, are oftener chargeable with having attempted,
too successfully, to make things dear, than with having aimed by wrong
means at making them cheap. The usual instrument for producing
artificial dearness is monopoly. To confer a monopoly upon a producer or
leader, or upon a set of producers or dealers not too numerous to
combine, is to give them the power of levying any amount of taxation on
the public, for their individual benefit, which will not make the public
forego the use of the commodity. When the sharers in the monopoly are so
numerous and so widely scattered that they are prevented from combining,
the evil is considerably less: but even then the competition is not so
active among a limited as among an unlimited number. Those who feel
assured of a fair average proportion in the general business are seldom
eager to get a larger share by foregoing a portion of their profits. A
limitation of competition, however partial, may have mischievous effects
quite disproportioned to the apparent cause. The mere exclusion of
foreigners, from a branch of industry open to the free competition of
every native, has been known, even in England, to render that branch a
conspicuous exception to the general industrial energy of the country.
The silk manufacture of England remained far behind that of other
countries of Europe, so long as the foreign fabrics were prohibited. In
addition to the tax levied for the profit, real or imaginary, of the
monopolists, the consumer thus pays an additional tax for their laziness
and incapacity. When relieved from the immediate stimulus of
competition, producers and dealers grow indifferent to the dictates of
their ultimate pecuniary interest; preferring to the most hopeful
prospects, the present ease of adhering to routine. A person who is
already thriving, seldom puts himself out of his way to commence even a
lucrative improvement, unless urged by the additional motive of fear
lest some rival should supplant him by getting possession of it before
him.

The condemnation of monopolies ought not to extend to patents, by which
the originator of an improved process is allowed to enjoy, for a limited
period, the exclusive privilege of using his own improvement. This is
not making the commodity dear for his benefit, but merely postponing a
part of the increased cheapness which the public owe to the inventor, in
order to compensate and reward him for the service. That he ought to be
both compensated and rewarded for it, will not be denied, and also that
if all were at once allowed to avail themselves of his ingenuity,
without having shared the Edition: current; Page: [933] labours or the
expenses which he had to incur in bringing his idea into a practical
shape, either such expenses and labours would be undergone by nobody
except very opulent and very public-spirited persons, or the state must
put a value on the service rendered by an inventor, and make him a
pecuniary grant. This has been done in some instances, and may be done
without inconvenience in cases of very conspicuous public benefit; but
in general an exclusive privilege, of temporary duration, is preferable;
because it leaves nothing to any one's discretion; because the reward
conferred by it depends upon the invention's being found useful, and the
greater the usefulness the greater the reward; and because it is paid by
the very persons to whom the service is rendered, the consumers of the
commodity. So decisive, indeed, are these considerations, that if the
system of patents were abandoned for that of rewards by the state, the
best shape which these could assume would be that of a small temporary
tax, imposed for the inventor's benefit, on all persons making use of
the invention. 1 To this, however, or to any other system which would
vest in the state the power of deciding whether an inventor should
derive any pecuniary advantage from the public benefit which he confers,
the objections are evidently stronger and more fundamental that the
strongest which can possibly be urged against patents. It is generally
admitted that the present Patent Laws need much improvement; but in this
case, as well as in the closely analogous one of Copyright, it would be
a gross immorality in the law to set everybody free to use a person's
work without his consent, and without giving him an equivalent. I have
seen with real alarm several recent attempts, in quarters carrying some
authority, to impugn the principle of patents altogether; attempts
which, if practically successful, would enthrone free stealing under the
prostituted name of free trade, and make the men of brains, still more
than at present, the needy retainers and dependents of the men of
money-bags.

§ 5. I pass to another kind of government interference, in which the end
and the means are alike odious, but which existed in England until not
more than a generation ago, and in France up to the year 1864.2 I mean
the laws against combinations of workmen to raise wages; laws enacted
and maintained for the declared purpose of Edition: current; Page: [934]
keeping wages low, as the famous Statute of Labourers was passed by a
legislature of employers, to prevent the labouring class, when its
numbers had been thinned by a pestilence, from taking advantage of the
diminished competition to obtain higher wages. Such laws exhibit the
infernal spirit of the slave master, when to retain the working classes
in avowed slavery has ceased to be practicable.

If it were possible for the working classes, by combining among
themselves, to raise or keep up the general rate of wages, it needs
hardly be said that this would be a thing not to be punished, but to be
welcomed and rejoiced at. Unfortunately the effect is quite beyond
attainment by such means. The multitudes who compose the working class
are too numerous and too widely scattered to combine at all, much more
to combine effectually. If they could do so, they might doubtless
succeed in diminishing the hours of labour, and obtaining the same wages
for less work. They would also have a limited power of obtaining, by
combination, an increase of general wages at the expense of profits. But
the limits of this power are narrow; and were they to attempt to strain
it beyond those limits, this could only be accomplished by keeping a
part of their number permanently out of employment.1 As support from
public charity would of course be refused to those who could get work
and would not accept it, they would be thrown for support upon the
trades union of which they were members; and the workpeople collectively
would be no better off than before, having to support the same numbers
out of the same aggregate wages. In this way, however, the class would
have its attention forcibly drawn to the fact of a superfluity of
numbers, and to the necessity, if they would have high wages, of
proportioning the supply of labour to the demand.

Combinations to keep up wages are sometimes successful, in trades where
the workpeople are few in number, and collected in a small number of
local centres. It is questionable if combinations ever had the smallest
effect on the permanent remuneration of spinners or weavers; but the
journeymen type-founders, by a close combination, are able, it is said,
to keep up a rate of wages much beyond that which is usual in
employments of equal hardness Edition: current; Page: [935] and skill;
and even the tailors, a much more numerous class, are understood to have
had, to some extent, a similar success. A rise of wages, thus confined
to particular employments, is not (like a rise of general wages)
defrayed from profits, but raises the value and price of the particular
article, and falls on the consumer; the capitalist who produces the
commodity being only injured in so far as the high price tends to narrow
the market; and not even then, unless it does so in a greater ratio than
that of the rise of price: for though, at higher wages, he employs, with
a given capital, fewer workpeople, and obtains less of the commodity,
yet if he can sell the whole of this diminished quantity at the higher
price, his profits are as great as before.

This partial rise of wages, if not gained at the expense of the
remainder of the working class, ought not to be regarded as an evil.1
The consumer, indeed, must pay for it; but cheapness of goods is
desirable only when the cause of it is that their production costs
little labour, and not when occasioned by that labour's being ill
remunerated. It may appear, indeed, at first sight, that the high wages
of the type.founders (for example) are obtained at the general cost of
the labouring class. This high remuneration either causes fewer persons
to find employment in the trade, or if not, must lead to the investment
of more capital in it, at the expense of other trades: in the first
case, it throws an additional number of labourers on the general market;
in the second, it withdraws from that market a portion of the demand:
effects, both of which are injurious to the working classes. Such,
indeed, would really be the result of a successful combination in a
particular trade or trades, for some time after its formation; but when
it is a permanent thing, the principles so often insisted upon in this
treatise, show that it can have no such effect. The habitual earnings of
the working classes at large can be affected by nothing but the habitual
requirements of the labouring people: these indeed may be altered, but
while they remain the same, wages never fall permanently below the
standard of these requirements, and do not long remain above that
standard. If there had been no combinations in particular trades, and
the wages of those trades had never been kept above the common level,
there is no reason to suppose that the common level would have been at
all higher than it now is. There would merely have been a greater number
of people altogether, and a smaller number of exceptions to the ordinary
low rate of wages.

Edition: current; Page: [936]
1 If, therefore, no improvement were to be hoped for in the general
circumstances of the working classes, the success of a portion of them,
however small, in keeping their wages by combination above the market
rate, would be wholly a matter of satisfaction. But when the elevation
of the character and condition of the entire body has at last become a
thing not beyond the reach of rational effort, it is time that the
better paid classes of skilled artisans should seek their own advantage
in common with, and not by the exclusion of, their fellow-labourers.
While they continue to fix their hopes on hedging themselves in against
competition, and protecting their own wages by shutting out others from
access to their employment, nothing better can be expected from them
than that total absence of any large and generous aims, that almost open
disregard of all other objects than high wages and little work for their
own small body, which were so deplorably evident in the proceedings and
manifestoes of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers during their quarrel
with their employers. Success, even if attainable, in raising up a
protected class of working people, would now be a hindrance, instead of
a help, to the emancipation of the working classes at large.

But though combinations to keep up wages are seldom effectual, and when
effectual, are, for the reasons which I have assigned, seldom desirable,
the right of making the attempt is one which cannot be refused to any
portion of the working population without great injustice, or without
the probability of fatally misleading them respecting the circumstances
which determine their condition. So long as combinations to raise wages
were prohibited by law, the law appeared to the operatives to be the
real cause of the low wages which there was no denying that it had done
its best to produce. Experience of strikes has been the best teacher of
the labouring classes on the subject of the relation between wages and
the demand and supply of labour: and it is most important that this
course of instruction should not be disturbed.

2 It is a great error to condemn, per se and absolutely, either trade
unions or the collective action of strikes. Even assuming that a
Edition: current; Page: [937] strike must inevitably fail whenever it
attempts to raise wages above that market rate which is fixed by the
demand and supply; demand and supply are not physical agencies, which
thrust a given amount of wages into a labourer's hand without the
participation of his own will and actions. The market rate is not fixed
for him by some self-acting instrument, but is the result of bargaining
between human beings—of what Adam Smith calls “the higgling of the
market;” and those who do not “higgle” will long continue to pay, even
over a counter, more than the market price for their purchases. Still
more might poor labourers who have to do with rich employers, remain
long without the amount of wages which the demand for their labour would
justify, unless, in vernacular phrase, they stood-out for it, and how
can they stand out for terms without organized concert? What chance
would any labourer have, who struck singly for an advance of wages? How
could he even know whether the state of the market admitted of a rise,
except by consultation with his fellows, naturally leading to concerted
action? I do not hesitate to say that associations of labourers, of a
nature similar to trades unions, far from being a hindrance to a free
market for labour, are the necessary instrumentality of that free
market; the indispensable means of enabling the sellers of labour to
take due care of their own interests under a system of competition.
There is an ulterior consideration of much importance, to which
attention was for the first time drawn by Professor Fawcett, in an
article in the Westminster Review. Experience has at length enabled the
more intelligent trade to take a tolerably correct measure of the
circumstances on which the success of a strike for an advance of wages
depends. The workmen are now nearly as well informed as the master, of
the state of the market for his commodities; they can calculate his
gains and his expenses, they know when his trade is or is not
prosperous, and only when it is, are they ever again likely to strike
for higher wages; which wages their known readiness to strike makes
their employers for the most part willing, in that case, to concede. The
tendency, therefore, of this state of things is to make a rise of wages
in any particular trade usually consequent upon a rise of profits,
which, as Mr. Fawcett observes, is a commencement of that regular
participation of the labourers in the profits derived from their labour,
every tendency to which, for the reasons stated in a previous chapter,∗
it is so important to encourage, since to it we have chiefly to look for
any radical improvement in the social and economical relations Edition:
current; Page: [938] between labour and capital. Strikes, therefore, and
the trade societies which render strikes possible, are for these various
reasons not a mischievous, but on the contrary, a valuable part of the
existing machinery of society.

It is, however, an indispensable condition of tolerating combinations,
that they should be voluntary. No severity, necessary to the purpose, is
too great to be employed against attempts to compel workmen to join a
union, or take part in a strike by threats or violence. Mere moral
compulsion, by the expression of opinion, the law ought not to interfere
with; it belongs to more enlightened opinion to restrain it, by
rectifying the moral sentiments of the people. Other questions arise
when the combination, being voluntary, proposes to itself objects really
contrary to the public good. High wages and short hours are generally
good objects, or, at all events, may be so:1 but in many trades unions,
it is among the rules that there shall be no task work, or no difference
of pay between the most expert workmen and the most unskilful, or that
no member of the union shall earn more than a certain sum per week, in
order that there may be more employment for the rest; 2 and the
abolition of piece work, under more or less of modification, held a
conspicuous place among the demands of the Amalgamated Society. These
are combinations to effect objects which are pernicious. Their success,
even when only partial, is a public mischief; and were it complete,
would be equal in magnitude to almost any of the evils arising from bad
economical legislation. Hardly anything worse can be said of the worst
laws on the subject of industry and its remuneration, consistent with
the personal freedom of the labourer, than that they place the energetic
and the idle, the skilful and the incompetent, on a level: and this, in
so far as it is in itself possible, it is the direct tendency3 of the
regulations of these unions to do. 4 It does not, however, follow as a
consequence that the law would Edition: current; Page: [939] be
warranted in making the formation of such associations illegal and
punishable. Independently of all considerations of constitutional
liberty, the best interests of the human race imperatively require that
all economical experiments, voluntarily undertaken, should have the
fullest licence, and that force and fraud should be the only means of
attempting to benefit themselves, which are interdicted to the less
fortunate classes of the community.∗

§ 6. Among the modes of undue exercise of the power of government on
which I have commented in this chapter, I have included only such as
rest on theories which have still more or less of footing in the most
enlightened countries. I have not spoken of some which have done still
greater mischief in times not long past, but which are now generally
given up, at least in theory, though enough of them still remains in
practice to make it impossible as yet to class them among exploded
errors.

The notion, for example, that a government should choose Edition:
current; Page: [940] opinions for the people, and should not suffer any
doctrines in politics, morals, law, or religion, but such as it
approves, to be printed or publicly professed, may be said to be
altogether abandoned as a general thesis. It is now well understood that
a régime of this sort is fatal to all prosperity, even of an economical
kind: that the human mind when prevented either by fear of the law or by
fear of opinion from exercising its faculties freely on the most
important subjects, acquires a general torpidity and imbecility, by
which, when they reach a certain point, it is disqualified from making
any considerable advances even in the common affairs of life, and which,
when greater still, make it gradually lose even its previous
attainments. There cannot be a more decisive example than Spain and
Portugal, for two centuries after the Reformation. The decline of those
countries in national greatness, and even in material civilization,
while almost all the other nations of Europe were uninterruptedly
advancing, has been ascribed to various causes, but there is one which
lies at the foundation of them all: the Holy Inquisition, and the system
of mental slavery of which it is the symbol.

Yet although these truths are very widely recognized, and freedom both
of opinion and of discussion is admitted as an axiom in all free
countries, this apparent liberality and tolerance has acquired so little
of the authority of a principle, that it is always ready to give way to
the dread or horror inspired by some particular sort of opinions. Within
the last fifteen or twenty years,1 several individuals have suffered
imprisonment, for the public profession, sometimes in a very temperate
manner, of disbelief in religion; and it is probable that both the
public and the government, at the first panic which arises on the
subject of Chartism or Communism, will fly to similar means for checking
the propagation of democratic or anti-property doctrines. In this
country, however, the effective restraints on mental freedom proceed
much less from the law or the government, than from the intolerant
temper of the national mind; arising no longer from even as respectable
a source as bigotry or fanaticism, but rather from the general habit,
both in opinion and conduct, of making adherence to custom the rule of
life, and enforcing it, by social penalties, against all persons who,
without a party to back them, assert their individual independence.

Edition: current; Page: [941]


CHAPTER XI: of the grounds and limits of the laisser-faire or non-interference principle

§ 1. We have now reached the last part of our undertaking; the
discussion, so far as suited to this treatise (that is, so far as it is
a question of principle, not detail) of the limits of the province of
government: the question, to what objects governmental intervention in
the affairs of society may or should extend, over and above those which
necessarily appertain to it. No subject has been more keenly contested
in the present age: the contest, however, has chiefly taken place round
certain select points, with only flying excursions into the rest of the
field. Those indeed who have discussed any particular question of
government interference, such as state education (spiritual or secular),
regulation of hours of labour, a public provision for the poor, &c.,
have often dealt largely in general arguments, far outstretching the
special application made of them, and have shown a sufficiently strong
bias either in favour of letting things alone, or in favour of meddling;
but have seldom declared, or apparently decided in their own minds, how
far they would carry either principle. The supporters of interference
have been content with asserting a general right and duty on the part of
government to intervene, wherever its intervention would be useful: and
when those who have been called the laisser-faire school have attempted
any definite limitation of the province of government, they have usually
restricted it to the protection of person and property against force and
fraud; a definition to which neither they nor any one else can
deliberately adhere, since it excludes, as has been shown in a preceding
chapter,∗ some of the most indispensable and unanimously recognized of
the duties of government.

Without professing entirely to supply this deficiency of a general
theory, on a question which does not, as I conceive, admit of any
Edition: current; Page: [942] universal solution, I shall attempt to
afford some little aid towards the resolution of this class of questions
as they arise, by examining, in the most general point of view in which
the subject can be considered, what are the advantages, and what the
evils or inconveniences, of government interference.

We must set out by distinguishing between two kinds of intervention by
the government, which, though they may relate to the same subject,
differ widely in their nature and effects, and require, for their
justification, motives of a very different degree of urgency. The
intervention may extend to controlling the free agency of individuals.
Government may interdict all persons from doing certain things; or from
doing them without its authorization; or may prescribe to them certain
things to be done, or a certain manner of doing things which it is left
optional with them to do or to abstain from. This is the authoritative
interference of government. There is another kind of intervention which
is not authoritative: when a government, instead of issuing a command
and enforcing it by penalties, adopts the course so seldom resorted to
by governments, and of which such important use might be made, that of
giving advice and promulgating information; or when, leaving individuals
free to use their own means of pursuing any object of general interest,
the government, not meddling with them, but not trusting the object
solely to their care, establishes, side by side with their arrangements,
an agency of its own for a like purpose. Thus, it is one thing to
maintain a Church Establishment, and another to refuse toleration to
other religions, or to persons professing no religion. It is one thing
to provide schools or colleges, and another to require that no person
shall act as an instructor of youth without a government licence. There
might be a national bank, or a government manufactory, without any
monopoly against private banks and manufactories. There might be a
post-office, without penalties against the conveyance of letters by any
other means. There may be a corps of government engineers for civil
purposes, while the profession of a civil engineer is free to be adopted
by every one. There may be public hospitals, without any restriction
upon private medical or surgical practice.

§ 2. It is evident, even at first sight, that the authoritative form of
government intervention has a much more limited sphere of legitimate
action than the other. It requires a much stronger necessity to justify
it in any case; while there are large departments Edition: current;
Page: [943] of human life from which it must be unreservedly and
imperiously excluded. Whatever theory we adopt respecting the foundation
of the social union, and under whatever political institutions we live,
there is a circle around every individual human being which no
government, be it that of one, of a few, or of the many, ought to be
permitted to overstep: there is a part of the life of every person who
has come to years of discretion, within which the individuality of that
person ought to reign uncontrolled either by any other individual or by
the public collectively. That there is, or ought to be, some space in
human existence thus entrenched around, and sacred from authoritative
intrusion, no one who professes the smallest regard to human freedom or
dignity will call in question: the point to be determined is, where the
limit should be placed; how large a province of human life this reserved
territory should include. I apprehend that it ought to include all that
part which concerns only the life, whether inward or outward, of the
individual, and does not affect the interests of others, or affects them
only through the moral influence of example. With respect to the domain
of the inward consciousness, the thoughts and feelings, and as much of
external conduct as is personal only, involving no consequences, none at
least of a painful or injurious kind, to other people: I hold that it is
allowable in all, and in the more thoughtful and cultivated often a
duty, to assert and promulgate, with all the force they are capable of,
their opinion of what is good or bad, admirable or contemptible, but not
to compel others to conform to that opinion; whether the force used is
that of extra-legal coercion, or exerts itself by means of the law.

Even in those portions of conduct which do affect the interest of
others, the onus of making out a case always lies on the defenders of
legal prohibitions. It is not a merely constructive or presumptive
injury to others, which will justify the interference of law with
individual freedom. To be prevented from doing what one is inclined to,
from acting according to one's own judgment of what is desirable, is not
only always irksome, but always tends, pro tanto, to starve the
development of some portion of the bodily or mental faculties, either
sensitive or active; and unless the conscience of the individual goes
freely with the legal restraint, it partakes, either in a great or in a
small degree, of the degradation of slavery. Scarcely any degree of
utility, short of absolute necessity, will justify a prohibitory
regulation, unless it can also be made to recommend itself to the
general conscience; unless persons of ordinary good Edition: current;
Page: [944] intentions either believe already, or can be induced to
believe, that the thing prohibited is a thing which they ought not to
wish to do.

It is otherwise with governmental interferences which do not restrain
individual free agency. When a government provides means of fulfilling a
certain end, leaving individuals free to avail themselves of different
means if in their opinion preferable, there is no infringement of
liberty, no irksome or degrading restraint. One of the principal
objections to government interference is then absent. There is, however,
in almost all forms of government agency, one thing which is compulsory.
the provision of the pecuniary means. These are derived from taxation;
or, if existing in the form of an endowment derived from public
property, they are still the cause of as much compulsory taxation as the
sale or the annual proceeds of the property would enable to be dispensed
with.∗ And the objection necessarily attaching to compulsory
contributions, is almost always greatly aggravated by the expensive
precautions and onerous restrictions, which are indispensable to prevent
evasion of a compulsory tax.

§ 3. A second general objection to government agency, is that every
increase of the functions devolving on the government is an increase of
its power, both in the form of authority, and still more, in the
indirect form of influence. The importance of this consideration, in
respect of political freedom, has in general been quite sufficiently
recognized, at least in England, but many, in latter times, have been
prone to think that limitation of the powers of the government is only
essential when the government itself is badly constituted; when it does
not represent the people, but is the organ of a class, or coalition of
classes: and that a government of sufficiently popular constitution
might be trusted with any amount of power over the nation, since its
power would be only that of the nation over itself. This might be true,
if the nation, in such cases, did not practically mean a mere majority
of the nation, and if minorities were only capable of oppressing, but
not of being oppressed. Experience, however, proves that the
depositaries of power who Edition: current; Page: [945] are mere
delegates of the people, that is of a majority, are quite as ready (when
they think they can count on popular support) as any organs of oligarchy
to assume arbitrary power, and encroach unduly on the liberty of private
life. The public collectively is abundantly ready to impose, not only
its generally narrow views of its interests, but its abstract opinions,
and even its tastes, as laws binding upon individuals. And the present
civilization tends so strongly to make the power of persons acting in
masses the only substantial power in society, that there never was more
necessity for surrounding individual independence of thought, speech,
and conduct, with the most powerful defences, in order to maintain that
originality of mind and individuality of character, which are the only
source of any real progress, and of most of the qualities which make the
human race much superior to any herd of animals. Hence it is no less
important in a democratic than in any other government, that all
tendency on the part of public authorities to stretch their
interference, and assume a power of any sort which can easily be
dispensed with, should be regarded with unremitting jealousy. Perhaps
this is even more important in a democracy than in any other form of
political society; because where public opinion is sovereign, an
individual who is oppressed by the sovereign does not, as in most other
states of things, find a rival power to which he can appeal for relief,
or, at all events, for sympathy.

§ 4. A third general objection to government agency, rests on the
principle of the division of labour. Every additional function
undertaken by the government, is a fresh occupation imposed upon a body
already overcharged with duties. A natural consequence is that most
things are ill done; much not done at all, because the government is not
able to do it without delays which are fatal to its purpose; that the
more troublesome and less showy, of the functions undertaken, are
postponed or neglected, and an excuse is always ready for the neglect;
while the heads of the administration have their minds so fully taken up
with official details, in however perfunctory a manner superintended,
that they have no time or thought to spare for the great interests of
the state, and the preparation of enlarged measures of social
improvement.

But these inconveniences, though real and serious, result much more from
the bad organization of governments, than from the extent and variety of
the duties undertaken by them. Government is not a name for some one
functionary, or definite number of Edition: current; Page: [946]
functionaries: there may be almost any amount of division of labour
within the administrative body itself. The evil in question is felt in
great magnitude under some of the governments of the Continent, where
six or eight men, living at the capital and known by the name of
ministers, demand that the whole public business of the country shall
pass, or be supposed to pass, under their individual eye. But the
inconvenience would be reduced to a very manageable compass, in a
country in which there was a proper distribution of functions between
the central and local officers of government, and in which the central
body was divided into a sufficient number of departments. When
Parliament thought it expedient to confer on the government an
inspecting and partially controlling authority over railways, it did not
add railways to the department of the Home Minister, but created a
Railway Board. When it determined to have a central superintending
authority for pauper administration, it established the Poor Law
Commission. There are few countries in which a greater number of
functions are discharged by public officers, than in some states of the
American Union, particularly the New England States; but the division of
labour in public business is extreme; most of these officers being not
even amenable to any common superior, but performing their duties
freely, under the double check of election by their townsmen, and civil
as well as criminal responsibility to the tribunals.

It is, no doubt, indispensable to good government that the chiefs of the
administration, whether permanent or temporary, should extend a
commanding, though general, view over the ensemble of all the interests
confided, in any degree, to the responsibility of the central power. But
with a skilful internal organization of the administrative machine,
leaving to subordinates, and as far as possible, to local subordinates,
not only the execution, but to a greater degree the control, of details;
holding them accountable for the results of their acts rather than for
the acts themselves, except where these come within the cognizance of
the tribunals; taking the most effectual securities for honest and
capable appointments; opening a broad path to promotion from the
inferior degrees of the administrative scale to the superior; leaving,
at each step, to the functionary, a wider range in the origination of
measures, so that, in the highest grade of all, deliberation might be
concentrated on the great collective interests of the country in each
department; if all this were done, the government would not probably be
overburthened by any business, in other respects fit to be undertaken by
Edition: current; Page: [947] it; though the overburthening would remain
as a serious addition to the inconveniences incurred by its undertaking
any which was unfit.

§ 5. But though a better organization of governments would greatly
diminish the force of the objection to the mere multiplication of their
duties, it would still remain true that in all the more advanced
communities, the great majority of things are worse done by the
intervention of government, than the individuals most interested in the
matter would do them, or cause them to be done, if left to themselves.
The grounds of this truth are expressed with tolerable exactness in the
popular dictum, that people understand their own business and their own
interests better, and care for them more, than the government does, or
can be expected to do. This maxim holds true throughout the greatest
part of the business of life, and wherever it is true we ought to
condemn every kind of government intervention that conflicts with it.
The inferiority of government agency, for example, in any of the common
operations of industry or commerce, is proved by the fact, that it is
hardly ever able to maintain.. itself in equal competition with
individual agency, where the individuals possess the requisite degree of
industrial enterprise, and can command the necessary assemblage of
means. All the facilities which a government enjoys of access to
information; all the means which it possesses of remunerating, and
therefore of commanding, the best available talent in the market—are not
an equivalent for the one great disadvantage of an inferior interest in
the result.

It must be remembered, besides, that even if a government were superior
in intelligence and knowledge to any single individual in the nation, it
must be inferior to all the individuals of the nation taken together. It
can neither possess in itself, nor enlist in its service, more than a
portion of the acquirements and capacities which the country contains,
applicable to any given purpose. There must be many persons equally
qualified for the work with those whom the government employs, even if
it selects its instruments with no reference to any consideration but
their fitness. Now these are the very persons into whose hands, in the
cases of most common occurrence, a system of individual agency naturally
tends to throw the work, because they are capable of doing it better or1
Edition: current; Page: [948] on cheaper terms than any other persons.
So far as this is the case, it is evident that government, by excluding
or even by superseding individual agency, either substitutes a less
qualified instrumentality for one better qualified, or at any rate
substitutes its own mode of accomplishing the work, for all the variety
of modes which would be tried by a number of equally qualified persons
aiming at the same end; a competition by many degrees more propitious to
the progress of improvement than any uniformity of system.

§ 6. I have reserved for the last place one of the strongest of the
reasons against the extension of government agency, Even if the
government could comprehend within itself, in each department, all the
most eminent intellectual capacity and active talent of the nation, it
would not be the less desirable that the conduct of a large portion of
the affairs of the society should be left in the hands of the persons
immediately interested in them. The business of life is an essential
part of the practical education of a people; without which, book and
school instruction, though most necessary and salutary, does not suffice
to qualify them for conduct, and for the adaptation of means to ends.
Instruction is only one of the desiderata of mental improvement;
another, almost as indispensable, is a vigorous exercise of the active
energies; labour, contrivance, judgment, self-control: and the natural
stimulus to these is the difficulties of life. This doctrine is not to
be confounded with the complacent optimism, which represents the evils
of life as desirable things, because they call forth qualities adapted
to combat with evils. It is only because the difficulties exist, that
the qualities which combat with them are of any value. As practical
beings it is our business to free human life from as many as possible of
its difficulties, and not to keep up a stock of them as hunters preserve
game, for the exercise of pursuing it. But since the need of active
talent and practical judgment in the affairs of life can only be
diminished, and not, even on the most favourable supposition, done away
with, it is important that those endowments should be cultivated not
merely in a select few, but in all, and that the cultivation should be
more varied and complete than most persons are able to find in the
narrow sphere of their merely individual interests. A people among whom
there is no habit of spontaneous action for a collective interest—who
look habitually to their government to command or prompt them in all
matters of joint concern—who Edition: current; Page: [949] expect to
have everything done for them, except what can be made an affair of mere
habit and routine—have their faculties only half developed; their
education is defective in one of its most important branches.

Not only is the cultivation of the active faculties by exercise,
diffused through the whole community, in itself one of the most valuable
of national possessions: it is rendered, not less, but more necessary,
when a high degree of that indispensable culture is systematically kept
up in the chiefs and functionaries of the state. There cannot be a
combination of circumstances more dangerous to human welfare, than that
in which intelligence and talent are maintained at a high standard
within a governing corporation, but starved and discouraged outside the
pale. Such a system, more completely than any other, embodies the idea
of despotism, by arming with intellectual superiority as an additional
weapon those who have already the legal power. It approaches as nearly
as the organic difference between human beings and other animals admits,
to the government of sheep by their shepherd, without anything like so
strong an interest as the shepherd has in the thriving condition of the
flock. The only security against political slavery is the check
maintained over governors by the diffusion of intelligence, activity,
and public spirit among the governed. Experience proves the extreme
difficulty of permanently keeping up a sufficiently high standard of
those qualities; a difficulty which increases, as the advance of
civilization and security removes one after another of the hardships,
embarrassments, and dangers against which individuals had formerly no
resource but in their own strength, skill, and courage. It is therefore
of supreme importance that all classes of the community, down to the
lowest, should have much to do for themselves; that as great a demand
should be made upon their intelligence and virtue as it is in any
respect equal to; that the government should not only leave as far as
possible to their own faculties the conduct of whatever concerns
themselves alone, but should suffer them, or rather encourage them, to
manage as many as possible of their joint concerns by voluntary
co-operation; since this discussion and management of collective
interests is the great school of that public spirit, and the great
source of that intelligence of public affairs, which are always regarded
as the distinctive character of the public of free countries.

A democratic constitution, not supported by democratic institutions in
detail, but confined to the central government, not only Edition:
current; Page: [950] is not political freedom, but often creates a
spirit precisely the reverse, carrying down to the lowest grade in
society the desire and ambition of political domination. In some
countries the desire of the people is for not being tyrannized over, but
in others it is merely for an equal chance to everybody of tyrannizing.
Unhappily this last state of the desires is fully as natural to mankind
as the former, and in many of the conditions even of civilized humanity
is far more largely exemplified. In proportion as the people are
accustomed to manage their affairs by their own active intervention,
instead of leaving them to the government, their desires will turn to
repelling tyranny, rather than to tyrannizing: while in proportion as
all real initiative and direction resides in the government, and
individuals habitually feel and act as under its perpetual tutelage,
popular institutions develop in them not the desire of freedom, but an
unmeasured appetite for place and power: diverting the intelligence and
activity of the country from its principal business to a wretched
competition for the selfish prizes and the petty vanities of office.

§ 7. The preceding are the principal reasons, of a general character, in
favour of restricting to the narrowest compass the intervention of a
public authority in the business of the community: and few will dispute
the more than sufficiency of these reasons, to throw, in every instance,
the burthen of making out a strong case, not on those who resist, but on
those who recommend, government interference. Laisser-faire, in short,
should be the general practice: every departure from it, unless required
by some great good, is a certain evil.

The degree in which the maxim, even in the cases to which it is most
manifestly applicable, has heretofore been infringed by governments,
future ages will probably have difficulty in crediting. Some idea may be
formed of it from the description of M. Dunoyer∗ of the restraints
imposed on the operations of manufacture under the old government of
France, by the meddling and regulating spirit of legislation.

“The State exercised over manufacturing industry the most unlimited and
arbitrary jurisdiction. It disposed without scruple of the resources of
manufacturers: it decided who should be allowed to work, what things it
should be permitted to make, what materials Edition: current; Page:
[951] should be employed, what processes followed, what forms should be
given to productions. It was not enough to do well, to do better; it was
necessary to do according to the rules. Everybody knows the regulation
of 1670 which prescribed to seize and nail to the pillory, with the
names of the makers, goods not conformable to the rules, and which, on a
second repetition of the offence, directed that the manufacturers
themselves should be attached also. Not the taste of the consumers, but
the commands of the law must be attended to. Legions of inspectors,
commissioners, controllers, jurymen, guardians, were charged with its
execution. Machines were broken, products were burned when not
conformable to the rules: improvements were punished; inventors were
fined. There were different sets of rules for goods destined for home
consumption and for those intended for exportation. An artizan could
neither choose the place in which to establish himself, nor work at all
seasons, nor work for all customers. There exists a decree of March 30,
1700, which limits to eighteen towns the number of places where
stockings might be woven. A decree of June 18, 1723, enjoins the
manufacturers at Rouen to suspend their works from the 1st of July to
the 15th of September, in order to facilitate the harvest. Louis XIV.,
when he intended to construct the colonnade of the Louvre, forbade all
private persons to employ workmen without his permission, under a
penalty of 10,000 livres, and forbade workmen to work for private
persons, on pain for the first offence, of imprisonment, and for the
second, of the galleys.”

That these and similar regulations were not a dead letter, and that the
officious and vexatious meddling was prolonged down to the French
Revolution, we have the testimony of Roland, the Girondist minister.∗ “I
have seen,” says he, “eighty, ninety, a hundred pieces of cotton or
woollen stuff cut up, and completely destroyed. I have witnessed similar
scenes every week for a number of years. I have seen manufactured goods
confiscated; heavy fines laid on the manufacturers; some pieces of
fabric were burnt in public places, and at the hours of market: others
were fixed to the pillory, with the name of the manufacturer inscribed
upon them, and he himself was threatened with the pillory, in case of a
second offence. All this was done under my eyes, at Rouen, in conformity
with existing regulations, or ministerial orders. What crime deserved so
cruel a punishment? Some defects in the materials employed, or in
Edition: current; Page: [952] the texture of the fabric, or even in some
of the threads of the warp.

“I have frequently seen manufacturers visited by a band of satellites
who put all in confusion in their establishments, spread terror in their
families, cut the stuffs from the frames, tore off the warp from the
looms, and carried them away as proofs of infringement; the
manufacturers were summoned, tried, and condemned: their goods
confiscated; copies of their judgment of confiscation posted up in every
public place; fortune, reputation, credit, all was lost and destroyed.
And for what offence? Because they had made of worsted, a kind of cloth
called shag, such as the English used to manufacture, and even sell in
France, while the French regulations stated that that kind of cloth
should be made with mohair. I have seen other manufacturers treated in
the same way, because they had made camlets of a particular width, used
in England and Germany, for which there was a great demand from Spain,
Portugal, and other countries, and from several parts of France, while
the French regulations prescribed other widths for camlets.”

The time is gone by, when such applications as these of the principle of
“paternal government” would be attempted, in even the least enlightened
country of the European commonwealth of nations. In such cases as those
cited, all the general objections to government interference are valid,
and several of them in nearly their highest degree. But we must now turn
to the second part of our task, and direct our attention to cases, in
which some of those general objections are altogether absent, while
those which can never be got rid of entirely, are overruled by
counter-considerations of still greater importance.

We have observed that, as a general rule, the business of life is better
performed when those who have an immediate interest in it are left to
take their own course, uncontrolled either by the mandate of the law or
by the meddling of any public functionary. The persons, or some of the
persons, who do the work, are likely to be better judges than the
government, of the means of attaining the particular end at which they
aim. Were we to suppose, what is not very probable, that the government
has possessed itself of the best knowledge which had been acquired up to
a given time by the persons most skilled in the occupation; even then,
the individual agents have so much stronger and more direct an interest
in the result, that the means are far more likely to be improved and
perfected if left to their uncontrolled choice. But if the workman
Edition: current; Page: [953] is generally the best selector of means,
can it be affirmed with the same universality, that the consumer, or
person served, is the most competent judge of the end? Is the buyer
always qualified to judge of the commodity? If not, the presumption in
favour of the competition of the market does not apply to the case; and
if the commodity be one, in the quality of which society has much at
stake, the balance of advantages may be in favour of some mode and
degree of intervention, by the authorized representatives of the
collective interest of the state.

§ 8. Now, the proposition that the consumer is a competent judge of the
commodity, can be admitted only with numerous abatements and exceptions.
He is generally the best judge (though even this is not true
universally) of the material objects produced for his use. These are
destined to supply some physical want, or gratify some taste or
inclination, respecting which wants or inclinations there is no appeal
from the person who feels them; or they are the means and appliances of
some occupation, for the use of the persons engaged in it, who may be
presumed to be judges of the things required in their own habitual
employment. But there are other things, of the worth of which the demand
of the market is by no means a test; things of which the utility does
not consist in ministering to inclinations, nor in serving the daily
uses of life, and the want of which is least felt where the need is
greatest. This is peculiarly true of those things which are chiefly
useful as tending to raise the character of human beings. The
uncultivated cannot be competent judges of cultivation. Those who most
need to be made wiser and better, usually desire it least, and if they
desired it, would be incapable of finding the way to it by their own
lights. It will continually happen, on the voluntary system, that, the
end not being desired, the means will not be provided at all, or that,
the persons requiring improvement having an imperfect or altogether
erroneous conception of what they want, the supply called forth by the
demand of the market will be anything but what is really required. Now
any well-intentioned and tolerably civilized government may think,
without presumption, that it does or ought to possess a degree of
cultivation above the average of the community which it rules, and that
it should therefore be capable of offering better education and better
instruction to the people, than the greater number of them would
spontaneously demand. Education, therefore, is one of those things which
it is admissible in principle Edition: current; Page: [954] that a
government should provide for the people. The case is one to which the
reasons of the non-interference principle do not necessarily or
universally extend.∗

With regard to elementary education, the exception to ordinary rules
may, I conceive, justifiably be carried still further. There are certain
primary elements and means of knowledge, which it is in the highest
degree desirable that all human beings born into the community should
acquire during childhood. If their parents, or those on whom they
depend, have the power of obtaining for them this instruction, and fail
to do it, they commit a double breach of duty, towards the children
themselves, and towards the members of the community generally, who are
all liable to suffer seriously from the consequences of ignorance and
want of education in their fellow-citizens. It is therefore an allowable
exercise of the powers of government to impose on parents the legal
obligation of giving elementary instruction to children. This, however,
cannot fairly be done, without taking measures to insure that such
instruction shall be always accessible to them, either gratuitously or
at a trifling expense.

Edition: current; Page: [955]
It may indeed be objected that the education of children is one of those
expenses which parents, even of the labouring class, ought to defray;
that it is desirable that they should feel it incumbent on them to
provide by their own means for the fulfilment of their duties, and that
by giving education at the cost of others, just as much by giving
subsistence, the standard of necessary wages is proportionally lowered,
and the springs of exertion and self-restraint is so much relaxed. This
argument could, at best, be only valid if the question were that of
substituting a public provision for what individuals would otherwise do
for themselves; if all parents in the labouring class recognized and
practised the duty of giving instruction to their children at their own
expense. But inasmuch as parents do not practise this duty, and do not
include education among those necessary expenses which their wages must
provide for, therefore the general rate of wages is not high enough to
bear those expenses, and they must be borne from some other source. And
this is not one of the cases in which the tender of help perpetuates the
state of things which renders help necessary. Instruction, when it is
really such, does not enervate, but strengthens as well as enlarges the
active faculties: in whatever manner acquired, its effect on the mind is
favourable to the spirit of independence: and when, unless had
gratuitously, it would not be had at all, help in this form has the
opposite tendency to that which in so many other cases makes it
objectionable; it is help towards doing without help.

In England, and most European countries, elementary instruction cannot
be paid for, at its full cost, from the common wages of unskilled
labour, and would not if it could. The alternative, therefore, is not
between government and private speculation, but between a government
provision and voluntary charity: between interference by government, and
interference by associations of individuals, subscribing their own money
for the purpose, like the two great School Societies. It is, of course,
not desirable that anything should be done by funds derived from
compulsory taxation, which is already sufficiently well done by
individual liberality. How far this is the case with school instruction,
is, in each particular instance, a question of fact. The education
provided in this country on the voluntary principle has of late been so
much discussed, that it is needless in this place to criticize it
minutely, and I shall merely express my conviction, that even in
quantity it is [1848], and is likely to remain, altogether insufficient,
while in quality, Edition: current; Page: [956] though with some slight
tendency to improvement, it is never good except by some rare accident,
and generally so bad as to be little more than nominal. I hold it
therefore the duty of the government to supply the defect, by giving
pecuniary support to elementary schools, such as to render them
accessible to all the children of the poor, either freely, or for a
payment too inconsiderable to be sensibly felt.1

One thing must be strenuously insisted on; that the government must
claim no monopoly for its education, either in the lower or in the
higher branches; must exert neither authority nor influence to induce
the people to resort to its teachers in preference to others, and must
confer no peculiar advantages on those who have been instructed by them.
Though the government teachers will probably be superior to the average
of private instructors, they will not embody all the knowledge and
sagacity to be found in all instructors taken together, and it is
desirable to leave open as many roads as possible to the desired end. It
is not endurable that a government should, either de jure or de facto,
have a complete control over the education of the people. To possess
such a control, and actually exert it, is to be despotic. A government
which can mould the opinions and sentiments of the people from their
youth upwards, can do with them whatever it pleases. Though a
government, therefore, may, and in many cases ought to, establish
schools and colleges, it must neither compel nor bribe any person to
come to them; nor ought the power of individuals to set up rival
establishments, to depend in any degree upon its authorization. It would
be justified in requiring from all the people that they shall possess
instruction in certain things, but not in prescribing to them how or
from whom they shall obtain it.

§ 9. In the matter of education, the intervention of government is
justifiable, because the case is not one in which the interest and
judgment of the consumer are a sufficient security for the goodness of
the commodity. Let us now consider another class of cases, where there
is no person in the situation of a consumer, and where the interest and
judgment to be relied on are those of the agent Edition: current; Page:
[957] himself; as in the conduct of any business in which he is
exclusively interested, or in entering into any contract or engagement
by which he himself is to be bound.

The ground of the practical principle of non-interference must here be,
that most persons take a juster and more intelligent view of their own
interest, and of the means of promoting it, than can either be
prescribed to them by a general enactment of the legislature, or pointed
out in the particular case by a public functionary. The maxim is
unquestionably sound as a general rule; but there is no difficulty in
perceiving some very large and conspicuous exceptions to it. These may
be classed under several heads.

First:—The individual who is presumed to be the best judge of his own
interests may be incapable of judging or acting for himself; may be a
lunatic, an idiot, an infant: or though not wholly incapable, may be of
immature years and judgment. In this case the foundation of the
laisser-faire principle breaks down entirely. The person most interested
is not the best judge of the matter, nor a competent judge at all.
Insane persons are everywhere regarded as proper objects of the care of
the state.∗ In the case of children and young persons, it is common to
say, that though they cannot judge for themselves, they have their
parents or other relatives to judge for them. But this removes the
question into a different category; making it no longer a question
whether the government should interfere with individuals in the
direction of Edition: current; Page: [958] their own conduct and
interests, but whether it should leave absolutely in their power the
conduct and interests of somebody else. Parental power is as susceptible
of abuse as any other power, and is, as a matter of fact, constantly
abused. If laws do not succeed in preventing parents from brutally
ill-treating, and even from murdering their children, far less ought it
to be presumed that the interests of children will never be sacrificed,
in more commonplace and less revolting ways, to the selfishness or the
ignorance of their parents. Whatever it can be clearly seen that parents
ought to do or forbear for the interest of children, the law is
warranted, if it is able, in compelling to be done or forborne, and is
generally bound to do so. To take an example from the peculiar province
of political economy; it is right that children, and young persons not
yet arrived at maturity, should be protected so far as the eye and hand
of the state can reach, from being over-worked. Labouring for too many
hours in the day, or on work beyond their strength, should not be
permitted to them, for if permitted it may always be compelled. Freedom
of contract, in the case of children, is but another word for freedom of
coercion. Education also, the best which circumstances admit of their
receiving, is not a thing which parents or relatives, from indifference,
jealousy, or avarice, should have it in their power to withhold.

The reasons for legal intervention in favour of children, apply not less
strongly to the case of those unfortunate slaves and victims of the most
brutal part of mankind, the lower animals. It is by the grossest
misunderstanding of the principles of liberty, that the infliction of
exemplary punishment on ruffianism practised towards these defenceless
creatures has been treated as a meddling by government with things
beyond its province; an interference with domestic life. The domestic
life of domestic tyrants is one of the things which it is the most
imperative on the law to interfere with; and it is to be regretted that
metaphysical scruples respecting the nature and source of the authority
of government, should induce many warm supporters of laws against
cruelty to animals, to seek for a justification of such laws in the
incidental consequences of the indulgence of ferocious habits to the
interests of human beings, rather than in the intrinsic merits of the
case itself. What it would be the duty of a human being, possessed of
the requisite physical strength, to prevent by force if attempted in his
presence, it cannot be less incumbent on society generally to repress.
The existing laws of England on the subject are chiefly defective in the
trifling, Edition: current; Page: [959] often almost nominal, maximum,
to which the penalty even in the worst cases is limited.

Among those members of the community whose freedom of contract ought to
be controlled by the legislature for their own protection, on account
(it is said) of their dependent position, it is frequently proposed to
include women: and in the existing Factory Acts,1 their labour, in
common with that of young persons, has been placed under peculiar
restrictions. But the classing together, for this and other purposes, of
women and children, appears to me both indefensible in principle and
mischievous in practice. Children below a certain age cannot judge or
act for themselves; up to a considerably greater age they are inevitably
more or less disqualified for doing so; but women are as capable as men
of appreciating and managing their own concerns, and the only hindrance
to their doing so arises from the injustice of their present social
position. When the law makes everything which the wife acquires, the
property of the husband, while by compelling her to live with him it
forces her to submit to almost any amount of moral and even physical
tyranny which he may choose to inflict, there is some ground for
regarding every act done by her as done under coercion: but it is the
great error of reformers and philanthropists in our time, to nibble at
the consequences of unjust power, instead of redressing the injustice
itself. If women had as absolute a control as men have, over their own
persons and their own patrimony or acquisitions, there would be no plea
for limiting their hours of labouring for themselves, in order that they
might have time to labour for the husband, in what is called, by the
advocates of restriction, his home. Women employed in factories are the
only women in the labouring rank of life whose position is not that of
slaves and drudges; precisely because they cannot easily be compelled to
work and earn wages in factories against their will. For improving the
condition of women, it should, in the contrary, be an object to give
them the readiest access to independent industrial employment, instead
of closing, either entirely or partially, that which is already open to
them.2

§ 10. A second exception to the doctrine that individuals are the best
judges of their own interest, is when an individual attempts Edition:
current; Page: [960] to decide irrevocably now, what will be best for
his interest at some future and distant time. The presumption in favour
of individual judgment is only legitimate, where the judgment is
grounded on actual, and especially on present, personal experience; not
where it is formed antecedently to experience, and not suffered to be
reversed even after experience has condemned it. When persons have bound
themselves by a contract, not simply to do some one thing, but to
continue doing something for ever or for a prolonged period, without any
power of revoking the engagement, the presumption which their
perseverance in that course of conduct would otherwise raise in favour
of its being advantageous to them, does not exist; and any such
presumption which can be grounded on their having voluntarily entered
into the contract, perhaps at an early age, and without any real
knowledge of what they undertook, is commonly next to null. The
practical maxim of leaving contracts free is not applicable without
great limitations in case of engagement in perpetuity; and the law
should be extremely jealous of such engagements; should refuse its
sanction to them, when the obligations they impose are such as the
contracting party cannot be a competent judge of; if it ever does
sanction them, it should take every possible security for their being
contracted with foresight and deliberation; and in compensation for not
permitting the parties themselves to revoke their engagement, should
grant them a release from it, on a sufficient case being made out before
an impartial authority. These considerations are eminently applicable to
marriage, the most important of all cases of engagement for life.1

§ 11. The third exception which I shall notice, to the doctrine that
government cannot manage the affairs of individuals as well as the
individuals themselves, has reference to the great class of cases in
which the individuals can only manage the concern by delegated agency,
and in which the so-called private management is, in point of fact,
hardly better entitled to be called management by the persons
interested, than administration by a public officer. Whatever, if left
to spontaneous agency, can only be done by joint-stock associations,
will often be as well, and sometimes better done, as far as the actual
work is concerned, by the state. Government management is, indeed,
proverbially jobbing, careless, and ineffective, but so likewise has
generally been joint-stock management. The Edition: current; Page: [961]
directors of a joint-stock company, it is true, are always shareholders;
but also the members of a government are invariably taxpayers; and in
the case of directors, no more than in that of governments, is their
proportional share of the benefits of good management equal to the
interest they may possibly have in mismanagement, even without reckoning
the interest of their case. It may be objected, that the shareholders,
in their collective character, exercise a certain control over the
directors, and have almost always full power to remove them from office.
Practically, however, the difficulty of exercising this power is found
to be so great, that it is hardly ever exercised except in cases of such
flagrantly unskilful, or, at least, unsuccessful management, as would
generally produce the ejection from office of managers appointed by the
government. Against the very ineffectual security afforded by meetings
of shareholders, and by their individual inspection and inquiries, may
be placed the greater publicity and more active discussion and comment,
to be expected in free countries with regard to affairs in which the
general government takes part. The defects, therefore, of government
management, do not seem to be necessarily much greater, if necessarily
greater at all, than those of management by joint-stock.

The true reasons in favour of leaving to voluntary associations all such
things as they are competent to perform, would exist in equal strength
if it were certain that the work itself would be as well or better done
by public officers. These reasons have been already pointed out: the
mischief of overloading the chief functionaries of government with
demands on their attention, and diverting them from duties which they
alone can discharge, to objects which can be sufficiently well attained
without them; the danger of unnecessarily swelling the direct power and
indirect influence of government, and multiplying occasions of collision
between its agents and private citizens; and the inexpediency of
concentrating in a dominant bureaucracy all the skill and experience in
the management of large interests, and all the power of organized
action, existing in the community; a practice which keeps the citizens
in a relation to the government like that of children to their
guardians, and is a main cause of the inferior capacity for political
life which has hitherto characterized the over-governed countries of the
Continent, whether with or without the forms of representative
government.∗

Edition: current; Page: [962]
But although, for these reasons, most things which are likely to be even
tolerably done by voluntary associations, should, generally speaking, be
left to them; it does not follow that the manner in which those
associations perform their work should be entirely uncontrolled by the
government. There are many cases in which the agency, of whatever
nature, by which a service is performed, is certain, from the nature of
the case, to be virtually single; in which a practical monopoly, with
all the power it confers of taxing the community, cannot be prevented
from existing. I have already more than once adverted to the case of the
gas and water companies, among which, though perfect freedom is allowed
to competition, none really takes place, and practically they are found
to be even more irresponsible, and unapproachable by individual
complaints, than the government. There are the expenses without the
advantages of plurality of agency; and the charge made for services
which cannot be dispensed with, is, in substance, quite as much
compulsory taxation as if imposed by law; there are few householders who
make any distinction between their “water-rate” and other local taxes.
In the case of these particular services, the reasons preponderate in
favour of their being performed, like the paving and cleansing of the
streets, not certainly by the general government of the state, but by
the municipal authorities of the town, and the expense defrayed, as even
now it in fact is, by a local rate. But in the many analogous cases
which it is best to resign to voluntary agency, the community needs some
other security for the fit performance of the service than the interest
of the managers; and it is the part of the government, either to subject
the business to reasonable conditions for the general advantage, or to
retain such power over it, that the profits of the monopoly may at least
be obtained for the public. This applies to the case of a road, a canal,
or a railway. These are always, in a great degree, practical monopolies;
and a government which concedes such monopoly unreservedly to a private
company, does much the same thing as if it allowed an individual or an
association Edition: current; Page: [963] to levy any tax they chose,
for their own benefit, on all the malt produced in the country, or on
all the cotton imported into it. To make the concession for a limited
time is generally justifiable, on the principle which justifies patents
for invention: but the state should either reserve to itself a
reversionary property in such public works, or should retain, and freely
exercise, the right of fixing a maximum of fares and charges, and, from
time to time, varying that maximum. It is perhaps necessary to remark,
that the state may be the proprietor of canals or railways without
itself working them; and that they will almost always be better worked
by means of a company renting the railway or canal for a limited period
from the state.

§ 12. To a fourth case of exception I must request particular attention,
it being one to which as it appears to me, the attention of political
economists has not yet been sufficiently drawn. There are matters in
which the interference of law is required, not to overrule the judgment
of individuals respecting their own interest, but to give effect to that
judgment: they being unable to give effect to it except by concert,
which concert again cannot be effectual unless it receives validity and
sanction from the law. For illustration, and without prejudging the
particular point, I may advert to the question of diminishing the hours
of labour. Let us suppose, what is at least supposable, whether it be
the fact or not—that a general reduction of the hours of factory labour,
say from ten to nine,1 would be for the advantage of the workpeople:
that they would receive as high wages, or nearly as high, for nine
hours' labour as they receive for ten. If this would be the result, and
if the operatives generally are convinced that it would, the limitation,
some may say, will be adopted spontaneously. I answer, that it will not
be adopted unless the body of operatives bind themselves to one another
to abide by it. A workman who refused to work more than nine hours while
there were others who worked ten, would either not be employed at all,
or if employed, must submit to lose one-tenth of his wages. However
convinced, therefore, he may be that it is the interest of the class to
work short time, it is contrary to his own interest to set the example,
unless he is well assured that all or most others will follow it. But
suppose a general agreement of the whole class: might not this be
Edition: current; Page: [964] effectual without the sanction of law? Not
unless enforced by opinion with a rigour practically equal to that of
law. For however beneficial the observance of the regulation might be to
the class collectively, the immediate interest of every individual would
lie in violating it: and the more numerous those were who adhered to the
rule, the more would individuals gain by departing from it. If nearly
all restricted themselves to nine hours, those who chose to work for ten
would gain all the advantages of the restriction, together with the
profit from infringing it; they would get ten hours' wages for nine
hours' work, and an hour's wages besides. I grant that if a large
majority adhered to the nine hours, there would be no harm done; the
benefit would be, in the main, secured to the class, while those
individuals who preferred to work harder and earn more, would have an
opportunity of doing so. This certainly would be the state of things to
be wished for; and assuming that a reduction of hours without any
diminution of wages could take place without expelling the commodity
from some of its markets—which is in every particular instance a
question of fact, not of principle—the manner in which it would be most
desirable that this effect should be brought about, would be by a quiet
change in the general custom of the trade; short hours becoming, by
spontaneous choice, the general practice, but those who chose to deviate
from it having the fullest liberty to do so. Probably, however, so many
would prefer the ten hours' work on the improved terms, that the
limitation could not be maintained as a general practice: what some did
from choice, others would soon be obliged to do from necessity, and
those who had chosen long hours for the sake of increased wages, would
be forced in the end to work long hours for no greater wages than
before. Assuming then that it really would be the interest of each to
work only nine hours if he could be assured that all others would do the
same, there might be no means of attaining this object but by converting
their supposed mutual agreement into an engagement under penalty, by
consenting to have it enforced by law. I am not expressing any opinion
in favour of such an enactment, which has never in this country been
demanded, and which I certainly should not, in present circumstances,
recommend:1 but it serves to exemplify the manner in which classes of
persons may need the assistance of Edition: current; Page: [965] law, to
give effect to their deliberate collective opinion of their own
interest, by affording to every individual a guarantee that his
competitors will pursue the same course, without which he cannot safely
adopt it himself.

Another exemplification of the same principle is afforded by what is
known as the Wakefield system of colonization. This system is grounded
on the important principle, that the degree of productiveness of land
and labour depends on their being in a due proportion to one another;
that if a few persons in a newly-settled country attempt to occupy and
appropriate a large district, or if each labourer becomes too soon an
occupier and cultivator of land, there is a loss of productive power,
and a great retardation of the progress of the colony in wealth and
civilization: that nevertheless the instinct (as it may almost be
called) of appropriation, and the feelings associated in old countries
with landed proprietorship, induce almost every emigrant to take
possession of as much land as he has the means of acquiring, and every
labourer to become at once a proprietor, cultivating his own land with
no other aid than that of his family. If this propensity to the
immediate possession of land could be in some degree restrained, and
each labourer induced to work a certain number of years on hire before
he became a landed proprietor, a perpetual stock of hired labourers
could be maintained, available for roads, canals, works of irrigation,
&c., and for the establishment and carrying on of the different branches
of town industry; whereby the labourer, when he did at last become a
landed proprietor, would find his land much more valuable, through
access to markets, and facility of obtaining hired labour. Mr. Wakefield
therefore proposed to check the premature occupation of land, and
dispersion of the people, by putting upon all unappropriated lands a
rather high price, the proceeds of which were to be expended in
conveying emigrant labourers from the mother country.

This salutary provision, however, has been objected to, in the name and
on the authority of what was represented as the great principle of
political economy, that individuals are the best judges of their own
interest. It was said, that when things are left to themselves, land is
appropriated and occupied by the spontaneous choice of individuals, in
the quantities and at the times most advantageous to each person, and
therefore to the community generally; and that to interpose artificial
obstacles to their obtaining land is to prevent them from adopting the
course which in their own judgment is most beneficial to them, from a
self-conceited notion Edition: current; Page: [966] of the legislator,
that he knows what is most for their interest, better than they do
themselves. Now this is a complete misunderstanding, either of the
system itself, or of the principle with which it is alleged to conflict.
The oversight is similar to that which we have just seen exemplified on
the subject of hours of labour. However beneficial it might be to the
colony in the aggregate, and to each individual composing it, that no
one should occupy more land than he can properly cultivate, nor become a
proprietor until there are other labourers ready to take his place in
working for hire; it can never be the interest of an individual to
exercise this forbearance, unless he is assured that others will do so
too. Surrounded by settlers who have each their thousand acres, how is
he benefited by restricting himself to fifty? or what does a labourer
gain by deferring the acquisition altogether for a few years, if all
other labourers rush to convert their first earnings into estates in the
wilderness, several miles apart from one another? If they, by seizing on
land, prevent the formation of a class of labourers for wages, he will
not, by postponing the time of his becoming a proprietor, be enabled to
employ the land with any greater advantage when he does obtain it; to
what end therefore should he place himself in what will appear to him
and others a position of inferiority, by remaining a hired labourer,
when all around him are proprietors? It is the interest of each to do
what is good for all, but only if others will do likewise.

The principle that each is the best judge of his own interest,
understood as these objectors understand it, would prove that
governments ought not to fulfil any of their acknowledged duties—ought
not, in fact, to exist at all. It is greatly the interest of the
community, collectively and individually, not to rob or defraud one
another. but there is not the less necessity for laws to punish robbery
and fraud; because, though it is the interest of each that nobody should
rob or cheat, it is not any one's interest to refrain from robbing and
cheating others when all others are permitted to rob and cheat him.
Penal laws exist at all, chiefly for this reason—because even an
unanimous opinion that a certain line of conduct is for the general
interest, does not always make it people's individual interest to adhere
to that line of conduct.

§ 13. Fifthly; the argument against government interference grounded on
the maxim that individuals are the best judges of their own interest,
cannot apply to the very large class of cases, in which those acts of
individuals with which the government claims to interfere, Edition:
current; Page: [967] are not done by those individuals for their own
interest, but for the interest of other people. This includes, among
other things, the important and much agitated subject of public charity.
Though individuals should, in general, be left to do for themselves
whatever it can reasonably be expected that they should be capable of
doing, yet when they are at any rate not to be left to themselves, but
to be helped by other people, the question arises whether it is better
that they should receive this help exclusively from individuals, and
therefore uncertainly and casually, or by systematic arrangements, in
which society acts through its organ, the state.

This brings us to the subject of Poor Laws; a subject which would be of
very minor importance if the habits of all classes of the people were
temperate and prudent, and the diffusion of property satisfactory; but
of the greatest moment in a state of things so much the reverse of this,
in both points, as that which the British islands present.

Apart from any metaphysical considerations respecting the foundation of
morals or of the social union, it will be admitted to be right that
human beings should help one another; and the more so, in proportion to
the urgency of the need: and none needs help so urgently as one who is
starving. The claim to help, therefore, created by destitution, is one
of the strongest which can exist; and there is primâ facie the amplest
reason for making the relief of so extreme an exigency as certain to
those who require it, as by any arrangements of society it can be made.

On the other hand, in all cases of helping, there are two sets of
consequences to be considered; the consequences of the assistance
itself, and the consequences of relying on the assistance. The former
are generally beneficial, but the latter, for the most part, injurious;
so much so, in many cases, as greatly to outweigh the value of the
benefit. And this is never more likely to happen than in the very cases
where the need of help is the most intense. There are few things for
which it is more mischievous that people should rely on the habitual aid
of others, than for the means of subsistence, and unhappily there is no
lesson which they more easily learn. The problem to be solved is
therefore one of peculiar nicety as well as importance; how to give the
greatest amount of needful help, with the smallest encouragement to
undue reliance on it.

Energy and self-dependence are, however, liable to be impaired by the
absence of help, as well as by its excess. It is even more fatal to
exertion to have no hope of succeeding by it, than to be assured
Edition: current; Page: [968] of succeeding without it. When the
condition of any one is so disastrous that his energies are paralyzed by
discouragement, assistance is a tonic, not a sedative: it braces instead
of deadening the active faculties: always provided that the assistance
is not such as to dispense with self-help, by substituting itself for
the person's own labour, skill, and prudence, but is limited to
affording him a better hope of attaining success by those legitimate
means. This accordingly is a test to which all plans of philanthropy and
benevolence should be brought, whether intended for the benefit of
individuals or of classes, and whether conducted on the voluntary or on
the government principle.

In so far as the subject admits of any general doctrine or maxim, it
would appear to be this—that if assistance is given in such a manner
that the condition of the person helped is as desirable as that of the
person who succeeds in doing the same thing without help, the
assistance, if capable of being previously calculated on, is
mischievous: but if, while available to everybody, it leaves to every
one a strong motive to do without it if he can, it is then for the most
part beneficial. This principle, applied to a system of public charity,
is that of the Poor Law of 1834. If the condition of a person receiving
relief is made as eligible as that of the labourer who supports himself
by his own exertions, the system strikes at the root of all individual
industry and self-government; and, if fully acted up to, would require
as its supplement an organized system of compulsion, for governing and
setting to work like cattle, those who had been removed from the
influence of the motives that act on human beings. But if, consistently
with guaranteeing all persons against absolute want, the condition of
those who are supported by legal charity can be kept considerably less
desirable than the condition of those who find support for themselves,
none but beneficial consequences can arise from a law which renders it
impossible for any person, except by his own choice, to die from
insufficiency of food. That in England at least this supposition can be
realized, is proved by the experience of a long period preceding the
close of the last century, as well as by that of many highly pauperized
districts in more recent times, which have been dispauperized by
adopting strict rules of poor-law administration, to the great and
permanent benefit of the whole labouring class. There is probably no
country in which, by varying the means suitably to the character of the
people, a legal provision for the destitute might not be made compatible
with the observance of the conditions necessary to its being innocuous.

Edition: current; Page: [969]
Subject to these conditions, I conceive it to be highly desirable, that
the certainty of subsistence should be held out by law to the destitute
able-bodied, rather than that their relief should depend on voluntary
charity. In the first place, charity almost always does too much or too
little: it lavishes its bounty in one place, and leaves people to starve
in another. Secondly, since the state must necessarily provide
subsistence for the criminal poor while undergoing punishment, not to do
the same for the poor who have not offended is to give a premium on
crime. And lastly, if the poor are left to individual charity, a vast
amount of mendacity is inevitable.1 What the state may and should
abandon to private charity, is the task of distinguishing between one
case of real necessity and another. Private charity can give more to the
more deserving. The state must act by general rules. It cannot undertake
to discriminate between the deserving and the undeserving indigent. It
owes no more than subsistence to the first, and can give no less to the
last. What is said about the injustice of a law which has no better
treatment for the merely unfortunate poor than for the ill-conducted, is
founded on a misconception of the province of law and public authority.
The dispensers of public relief have no business to be inquisitors.
Guardians and overseers are not fit to be trusted to give or withhold
other people's money according to their verdict on the morality of the
person soliciting it; and it would show much ignorance of the ways of
mankind to suppose that such persons, even in the almost impossible case
of their being qualified, will take the trouble of ascertaining and
sifting the past conduct of a person in distress, so as to form a
rational judgment on it. Private charity can make these distinctions;
and in bestowing its own money, is entitled to do so according to its
own judgment. It should understand that this is its peculiar and
appropriate province, and that it is commendable or the contrary, as it
exercises the function with more or less discernment. But the
administrators of a public fund ought not to be required to do more for
anybody, than that minimum which is due even to the worst. If they are,
the indulgence very speedily becomes the rule, and refusal the more or
less capricious or tyrannical exception.2

§ 14. Another class of cases which fall within the same general Edition:
current; Page: [970] principle as the case of public charity, are those
in which the acts done by individuals, though intended solely for their
own benefit, involve consequences extending indefinitely beyond them, to
interests of the nation or of posterity, for which society in its
collective capacity is alone able, and alone bound, to provide. One of
these cases is that of Colonization. If it is desirable, as no one will
deny it to be, that the planting of colonies should be conducted, not
with an exclusive view to the private interests of the first founders,
but with a deliberate regard to the permanent welfare of the nations
afterwards to arise from these small beginnings; such regard can only be
secured by placing the enterprise, from its commencement, under
regulations constructed with the foresight and enlarged views of
philosophical legislators; and the government alone has power either to
frame such regulations, or to enforce their observance.

The question of government intervention in the work of Colonization
involves the future and permanent interests of civilization itself, and
far outstretches the comparatively narrow limits of purely economical
considerations. But even with a view to those considerations alone, the
removal of population from the overcrowded to the unoccupied parts of
the earth's surface is one of those works of eminent social usefulness,
which most require, and which at the same time best repay, the
intervention of government.

To appreciate the benefits of colonization, it should be considered in
its relation, not to a single country, but to the collective economical
interests of the human race. The question is in general treated too
exclusively as one of distribution; of relieving one labour market and
supplying another. It is this, but it is also a question of production,
and of the most efficient employment of the productive resources of the
world. Much has been said of the good economy of importing commodities
from the place where they can be bought cheapest; while the good economy
of producing them where they can be produced cheapest is comparatively
little thought of. If to carry consumable goods from the places where
they are superabundant to those where they are scarce is a good
pecuniary speculation, is it not an equally good speculation to do the
same thing with regard to labour and instruments? The exportation of
labourers and capital from old to new countries, from a place where
their productive power is less to a place where it is greater, increases
by so much the aggregate produce of the labour and capital of the world.
It adds to the joint wealth of the old and the new country, what amounts
in a short period to many times the mere cost of effecting the Edition:
current; Page: [971] transport. There needs be no hesitation in
affirming that Colonization, in the present state of the world, is the
best affair of business, in which the capital of an old and wealthy
country can engage.

It is equally obvious, however, that Colonization on a great scale can
be undertaken, as an affair of business, only by the government, or by
some combination of individuals in complete understanding with the
government; except under such very peculiar circumstances as those which
succeeded the Irish famine.1 Emigration on the voluntary principle
rarely has any material influence in lightening the pressure of
population in the old country, though as far as it goes it is doubtless
a benefit to the colony. Those labouring persons who voluntarily
emigrate are seldom the very poor; they are small farmers with some
little capital, or labourers who have saved something, and who, in
removing only their own labour from the crowded labour-market, withdraw
from the capital of the country a fund which maintained and employed
more labourers than themselves. Besides, this portion of the community
is so limited in number, that it might be removed entirely, without
making any sensible impression upon the numbers of the population, or
even upon the annual increase. Any considerable emigration of labour is
only practicable, when its cost is defrayed, or at least advanced, by
others than the emigrants themselves. Who then is to advance it?
Naturally, it may be said, the capitalists of the colony, who require
the labour, and who intend to employ it. But to this there is the
obstacle, that a capitalist, after going to the expense of carrying out
labourers, has no security that he shall be the person to derive any
benefit from them. If all the capitalists of the colony were to combine,
and bear the expense by subscription, they would still have no security
that the labourers, when there, would continue to work for them. After
working for a short time and earning a few pounds, they always, unless
prevented by the government, squat on unoccupied land, and work only for
themselves. The experiment has been repeatedly tried whether it was
possible to enforce contracts for labour, or the repayment of the
passage money of emigrants to those who advanced it, and the trouble and
expense have always exceeded the advantage. The only other resource is
the voluntary contributions of parishes or individuals, to rid
themselves of surplus labourers who are already, or who are likely to
become, locally chargeable on the poor-rate. Were this speculation
Edition: current; Page: [972] to become general, it might produce a
sufficient amount of emigration to clear off the existing unemployed
population, but not to raise the wages of the employed: and the same
thing would require to be done over again in less than another
generation.

One of the principal reasons why Colonization should be a national
undertaking, is that in this manner alone, save in highly exceptional
cases, can emigration be self-supporting. The exportation of capital and
labour to a new country being, as before observed, one of the best of
all affairs of business, it is absurd that it should not, like other
affairs of business, repay its own expenses. Of the great addition which
it makes to the produce of the world, there can be no reason why a
sufficient portion should not be intercepted, and employed in
reimbursing the outlay incurred in effecting it. For reasons already
given, no individual, or body of individuals, can reimburse themselves
for the expense; the government, however, can. It can take from the
annual increase of wealth, caused by the emigration, the fraction which
suffices to repay with interest what the emigration has cost. The
expenses of emigration to a colony ought to be borne by the colony; and
this, in general, is only possible when they are borne by the colonial
government.

Of the modes in which a fund for the support of colonization can be
raised in the colony, none is comparable in advantage to that which was
first suggested, and so ably and perseveringly advocated, by Mr.
Wakefield: the plan of putting a price on all unoccupied land, and
devoting the proceeds to emigration. The unfounded and pedantic
objections to this plan have been answered in a former part of this
chapter: we have now to speak of its advantages. First, it avoids the
difficulties and discontents incident to raising a large annual amount
by taxation; a thing which is almost useless to attempt with a scattered
population of settlers in the wilderness, who, as experience proves, can
seldom be compelled to pay direct taxes, except at a cost exceeding
their amount; while in an infant community indirect taxation soon
reaches its limit. The sale of lands is thus by far the easiest mode of
raising the requisite funds. But it has other and still greater
recommendations. It is a beneficial check upon the tendency of a
population of colonists to adopt the tastes and inclinations of savage
life, and to disperse so widely as to lose all the advantages of
commerce, of markets, of separation of employments, and combination of
labour. By making it necessary for those who emigrate at the expense of
the fund, to earn a considerable sum before they can become landed
proprietors, it keeps Edition: current; Page: [973] up a perpetual
succession of labourers for hire, who in every country are a most
important auxiliary even to peasant proprietors: and by diminishing the
eagerness of agricultural speculators to add to their domain, it keeps
the settlers within reach of each other for purposes of co-operation,
arranges a numerous body of them within easy distance of each centre of
foreign commerce and non-agricultural industry, and insures the
formation and rapid growth of towns and town products. This
concentration, compared with the dispersion which uniformly occurs when
unoccupied land can be had for nothing, greatly accelerates the
attainment of prosperity, and enlarges the fund which may be drawn upon
for further emigration. Before the adoption of the Wakefield system, the
early years of all new colonies were full of hardship and difficulty:
the last colony founded on the old principle, the Swan River settlement,
being one of the most characteristic instances. In all subsequent
colonization, the Wakefield principle has been acted upon, though
imperfectly,1 a part only of the proceeds of the sale of land being
devoted to emigration: yet wherever it has been introduced at all, as in
South Australia, Victoria, and New Zealand, the restraint put upon the
dispersion of the settlers, and the influx of capital caused by the
assurance of being able to obtain hired labour, has, in spite of many
difficulties and much mismanagement, produced a suddenness and rapidity
of prosperity more like fable than reality.∗2

The self-supporting system of Colonization, once established, would
increase in efficiency every year; its effect would tend to increase in
geometrical progression: for since every able-bodied emigrant, until the
country is fully peopled, adds in a very short time to its wealth, over
and above his own consumption, as much as would defray the expense of
bringing out another emigrant, it follows Edition: current; Page: [974]
that the greater the number already sent, the greater number might
continue to be sent, each emigrant laying the foundation of a succession
of other emigrants at short intervals without fresh expense, until the
colony is filled up. It would therefore be worth while, to the mother
country, to accelerate the early stages of this progression, by loans to
the colonies for the purpose of emigration, repayable from the fund
formed by the sales of land. In thus advancing the means of
accomplishing a large immediate emigration, it would be investing that
amount of capital in the mode, of all others, most beneficial to the
colony; and the labour and savings of these emigrants would hasten the
period at which a large sum would be available from sales of land. It
would be necessary, in order not to overstock the labour market, to act
in concert with the persons disposed to remove their own capital to the
colony. The knowledge that a large amount of hired labour would be
available, in so productive a field of employment, would insure a large
emigration of capital from a country, like England, of low profits and
rapid accumulation: and it would only be necessary not to send out a
greater number of labourers at one time, than this capital could absorb
and employ at high wages.

Inasmuch as, on this system, any given amount of expenditure, once
incurred, would provide not merely a single emigration, but a
perpetually flowing stream of emigrants, which would increase in breadth
and depth as it flowed on; this mode of relieving overpopulation has a
recommendation, not possessed by any other plan ever proposed for making
head against the consequences of increase without restraining the
increase itself: there is an element of indefiniteness in it; no one can
perfectly foresee how far its influence, as a vent for surplus
population, might possibly reach. There is hence the strongest
obligation on the government of a country like our own, with a crowded
population, and unoccupied continents under its command, to build, as it
were, and keep open, in concert with the colonial governments, a bridge
from the mother country to those continents, by establishing the
self-supporting system of colonization on such a scale, that as great an
amount of emigration as the colonies can at the time accommodate, may at
all times be able to take place without cost to the emigrants
themselves.

1 The importance of these considerations, as regards the British
Edition: current; Page: [975] islands, has been of late considerably
diminished by the unparalleled amount of spontaneous emigration from
Ireland; an emigration not solely of small farmers, but of the poorest
class of agricultural labourers, and which is at once voluntary and
self-supporting, the succession of emigrants being kept up by funds
contributed from the earnings of their relatives and connexions who had
gone before. To this has been added a large amount of voluntary
emigration to the seats of the gold discoveries, which has partly
supplied the wants of our most distant colonies, where, both for local
and national interests, it was most of all required. But the stream of
both these emigrations has already considerably slackened, and though
that from Ireland has since partially revived, it is not certain that
the aid of government in a systematic form, and on the self-supporting
principle, will not again become necessary to keep the communication
open between the hands needing work in England, and the work which needs
hands elsewhere.

§ 15. The same principle which points out colonization, and the relief
of the indigent, as cases to which the principal objection to government
interference does not apply, extends also to a variety of cases, in
which important public services are to be performed, while yet there is
no individual specially interested in performing them, nor would any
adequate remuneration naturally or spontaneously attend their
performance. Take for instance a voyage of geographical or scientific
exploration. The information sought may be of great public value, yet no
individual would derive any benefit from it which would repay the
expense of fitting out the expedition; and there is no mode of
intercepting the benefit on its way to those who profit by it, in order
to levy a toll for the remuneration of its authors. Such voyages are, or
might be, undertaken by private subscription; but this is a rare and
precarious resource. Instances are more frequent in which the expense
has been borne by public companies or philanthropic associations; but in
general such enterprises have been conducted at the expense of
government, which is thus enabled to entrust them to the persons in its
judgment Edition: current; Page: [976] best qualified for the task.
Again, it is a proper office of government to build and maintain
lighthouses, establish buoys, &c. for the security of navigation: for
since it is impossible that the ships at sea which are benefited by a
lighthouse, should be made to pay a toll on the occasion of its use, no
one would build lighthouses from motives of personal interest, unless
indemnified and rewarded from a compulsory levy made by the state. There
are many scientific researches, of great value to a nation and to
mankind, requiring assiduous devotion of time and labour, and not
unfrequently great expense, by persons who can obtain a high price for
their services in other ways. If the government had no power to grant
indemnity for expense, and remuneration for time and labour thus
employed, such researches could only be undertaken by the very few
persons who, with an independent fortune, unite technical knowledge,
laborious habits, and either great public spirit, or an ardent desire of
scientific celebrity.

Connected with this subject is the question of providing by means of
endowments or salaries, for the maintenance of what has been called a
learned class. The cultivation of speculative knowledge, though one of
the most useful of all employments, is a service rendered to a community
collectively, not individually, and one consequently for which it is,
primâ facie, reasonable that the community collectively should pay;
since it gives no claim on any individual for a pecuniary remuneration;
and unless a provision is made for such services from some public fund,
there is not only no encouragement to them, but there is as much
discouragement as is implied in the impossibility of gaining a living by
such pursuits, and the necessity consequently imposed on most of those
who would be capable of them, to employ the greatest part of their time
in gaining a subsistence. The evil, however, is greater in appearance
than in reality. The greatest things, it has been said, have generally
been done by those who had the least time at their disposal; and the
occupation of some hours every day in a routine employment, has often
been found compatible with the most brilliant achievements in literature
and philosophy. Yet there are investigations and experiments which
require not only a long but a continuous devotion of time and attention:
there are also occupations which so engross and fatigue the mental
faculties, as to be inconsistent with any vigorous employment of them
upon other subjects, even in any intervals of leisure. It is highly
desirable, therefore, that there should be a mode of insuring to the
public the services of scientific discoverers, Edition: current; Page:
[977] and perhaps of some other classes of savants, by affording them
the means of support consistently with devoting a sufficient portion of
time to their peculiar pursuits. The fellowships of the Universities are
an institution excellently adapted for such a purpose; but are hardly
ever applied to it, being bestowed, at the best, as a reward for past
proficiency, in committing to memory what has been done by others, and
not as the salary of future labours in the advancement of knowledge. In
some countries, Academies of science, antiquities, history, &c., have
been formed with emoluments annexed. The most effectual plan, and at the
same time least liable to abuse, seems to be that of conferring
Professorships, with duties of instruction attached to them. The
occupation of teaching a branch of knowledge, at least in its higher
departments, is a help rather than an impediment to the systematic
cultivation of the subject itself. The duties of a professorship almost
always leave much time for original researches; and the greatest
advances which have been made in the various sciences, both moral and
physical, have originated with those who were public teachers of them;
from Plato and Aristotle to the great names of the Scotch, French, and
German Universities. I do not mention the English, because until very
lately their professorships have been, as is well known, little more
than nominal. In the case, too, of a lecturer in a great institution of
education, the public at large has the means of judging, if not the
quality of the teaching, at least the talents and industry of the
teacher; and it is more difficult to misemploy the power of appointment
to such an office, than to job in pensions and salaries to persons not
so directly before the public eye.

It may be said generally, that anything which it is desirable should be
done for the general interests of mankind or of future generations, or
for the present interests of those members of the community who require
external aid, but which is not of a nature to remunerate individuals or
associations for undertaking it, is in itself a suitable thing to be
undertaken by government: though, before making the work their own,
governments ought always to consider if there be any rational
probability of its being done on what is called the voluntary principle,
and if so, whether it is likely to be done in a better or more effectual
manner by government agency, than by the zeal and liberality of
individuals.

§ 16. The preceding heads comprise, to the best of my judgment, the
whole of the exceptions to the practical maxim, that the business
Edition: current; Page: [978] of society can be best performed by
private and voluntary agency. It is, however, necessary to add, that the
intervention of government cannot always practically stop short at the
limit which defines the cases intrinsically suitable for it. In the
particular circumstances of a given age or nation, there is scarcely
anything really important to the general interest, which it may not be
desirable, or even necessary, that the government should take upon
itself, not because private individuals cannot effectually perform it,
but because they will not. At some times and places there will be no
roads, docks, harbours, canals, works of irrigation, hospitals, schools,
colleges, printing-presses, unless the government establishes them; the
public being either too poor to command the necessary resources, or too
little advanced in intelligence to appreciate the ends, or not
sufficiently practised in joint action to be capable of the means. This
is true, more or less, of all countries inured to despotism, and
particularly of those in which there is a very wide distance in
civilization between the people and the government: as in those which
have been conquered and are retained in subjection by a more energetic
and more cultivated people. In many parts of the world, the people can
do nothing for themselves which requires large means and combined
action: all such things are left undone, unless done by the state. In
these cases, the mode in which the government can most surely
demonstrate the sincerity with which it intends the greatest good of its
subjects, is by doing the things which are made incumbent on it by the
helplessness of the public, in such a manner as shall tend not to
increase and perpetuate, but to correct that helplessness. A good
government will give all its aid in such a shape as to encourage and
nurture any rudiments it may find of a spirit of individual exertion. It
will be assiduous in removing obstacles and discouragements to voluntary
enterprise, and in giving whatever facilities and whatever direction and
guidance may be necessary: its pecuniary means will be applied, when
practicable, in aid of private efforts rather than in supersession of
them, and it will call into play its machinery of rewards and honours to
elicit such efforts. Government aid, when given merely in default of
private enterprise, should be so given as to be as far as possible a
course of education for the people in the art of accomplishing great
objects by individual energy and voluntary co-operation.

I have not thought it necessary here to insist on that part of the
functions of government which all admit to be indispensable, the
Edition: current; Page: [979] function of prohibiting and punishing such
conduct on the part of individuals in the exercise of their freedom as
is clearly injurious to other persons, whether the case be one of force,
fraud, or negligence. Even in the best state which society has yet
reached, it is lamentable to think how great a proportion of all the
efforts and talents in the world are employed in merely neutralizing one
another. It is the proper end of government to reduce this wretched
waste to the smallest possible amount, by taking such measures as shall
cause the energies now spent by mankind in injuring one another, or in
protecting themselves against injury, to be turned to the legitimate
employment of the human faculties, that of compelling the powers of
nature to be more and more subservient to physical and moral good.1

Edition: current; Page: [none] Edition: current; Page: [981]


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL APPENDIX


prepared by sir william ashley in 1909

For the history of economic investigation and discussion since the
publication of Mill's Principles in 1848, the only general work to which
reference can be made in English is Palgrave's Dictionary of Political
Economy (1894–1908), which contains many useful articles under the
headings of the various subjects and authors. Readers of French will
obtain some assistance from Block, Les Progrès de la Science Économique
depuis Adam Smith (1890), representing the strictest school of French
orthodoxy, and from Gide and Rist, Histoire des Doctrines Économiques
(1909), written from a more modern point of view. Readers of German will
naturally refer to Conrad's Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenachaften, of
which the third and enlarged edition is now being issued; and they will
find a number of valuable reviews of the course of discussion of the
several main topics in the series of monographs brought together under
the title Die Entwicklung der deutschen Volkswirthschaftslehre im
neunzehnten Jahrhundert (1908).


A.—: The Mercantile System (p. 6)

Mill's account is based on that of Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations, bk.
iv. ch. i. Much investigation has subsequently taken place into
mercantilist literature and policy, some results of which may be seen in
Roscher, Geschichte der National-Ökonomik in Deutschland (1874), § 57,
closely followed (with a Positivist colouring) by Ingram, History of
Political Economy (1888); in Schmoller, The Mercantile System and its
Historical Significance (1884; Eng. trans. 1896), and Grundriss der
Allgemeinen Volkswirthschaftslehre (1900), i. § 39 (in French trans.,
Principes d'Économie Politique (1905–1908), i. § 39); in Cunningham,
Growth of English Industry and Commerce, vol. ii. pt. i., The Mercantile
System (1903); and in Unwin, Industrial Organisation in the Sixteenth
and Seventeenth Centuries (1904). One of the most significant of English
mercantilist writings, Mun's England's Treasure by Forraign Trade
(1664), has been recently republished (1895).


B.—: The Definition of Wealth (p. 9)

Mill's definition has been criticised, from very different points of
view, by Jevons, Principles of Economics (posthumously published, 1905),
p. 14; Nicholson, Principles of Political Economy, i. (1893),
Introduction; and Ruskin, Unto this Last (1862), Preface, and Munera
Pulveris (1863), Preface. For a recent classification of “desirable
things,” see Marshall, Principles of Economics (1890; 5th ed. 1907), bk.
ii. ch. 2. Sidgwick, Principles of Political Economy (1883), bk. i. ch.
ii., points out that, though in England “Wealth” has commonly been
regarded as the most fundamental conception in Political Economy, it has
also been commonly held that it should be defined by the characteristic
of Edition: current; Page: [982] possessing “Value,” so that it would
seem more logical “to begin by attempting to get a precise conception of
this characteristic.” For difficulties attaching to “Richesse,” as the
French equivalent of “Wealth,” see Gide, Cours d'Économie Politique
(1909), p. 47. [By the earlier French economic writers, however, the
term was used in the plural, as in Turgot's Réflexions sur Formation et
la Distribution des Richesses (1770: trans. by Ashley, 1898).]

The German language possesses no one inclusive term like “Wealth”; and
German economists have long been accustomed to begin with the definition
of “goods” (Guter) and, in consequence, of “a good” (Gut)—enjoying, in
the use of the latter term, an advantage not available in current
English speech. For characteristic examples reference may be made to
Wagner, Lehrbuch der Politischen Oekonomie, Grundlagen (3rd ed. 1892),
I, bk. ii. ch. i.; or Conrad, Grundriss zum Studium der Politischen
Oekonomie (6th ed. 1907), § 5. The phrases “goods,” “economic goods,”
“an economic good,” and so on, have of late years made their way into
English and still more into American economic writings; see, for
instance, Marshall (as above), and Clark, Essentials of Economic Theory
(1907), ch. 2; and cf. Pierson, Principles of Economics (Eng. trans.
1902), pt. i. ch. i.


C.—: The Types of Society (p. 20)

Mill's brief sketch of the general economic development of humanity is a
masterly one. But since his time there has been a vast amount of work
done, especially in Germany, in the field of economic history. The best
introduction to the subject is now Schmoller's Grundriss, bk. ii.
(occupying the second volume of the French trans., Principes). A very
suggestive treatment of certain aspects of the subject is presented in a
brief compass in Bücher, Entstehung der Volkswirthschaft (Eng. trans.
under the title Industrial Evolution, N. Y. 1901); which receives some
necessary correction and is supplemented in important respects by Meyer,
Die wirthschaftliche Entwickelung des Alterthums, Vortrag, 1895, and Die
Sklaverei im Alterthum, Vortrag, 1898; and by v. Below, Über Theorien
der wirthschaftlichen Entwicklung der Völker, in Historische
Zeitschrift, lxxxvi. (N. F. 1.). The best general work in English is
Cunningham's Western Civilisation in its Economic Aspects; Ancient Times
(1898), Mediaeval and Modern Times (1900). Seligman, Principles of
Economics (1905), part ii. bks. ii. and iii., brings together a great
many instructive apercus in a short compass.


D.—: Productive and Unproductive Labour (p. 53)

The distinction was taken from Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations, bk. ii.
ch. 3, who derived the words themselves from the French Physiocrats,
though he used them in a different sense. It has been criticised by
Jevons, Principles, ch. xviii., and Cancan, History of the Theories of
Production and Distribution (1893), ch. i. § 7; and it is now but little
used. Cf. Marshall, bk. ii. ch. 3.


E.—: The Definition of Capital (p. 62)

A good introduction to the large contentious literature on this subject
is Schmoller, Grundriss, ii. § 182 c (in the French trans. Principes,
iii. pp. 409 seq.); which makes use of the material collected in
Böhm-Bawerk, The Positive Theory of Capital (Eng. trans. 1891), bk. i.
ch. 3. As Wagner, Grundlagen, § 129, has Edition: current; Page: [983]
pointed out, the conception of capital is twofold—economical and
historical (cf. Gide, Cours, bk. i. ch. 3); the latter aspect was
emphasised by Lassalle in his proposition that “Capital is a historical
category.” An account in English of the history of the conception will
be found in Marshall, i. App. E, and in Taussig, Wages and Capital (N.
Y. 1896), ch. 2. Clark, Distribution of Wealth (1902), ch. 9,
distinguishes between “Capital” and “Capital Goods.” Fisher, The Nature
of Capital and Income (1906), defines Capital as “a stock of wealth
existing at a moment of time,”—which would seem to identify Capital with
Wealth generally; while Gibson, Human Economics (1909), defines Capital
from the business point of view as “everything in which an individual or
group has a legal estate and for which there is a buyer's valuation.”


F.—: Fundamental Propositions on Capital (p. 90)

For destructive criticism of these propositions see Jevons, Principles,
ch. xxiv.; Sidgwick Principles, bk. i. ch. 5, note; and Nicholson,
Principles, i. pp. 98 seq. The first and fourth of them, as stated by
Mill, are only other aspects of his Wages Fund doctrine, and, according
to Marshall, Principles, i. App. J, “express his meaning badly.”


G.—: Division and Combination of Labour (p. 131)

This subject, when further examined, widens out into the two far larger
topics of economic differentiation and co-operation, which are
themselves to a large extent but different aspects of the same process.
In this sense it is philosophically treated with a great command of the
results of recent investigations, in Schmoller, Grundriss, i. §§ 113
seq. (in Fr. trans. Principes, ii. pp. 248 seq.).


H.—: Large and Small Farming (p. 154)

On this problem, so far as England is concerned, it has to be
remembered: (1) that the substitution of large for small farming in the
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries was closely associated with
the movement for the enclosure of the “open” or intermixed fields; see
hereon, Slater, The English Peasantry and the Enclosure of Common Fields
(1907), and Hasbach, A History of the English Agricultural Labourer
(Eng. trans. 1908); and (2) that the position of affairs has been
greatly affected since Mill wrote by the shock to “cereal farming”
caused by the influx of cheap American grain in the eighties: hereon,
see Levy, Entstehung and Rückgang des landwirthschaftlichen
Grossbetriebes in England (1904). Materials for an opinion on the
economic prospects of small farming in England are to be found in Lawes
and Gilbert, Allotments and Small Holdings, in Journal of the Royal
Agric. Soc., vol. iii. 3rd series (1892); in the Report of a
Departmental Committee on Small Holdings (1906); and in Jebb, The Small
Holdings of England (1907). They are evidently bound up to some extent
with the prospects of agricultural co-operation (in the purchase of
fertilisers, the sale of produce, &c.), of which an account is given in
Pratt, The Organisation of Agriculture (1905), and in the publications
of the Agricultural Organisation Society. A general comparison of Large
and Small Farming following, criticising, and supplementing that of Mill
is presented by Nicholson, Principles, i. (1893) bk. i. ch. 9.

Edition: current; Page: [984]


I.—: Population (p. 162)

In the writings of no contemporary economist, in Great Britain or
abroad, does the idea that population is constantly tending to press
upon the means of subsistence occupy the same conspicuous and primary
place as it does with Mill. The treatment of the subject by Marshall,
Principles, bk. iv. chs. 4, 13, and bk. vi. ch. 13, is characteristic of
the general present attitude. Attention is coming to be directed more
and more to those defects in the present industrial organisation which
create a body of permanently underemployed as well as temporarily
unemployed, even where the growth of population is evidently not
outstripping the means of employment: hereon see Beveridge, Unemployment
(1909), p. 6 and passim. The understanding of the exact teaching of
Malthus, and of the differences between the first edition of the Essay
(1798) and the second (1803), has been facilitated by the publication of
Parallel Chapters from the First and Second Editions of an Essay on the
Principle of Population (1895).


J.—: The Law of Diminishing Return (p. 188)

Careful restatements in general accord with Mill's teaching are to be
found in Marshall, Principles, i. bk. iv. ch. 3; and Nicholson,
Principles, bk. i. ch. 10. For the results of the Rothamsted
experiments, showing that “beyond a certain point the increase of crop
is not in proportion to the increase in the amount of manure applied,”
see Lawes, Is Higher Farming a Remedy for Lower Prices? Lecture (1879);
and Hall, The Book of the Rothamsted Experiments (1905). The extent to
which the formula of diminishing returns covers the facts of
agricultural development is discussed by Schmoller, Grundriss, ii. § 233
(Principes, iv. pp. 427 seq.). But while Mill and the older theoretic
writers distinguished between the law of diminishing return in
agriculture and the fact (by some called the law) of increasing return
in manufacture (cf. Marshall, Principles, bk. iv. ch. 13, § 2), and
writers of the historical school tend to minimise the effect of the law
of diminishing return even in agriculture, some more recent theoretic
writers go in the other direction and declare that the law of
diminishing return is universal and applies to production of all kinds.
For the sense in which they use such language, see Clark, Distribution
of Wealth, p. 208, and Seligman, Principles, § 88.


K.—: Mill's Earlier and Later Writings on Socialism (p. 204)

Mill's account in the Preface to the 3rd edition of the nature of the
alterations there made, scarcely give an adequate impression of the
change of tone on his part between 1848 and 1852. The total impression
produced by the argument of 1848 is that “Socialism” was probably
undesirable and impracticable. Thus the difficulty of apportioning
labour among the members of the community, which was met in 1852 by an
expression of the hope that “human intelligence would not be inadequate”
to deal with it, had called forth in 1848 the following remarks:

“In the existing system of industry these things do adjust themselves
with some, though but a distant, approach to fairness. If one kind of
work is harder or more disagreeable than another, or requires a longer
practice, it is better paid, simply because there are fewer competitors
for it; and an individual generally finds that he can earn most by doing
the thing which he is fittest for. I admit that this self-adjusting
machinery Edition: current; Page: [985] does not touch some of the
grossest of the existing inequalities of remuneration, and in particular
the unjust advantage possessed by almost the commonest mental over
almost the hardest and most disagreeable bodily labour. Employments
which require any kind of technical education, however simple, have
hitherto been the subject of a real monopoly as against the mass. But as
popular instruction advances, this monopoly is already becoming less
complete, and every increase of prudence and foresight among the people
encroaches upon it more and more.”

And the argument concluded thus:

“I believe that the condition of the operatives in a well-regulated
manufactory, with a great reduction of the hours of labour and a
considerable variety of the kind of it, is very like what the condition
of all would be in a Socialist community. I believe that the majority
would not exert themselves for any thing beyond this, and that unless
they did, nobody else would; and that on this basis human life would
settle itself into one invariable round. But to maintain even this
state, the limitation of the propagative powers of the community must be
as much a matter of public regulation as everything else; since under
the supposed arrangements prudential restraint would no longer exist.
Now, if we suppose an equal degree of regulation to take place under the
present system, either compulsorily, or, what would be so much
preferable, voluntarily; a condition at least equal to what the
Socialist system offers to all would fall to the lot of the least
fortunate, by the mere action of the competitive principle. Whatever of
pecuniary means or freedom of action any one obtained beyond this, would
be so much to be counted in favour of the competitive system.”

It is true that, in the next section, he went on to say:

“These arguments, to my mind conclusive against Communism, are not
applicable to St. Simonism... St. Simonism does not contemplate an
equal, but an unequal, division of the produce.”

But he judged the assumption on which it rested “almost too chimerical
to be reasoned against”; and began the next section thus:

“There has never been imagined any mode of distributing the produce of
industry, so well adapted to the requirements of human nature on the
whole, as that of letting the share of each individual (not in a state
of bodily or mental incapacity) depend in the main on that individual's
own energies and exertions, and on such furtherance as may be obtained
from the voluntary good offices of others. It is not the subversion of
the system of individual property that should be aimed at, but the
improvement of it.”

In the 3rd edition, it should be noted, the treatment of the subject is
affected not only by a modification of personal opinion, but also by the
insertion, which had taken place in the 2nd edition, of the account of
Fourierism.

In 1869 Mill formed the design of writing a book on Socialism; and after
his death the first rough drafts of the work were published by his
step-daughter, Miss Helen Taylor, in the Fortnightly Review for
February, March, and April 1879. These articles indicate a reversion on
Mill's part to an attitude resembling more closely perhaps his state of
mind in 1848 than that in 1852. It must be remembered that his
criticisms bore primarily upon the Socialist literature of his own time
(1869). His treatment of the subject was so carefully balanced that
there is a certain risk of giving an unfair impression of the general
effect of the argument by the selection of a few passages. The following
passages, taken in conjunction with the chapters in the Principles,
will, however, indicate with sufficient clearness his general point of
view.

After an Introduction on the importance of the subject, Mill begins by
setting forth at length the Socialist objections to the present order of
society, and by recognising the large element of truth in them.

“But the strongest case is susceptible of exaggeration; and it will have
Edition: current; Page: [986] been evident to many readers, even from
the passages I have quoted, that such exaggeration is not wanting in the
representations of the ablest and most candid Socialists. Though much of
their allegations is unanswerable, not a little is the result of errors
in political economy; by which, let me say once for all, I do not mean
the rejection of any practical rules of policy which have been laid down
by political economists: I mean ignorance of economic facts, and of the
causes by which the economic phenomena of society as it is, are actually
determined.

“In the first place, it is unhappily true that the wages of ordinary
labour in all the countries of Europe are wretchedly insufficient to
supply the physical and moral necessities of the population in any
tolerable measure. But when it is further alleged that even this
insufficient remuneration has a tendency to diminish; that there is, in
the words of M. Louis Blanc, une baisse continue des salaires; the
assertion is in opposition to all accurate information, and to many
notorious facts. It has yet to be proved that there is any country in
the civilised world where the ordinary wages of labour, estimated either
in money or in articles of consumption, are declining; while in many
they are, on the whole, on the increase; and an increase which is
becoming not slower, but more rapid.”

The following passage supplements the chapter in the Principles on the
theory of Profit:

“Another point on which there is much misapprehension on the part of
Socialists, as well as of Trades Unionists and other partisans of Labour
against Capital, relates to the proportions in which the produce of the
country is really shared, and the amount of what is actually diverted
from those who produce it, to enrich other persons.... With respect to
capital employed in business, there is in the popular notions a great
deal of illusion. When, for instance, a capitalist invests £20,000 in
his business and draws from it an income of suppose £2000 a year, the
common impression is as if he was the beneficial owner both of the
£20,000 and the £2000, while the labourers own nothing but their wages.
The truth, however, is that he only obtains the two thousand pounds on
condition of applying no part of the £20,000 to his own use. He has the
legal control over it, and might squander it if he chose, but if he did
he would not have the £2000 a year also. As long as he derives an income
from his capital he has not the option of withholding it from the use of
others. As much of his invested capital as consists of buildings,
machinery and other instruments of production, is applied to production
and is not applicable to the support or enjoyment of any one. What is so
applicable (including what is laid out in keeping up or renewing the
buildings and instruments) is paid away to labourers, forming their
remuneration and their share in the division of the produce. For all
personal purposes they have the capital and he has but the profits,
which it only yields to him on condition that the capital itself is
employed in satisfying, not his own wants, but those of labourers. The
proportion which the profits of capital usually bear to the capital
itself (or rather to the circulating portion of it) is the ratio which
the capitalist's share of the produce bears to the aggregate share of
the labourers. Even as his own share a small part only belongs to him as
the owner of capital. The portion of the produce which falls to capital
merely as capital is measured by the interest of money, since that is
all that the owner of capital obtains when he contributes nothing to
production except the capital itself. Now the interest of capital in the
public funds, which are considered to be the best security, is at the
present prices (which have not varied much for many years) about three
and one-third per cent. Even in this investment there is some little
risk—risk of repudiation, risk of being obliged to sell out at a low
price in some commercial crisis.

“Estimating these risks at one-third per cent., the remaining three per
Edition: current; Page: [987] cent. may be considered as the
remuneration of capital, apart from insurance against loss. On the
security of a mortgage four per cent. is generally obtained, but in this
transaction there are considerably greater risks—the uncertainty of
titles to land under our bad system of law; the chance of having to
realise the security at a great cost in law charges; and liability to
delay in the receipt of the interest, even when the principal is safe.
When mere money independently of exertion yields a larger income, as it
sometimes does, for example, by shares in railway or other companies,
the surplus is hardly ever an equivalent for the risk of losing the
whole, or part, of the capital by mismanagement, as in the case of the
Brighton Railway, the dividend of which, after having been six per cent.
per annum, sunk to from nothing to one and one-half per cent., and
shares which had been bought at 120 could not be sold for more than
43.... Of the profits, therefore, which a manufacturer or other person
in business obtains from his capital no more than about three per cent.
can be set down to the capital itself. If he were able and willing to
give up the whole of this to his labourers, who already share among them
the whole of his capital as it is annually reproduced from year to year,
the addition to their weekly wages would be inconsiderable. Of what he
obtains beyond three per cent. a great part is insurance against the
manifold losses he is exposed to, and cannot safely be applied to his
own use, but requires to be kept in reserve to cover those losses when
they occur. The remainder is properly the remuneration of his skill and
industry—the wages of his labour of superintendence. No doubt if he is
very successful in business these wages of his are extremely liberal,
and quite out of proportion to what the same skill and industry would
command if offered for hire. But on the other hand he runs a worse risk
than that of being out of employment: that of doing the work without
earning anything by it, of having the labour and anxiety, without the
wages. I do not say that the drawbacks balance the privileges, or that
he derives no advantage from the position that makes him a capitalist
and employer of labour, instead of a skilled superintendent letting out
his service to others; but the amount of his advantage must not be
estimated by the great prizes alone. If we subtract from the gains of
some the losses of others and deduct from the balance a fair
compensation for the anxiety, skill and labour of both, grounded on the
market price of skilled superintendence, what remains will be, no doubt,
considerable, but yet, when compared to the entire capital of the
country, annually reproduced and dispensed in wages, it is very much
smaller than it appears to the popular imagination; and were the whole
of it added to the share of the labourers it would make a less addition
to their share than would be made by any important invention in
machinery, or by the suppression of unnecessary distributers and other
‘parasites of industry.’...

“It seemed desirable to begin the discussion of the Socialist question
by these remarks in abatement of Socialist exaggerations, in order that
the true issues between Socialism and the existing state of society
might be correctly conceived. The present system is not, as many
Socialists believe, hurrying us into a state of general indigence and
slavery from which only Socialism can save us. The evils and injustices
suffered under the present system are great, but they are not
increasing; on the contrary, the general tendency is toward their slow
diminution.”

Mill then opens his statement of the objections to Socialism with the
following classification, which illustrates the extent to which
Socialist propaganda has changed its character since 1869:

“Among those who call themselves Socialists, two kinds of persons may be
distinguished. There are, in the first place, those whose plans for a
new order of society—in which private property and individual
competition are to be superseded and other motives to action
substituted—are on the Edition: current; Page: [988] scale of a village
community or township, and would be applied to an entire country by the
multiplication of such self-acting units; of this character are the
systems of Owen and Fourier, and the more thoughtful and philosophic
Socialists generally. The other class, who are more a product of the
continent than of Great Britain and may be called the revolutionary
Socialists, propose to themselves a much bolder stroke. Their scheme is
the management of the whole productive resources of the country by one
central authority, the general government.”

Remarking that:

“the peculiarities, however, of the revolutionary form of Socialism will
be most conveniently examined after the considerations common to both
the forms have been duly weighed,”

he begins by pointing out that:

“the distinctive feature of Socialism is not that all things are in
common, but that production is only carried on upon the common account,
and that the instruments of production are held as common property.”

Accordingly:

“The question to be considered is, whether this joint management is
likely to be as efficient and successful as the managements of private
industry by private capital. And this question has to be considered in a
double aspect: the efficiency of the directing mind, or minds, and that
of the simple workpeople.”

He discusses this, first in relation to the form of Socialism which he
calls

“simple communism, i.e. equal division of the produce among all the
sharers, or, according to M. Louis Blanc's still higher standard of
justice, apportionment of it according to difference of need, but
without making any difference of reward according to the nature of the
duty nor according to the supposed merits or services of the
individual,”

with the conclusion that its success would depend upon a moral education
for which mankind could only be effectually trained by communistic
association:

“It is for Communism, then, to prove, by practical experiment its power
of giving this training. Experiments alone can show whether there is as
yet in any portion of the population a sufficiently high level of moral
cultivation to make Communism succeed, and to give the next generation
among themselves the education necessary to keep up that high level
permanently. If Communist associations show that they can be durable and
prosperous, they will multiply, and will probably be adopted by
successive portions of the population of the more advanced countries as
they become morally fitted for that mode of life.”

And, going on then to “those other forms of Socialism which recognise
the difficulties of Communism and contrive means to surmount them,” of
which the principal was Fourierism, he gives reasons for the opinion
that, for them, “practical trial” is no less necessary. He then goes on
to the other main division:

“The various schemes for managing the productive resources of the
country by public instead of private agency... are at present workabie
only by the élite of mankind, and have yet to prove their power of
training mankind at large to the state of improvement which they
presuppose. Far more, of course, may this be said of the more ambitious
plan which aims at taking possession of the whole land and capital of
the country, and beginning at once to administer it on the public
account. Apart from all consideration of injustice to the present
possessors, the very idea of conducting the whole industry of a country
by direction from a single centre is so obviously chimerical that nobody
ventures to propose any mode in which it should be done.”

Mill's argument with regard to the second or “revolutionary” type of
Socialism is accordingly based upon the difficulty of “the problem of
management.” And his final conclusion is thus expressed:

Edition: current; Page: [989]
“The preceding considerations appear sufficient to show that an entire
renovation of the social fabric, such as is contemplated by Socialism,
establishing the economic constitution of society upon an entirely new
basis, other than that of private property and competition, however
valuable as an ideal, and even as a prophecy of ultimate possibilities,
is not available as a present resource, since it requires from those who
are to carry on the new order of things qualities both moral and
intellectual, which require to be tested in all, and to be created in
most; and this cannot be done by an Act of Parliament, but must be, on
the most favourable supposition, a work of considerable time. For a long
period to come the principle of individual property will be in
possession of the field; and even if in any country a popular movement
were to place Socialists at the head of a revolutionary government, in
however many ways they may violate private property the institution
itself would survive, and would either be accepted by them or brought
back by their expulsion, for the plain reason that people will not lose
their hold of what is at present their sole reliance for subsistence and
security until a substitute for it has been got into working order. Even
those, if any, who have shared among themselves what was the property of
others would desire to keep what they had acquired, and to give back to
property in the new hands the sacredness which they had not recognised
in the old.

“But though, for these reasons, individual property has presumably a
long term before it, if only of provisional existence, we are not,
therefore, to conclude that it must exist during that whole term
unmodified, or that all the rights now regarded as appertaining to
property belong to it inherently, and must endure while it endures. On
the contrary, it is both the duty and the interest of those who derive
the most direct benefit from the laws of property to give impartial
consideration to all proposals for rendering those laws in any way less
onerous to the majority....

“One of the mistakes oftenest committed, and which are the source of the
greatest practical errors in human affairs, is that of supposing that
the same name always stands for the same aggregation of ideas. No word
has been the subject of more of this kind of misunderstanding than the
word property. It denotes, in every state of society, the largest power
of exclusive use or exclusive control over things (and sometimes,
unfortunately, over persons) which the law accords, or which custom in
that state of society recognises; but these powers of exclusive use and
control are very various and differ greatly in different countries and
in different states of society.”

And, after some historical illustrations of this proposition, he
concludes:

“When, therefore, it is maintained, rightly or wrongly, that some change
or modification in the powers exercised over things by the persons
legally recognised as their proprietors would be beneficial to the
public and conducive to the general improvement, it is no good answer to
this merely to say that the supposed change conflicts with the idea of
property. The idea of property is not some one thing identical
throughout history and incapable of alteration, but is variable like all
other creations of the human mind; at any given time it is a brief
expression denoting the rights over things conferred by the law or
custom of some given society at that time; but neither on this point nor
on any other has the law and custom of a given time and place a claim to
be stereotyped for ever. A proposed reform in laws or customs is not
necessarily objectionable because its adoption would imply, not the
adaptation of all human affairs to the existing idea of property, but
the adaptation of the existing ideas of property to the growth and
improvement of human affairs. This is said without prejudice to the
equitable claim of proprietors to be compensated by the state for such
legal rights of a proprietary nature as they may be dispossessed of for
the public advantage.”

Edition: current; Page: [990]


L.—: The Later History of Socialism (p. 217)

It will be observed that the socialistic writings commented on by Mill
were all of French origin and were none of them subsequent to 1869, the
date of Mill's articles on Socialism referred to under Appendix K. The
Socialism which has been of most influence in later years has been of
German origin, and must be studied in the writings of its chief
exponents, Karl Marx, Ferdinand Lassalle, Rodbertus, and Friedrich
Engels. The most notable in this connexion of those of Lassalle were
Arbeiterprogramm (1862: Eng. trans. as The Working Man's Programme), and
Herr Bastiat Schulze von Delitzsch der ökonomische Julian (1864: French
trans. by Malon as Capital et Travail); of Rodbertus, Zur Beleuchtung
der Sozialen Frage (1875; containing a new edition of Soziale Briefe an
v. Kirchmann, 1850), and Die Handelskrisen (1858: Eng. trans. as
Overproduction and Crises, 1898); and of Engels (in conjunction with
Marx), Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei (1848: Eng. trans. revised by
Engels 1888), and, alone, Die Entwickelung der Sozialismus von der
Utopie zur Wissenschaft (1882: Eng. trans. as Socialism, Utopian and
Scientific), and Introductions to Marx's Capital. But of most importance
for the theoretic formulation of Socialism have been the writings of
Marx (1818–1883): Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie (1859), and,
above all, Das Kapital (i. 1867: Eng. trans. Capital, 1887; ii. 1893;
iii. 1894. An English abstract of the 1st vol. by Aveling appeared in
1891 as The Student's Marx). Fundamental ideas in the writings of Marx
were those of Surplus-Value, of Class War, of the Concentration of
Wealth, and of the Materialist Interpretation of History. The extent to
which these particular teachings have been abandoned by those younger
German socialists known as “Revisionists” may be gathered from
Bernstein, Die Voraussetzungen der Sozialismus (1899: Eng. trans. as
Evolutionary Socialism, 1909).

Among useful books on the history of Socialism in general, and of German
socialism in particular, may be mentioned: Laveleye, Le Socialisme
Contemporain (1881: Eng. trans. 1885); Ely, French and German Socialism
(1885); Gonner, The Social Philosophy of Rodbertus (1900); Rae,
Contemporary Socialism (3rd ed. 1901); Brooks, The Social Unrest (1903);
Kirkup, A History of Socialism (3rd ed. 1906); Ensor, Modern Socialism
(2nd ed. 1907),—a most useful collection of typical documents and
speeches from all the leading countries of Europe; and Herkner, Die
Arbeiterfrage (5th ed. 1908).

English socialism has pursued in some respects a line of development of
its own; and it may be studied in Fabian Essays in Socialism (1889:
Reprint, with a significant preface, 1908); various Fabian Tracts,
especially Shaw, The Fabian Society (1892); Macdonald, Socialism and
Society (1905); Wells, New Worlds for Old (1908); and Villiers, The
Socialist Movement in England (1908).

Two popular works which have had a very large circulation are, in
America, Bellamy, Looking Backward (1890), and in England, Blatchford,
Merrie England (1894).

For French socialism see Jaurès, Studies in Socialism (Eng. trans.
1906); Lavy, L'Oeuvre de Millerand (1902); and Millerand, Travail et
Travailleurs (1908); for the recent developments of “Revolutionary
Syndicalism,” Gide and Rist, Histoire des Doctrines Économiques (1909);
and for Belgian socialism, Destrée and Vandervelde, Le Socialisme en
Belgique (1903).

Among criticisms of socialism in various forms and aspects may be
singled out Herbert Spencer, The Man v. The State (1884); Courtney The
Difficulties of Socialism, in Econ. Journal, i. (1891); Schäffle, The
Impossibility of Social Democracy (Eng. trans. 1892); Richter, Pictures
of the Socialistic Future (Eng. trans. 1893); Devas, Political Economy
(2nd ed. 1901), bk. ii. ch. 7; Strachey, Problems and Perils of
Socialism (1908); and Mallock, A Critical Examination of Socialism
(1909). An individualist position is ably Edition: current; Page: [991]
maintained in the writings of Helen Bosanquet, especially The Strength
of the People (1902).


M.—: Indian Tenures (p. 328)

The whole subject must now be studied in the works of the late B. H.
Baden-Powell, and especially in the three massive volumes The Land
Systems of British India (1892), and the brief text-book based upon that
work, Land Revenue in British India (1894). See also his Indian Village
Community (1896), and the more popular Village Communities in India
(1899); and on the special subject of the Origin of Zamindari Estates in
Bengal, his article under that title in the (Harvard) Quarterly Journal
of Economics, xi. (Oct. 1896).


N.—: Irish Agrarian Development (p. 342)

The Irish Land Act of 1870 marked the beginning of an attempt to solve
the agrarian problem in accordance with the principle popularly
described as “dual ownership,” by giving the tenants a right to
“compensation for disturbance.” The great Land Act of 1881 carried the
process much further by accepting the proposals known as “the three F's”
(fair rents, free sale of tenants' interests, and fixed tenure), and
establishing a Land Court to fix “judicial rents” for a term of years.
By the Land Act of 1903, however, a new departure was made; and
machinery was provided for the voluntary transference to the tenants of
the land still in the hands of the landlords, on terms attractive to
both parties. This measure and the subsequent amending and supplementary
Acts will probably, in no long time, bring about the establishment of a
system of peasant proprietorship over a great part of Ireland. It should
be added that there has of recent years been a rapid growth among Irish
farmers of various forms of co-operation. For a brief account of the Act
of 1881 and of its relation to contemporary Nationalism, see Low and
Sanders, Political History of England during the reign of Victoria
(1907). The least biassed accounts of Irish agrarian history during the
last forty years are perhaps to be found in a brief work by a German
economist, Dr. Bonn, Modern Ireland and her Agrarian Problem (Eng.
trans. 1906), and in Bastable's articles in the (Harvard) Quarterly
Journal of Economics, xviii. (Nov. 1903), and in the Economic Journal,
xix. (March 1909). On the movement towards co-operation among farmers,
see Plunkett, Ireland in the New Century (1903), part ii. The details of
the history are best looked for in the reports of Royal Commissions and
similar documents, such as the Report of the Royal Commission of 1880–1,
and of the Royal Commission of 1886–7, the Report of the Select
Committee of the House of Commons of 1894 (“Morley's Committee”), and
the Report of the Royal Commission of 1897–8 (“Fry's Commission”),
together with a Report by Mr. W. F. Bailey, Legal
Assistant-Commissioner, of an Inquiry into the Present Condition of
Tenant Purchasers (1903). the Reports of the Irish Agricultural
Organisation Society (from 1895), and of the Irish Department of
Agriculture and Technical Instruction (from 1901). See also Coyne,
Ireland, Industrial and Commercial (pub. by Irish Dep. of Agriculture,
1902), and for the text of the Acts, Cherry and Barton, Irish Land Law.


O.—: The Wages Fund Doctrine (p. 344)

This doctrine was formally abandoned by Mill himself in the course of a
review of Thornton's Labour in the Fortnightly Review for May 1869,
reprinted in his Dissertations and Discussions, iv. The central passages
of this article are as follows (Dissertations, iv. pp. 42 seq.):

Edition: current; Page: [992]
“It will be said that... supply and demand do entirely govern the price
obtained for labour. The demand for labour consists of the whole
circulating capital of the country, including what is paid in wages for
unproductive labour. The supply is the whole labouring population. If
the supply is in excess of what the capital can at present employ, wages
must fall. If the labourers are all employed, and there is a surplus of
capital still unused, wages will rise. This series of deductions is
generally received as incontrovertible. They are found, I presume, in
every systematic treatise on political economy, my own certainly
included. I must plead guilty to having, along with the world in
general, accepted the theory without the qualifications and limitations
necessary to make it admissible.

“The theory rests on what may be called the doctrine of the wages fund.
There is supposed to be, at any given instant, a sum of wealth, which is
unconditionally devoted to the payment of wages of labour. This sum is
not regarded as unalterable, for it is augmented by saving, and
increases with the progress of wealth; but it is reasoned upon as at any
given moment a predetermined amount. More than that amount it is assumed
that the wages-receiving class cannot possibly divide among them; that
amount, and no less, they cannot but obtain. So that, the sum to be
divided being fixed, the wages of each depend solely on the divisor, the
number of participants....

“But is there such a thing as a wages-fund, in the sense here implied?
Exists there any fixed amount which, and neither more nor less than
which, is destined to be expended in wages?

“Of course there is an impassable limit to the amount which can be so
expended; it cannot exceed the aggregate means of the employing classes.
It cannot come up to those means; for the employers have also to
maintain themselves and their families. But, short of this limit, it is
not, in any sense of the word, a fixed amount.

“In the common theory, the order of ideas is this: The capitalist's
pecuniary means consist of two parts—his capital, and his profits or
income. His capital is what he starts with at the beginning of the year,
or when he commences some round of business operations; his income he
does not receive until the end of the year, or until the round of
operations it completed. His capital, except such part as is fixed in
buildings and machinery, or laid out in materials, is what he has got to
pay wages with. He cannot pay them out of his income, for he has not yet
received it. When he does receive it, he may lay by a portion to add to
his capital, and as such it will become part of next year's wages-fund,
but has nothing to do with this year's.

“This distinction, however, between the relation of the capitalist to
his capital, and his relation to his income is wholly imaginary. He
starts at the commencement with the whole of his accumulated means, all
of which is potentially capital: and out of this he advances his
personal and family expenses, exactly as he advances the wages of his
labourers.... If we choose to call the whole of what he possesses
applicable to the payment of wages, the wages-fund, that fund is
co-extensive with the whole proceeds of his business, after keeping up
his machinery, buildings and materials, and feeding his family; and it
is expended jointly upon himself and his labourers. The less he expends
on the one, the more may be expended on the other, and vice versâ. The
price of labour, instead of being determined by the division of the
proceeds between the employer and the labourers, determines it. If he
gets his labour cheaper, he can afford to spend more upon himself. If he
has to pay more for labour, the additional payment comes out of his own
income; perhaps from the part which he would have saved and added to
capital, thus anticipating his voluntary economy by a compulsory one;
perhaps from what he would have expended on his private wants or
pleasures. Edition: current; Page: [993] There is no law of nature
making it inherently impossible for wages to rise to the point of
absorbing not only the funds which he had intended to devote to carrying
on his business, but the whole of what he allows for his private
expenses, beyond the necessaries of life. The real limit to the rise is
the practical consideration, how much would ruin him or drive him to
abandon the business: not the inexorable limits of the wages-fund.

“In short, there is abstractedly available for the payment of wages,
before an absolute limit is reached, not only the employer's capital,
but the whole of what can possibly be retrenched from his personal
expenditure: and the law of wages, on the side of demand, amounts only
to the obvious proposition that the employers cannot pay away in wages
what they have not got. On the side of supply, the law as laid down by
economists remains intact. The more numerous the competitors for
employment, the lower, caeteris paribus, will wages be....

“But though the population principle and its consequences are in no way
touched by anything that Mr. Thornton has advanced, in another of its
bearings the labour question, considered as one of mere economics,
assumes a materially changed aspect. The doctrine hitherto taught by all
or most economists (including myself), which denied it to be possible
that trade combinations can raise wages, or which limited their
operations in that respect to the somewhat earlier attainment of a rise
which the competition of the market would have produced without
them,—this doctrine is deprived of its scientific foundation, and must
be thrown aside. The right and wrong of the proceedings of Trade Unions
becomes a common question of prudence and social duty, not one which is
peremptorily decided by unbending necessities of political economy.”

In spite of the remonstrances of Cairnes, and his attempt to restate the
Wages Fund doctrine in a more satisfactory form, in his Leading
Principles, part ii. ch. 1, it may be said to be abandoned now by all
economists, at any rate in the form in which it was stated by Mill. For
a criticism of Mill's retractation, and a statement of a sense in which
it may still be allowable to speak of a Wages Fund, see Taussig, Wages
and Capital, an Examination of the Wages Fund Doctrine (N. Y. 1896),
especially part ii. ch. 11. And see Sidgwick Principles, bk. ii. ch. 8,
§ 2; Marshall, Principles, i. App. J: The Doctrine of the Wages Fund;
and Nicholson, Principles, bk. ii. ch. 10, § 8.


P.—: The Movement of Population (p. 360)

The rate of growth of the population of the several parts of the United
Kingdom is shown by the following table:

[lf0199_figure_006.jpg]

Edition: current; Page: [994]
The factors in the increase of population are evidently (1) migration,
(2) the “natural increase” of population, i.e. the excess of births over
deaths. The annual natural increase has fallen in England and Wales from
14.5 per 1000 of the population for the period 1876–1880, to 12.1 in
1901–1905, in consequence of the fact that though the death-rate fell
from 20.8 to 16 per thousand, the birth-rate fell from 35.3 to 28.1. The
birth-rate in England and Wales, for the period since the Civil
Registration Act of 1837, reached its maximum in the period 1870–1876,
and has since shown a material decline.

The extent of this decline is shown in the next table:

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Period.         Average Annual _Crude_    Average Annual _Corrected_
                   Birth-rate per 1000 of    Birth-rate per 1000 of
                   Total Population.         Female Population
                                             aged 15–45 years.
  --------------- ------------------------- ----------------------------
  1876–1880....   35.3                      153.3

  1881–1885....   33.5                      144.3

  1886–1890....   31.4                      133.4

  1891–1895....   30.5                      126.8

  1896–1900....   29.3                      118.8

  1901–1905....   28.1                      112.5

  1906......      27.1                      108.3

  1907......      26.3                      105.1
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : BIRTH-RATES (ENGLAND AND WALES).

As regards the decline in the birth-rate generally, the
Registrar-General observes:

“There are sufficient grounds for stating that during the past 30 years
approximately 14 per cent. of the decline in the birth-rate (based on
the proportion of births to the female population aged 15–45 years) is
due to the decrease in the proportion of married women in the female
population of conceptive ages, and that over 7 per cent. is due to the
decrease of illegitimacy. With regard to the remaining 79 per cent. of
the decrease, although some of the reduced fertility may be ascribed to
changes in the age constitution of married women, there can be little
doubt that much of it is due to deliberate restriction of
child-bearing.”

The decline in the birth-rate, whatever may be its cause, is a feature
common to the birth statistics of most European countries. The
statistics may be studied in the General Report on the Census of 1901,
and in the Annual Reports of the Registrar-General. The figures are
conveniently collected in the Blue-book, Public Health and Social
Conditions, prepared by the Local Government Board (1909). The most
detailed statistical analysis of the facts is to be found in a paper by
Newsholme and Stevenson, and another by Yule, in the Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society (March 1906).


Q.—: Profits (p. 421)

The most powerful impulse to fresh discussion of the nature of profits
was given by the late General Walker, in the emphasis laid by him on
“the function of the entrepreneur,” and his view that “profits are a
species of the same genus as rent,” and “do not form a part of the price
of manufactured products”; Edition: current; Page: [995] see his Wages
Question (1876), ch. 14, and Political Economy (1883). In this
discussion it has become usual to distinguish more sharply than the
earlier writers between Interest and “pure” or “net” Profits; and there
is now a large literature on both these topics. As to Interest, much
influence has been exerted by the doctrine of the Austrian writer,
Böhm-Bawerk, which explains interest as “a premium on present as against
future things”; see Böhm-Bawerk, Capital and Interest (Eng. trans.
1890), and Positive Theory of Capital (Eng. trans. 1891). Of the
writings this has called forth it may be sufficient to refer to Pierson,
Principles of Economics (Eng. trans. 1902), part i. ch. 4, § 5, and to
Cassel, The Nature and Necessity of Interest (1903).

On Profit, recent writings are largely influenced by the conceptions of
(1) a “quasi-rent,” (2) “the marginal entrepreneur,” and (3) “long and
short periods.” The present state of the discussion may be seen in
Marshall, Principles, bk. vi. chs. 6–8; Clark, Essentials of Economic
Theory (1907), pp. 117 seq.; Seager, Introduction to Economics (3rd ed.
1906), ch. 10; and in Conrad's Grundriss, § 84, and Gide's Cours, pp.
674 seq. The treatment of the subject by Schmoller, Grundriss, §§ 231–2
(Principes, vol. iv.), will be found illuminating. The “tendency” of
profits and wages to an equality has been commented upon frequently by
Cliffe Leslie, as in his articles on The Political Economy of Adam Smith
and On the Philosophical Method of Political Economy, reprinted in his
Essays (1879).


R.—: Rent (p. 434)

Criticisms of the Ricardian doctrine of rent, or of its formulation, are
to be found in Sidgwick, Principles, bk. ii. ch. 8, and in Nicholson,
Principles, vol. i. bk. ii. ch. 14; and it is restated in Pierson,
Principles, pt. i. ch. 2, and in Marshall, Principles, bk. vi. ch. 9.


S.—: The Theory of Value (p. 482)

It is on this subject—as to which Mill remarked, in 1848, that “happily
there is nothing in the laws of value which remains for the present or
any future writer to clear up; the theory of the subject is complete”
(p. 436)—that theoretic discussion has mainly turned during the last
four decades, owing chiefly to the writings of Jevons, of Menger and the
other representatives of the Austrian school, and of Clark and his
American followers. The characteristic of all these writers is to
approach the problem from the side of demand, and to find the key to
value in Final or Marginal Utility (Grenznutz). The best introduction to
the discussion is through Jevons, Theory of Political Economy (1871; 2nd
ed. revised, 1879), chs. 3 and 4; and through Bonar's article on The
Austrian Economists in the (Harvard) Quarterly Journal of Economics,
iii. (Oct. 1888); and Smart, An Introduction to the Theory of Value on
the lines of Menger, Wieser and Böhm-Bawerk (1891). Wieser's Natural
Value (Eng. trans. 1893) attempts to apply the doctrine to the whole
problem of Distribution. For the present state of the discussion see
Marshall, Principles, i. bk. v.; Clark, Essentials, chs. 6 and 7; and
Schmoller, Grundriss, §§ 171–2 (in French, Principes, vol. iii.).

Mill's doctrine of Cost of Production was attacked by Cairnes in his
Some Leading Principles of Political Economy newly expounded (1874),
soon after Mill's death. See hereon Marshall in Fortnightly Review
(April 1876), and Principles, book v. ch. 3, § 2. Cairnes contributed an
important consideration to the discussion by the emphasis which he laid
on “Non-competing Groups.”

Edition: current; Page: [996]


T.—: The Value of Money (p. 506)

For other expositions of “the Quantity Theory of Prices,” see Walker,
Money (1878), chs. 3–8; and Nicholson, Money and Monetary Problems
(1888; 4th ed. 1897), chs. 5–7. For a criticism, see Scott, Money and
Banking (N. Y. 1903), ch. 4. An attempt to test the doctrine
statistically is made by Kemmerer, Money and Credit Instruments in their
relation to General Prices (N. Y. 1907). For the sense of “money” in
modern business, see Withers, The Meaning of Money (1909).


U.—: Bimetallism (p. 510)

For the main points of the controversy on this subject, which had hardly
begun when Mill wrote in 1848, see Jevons, Money (1875), ch. 12 (with
his acceptance of the view of the “compensatory action” of a double
standard system); Gibbs and Grenfell, The Bimetallic Controversy
(1886),—a collection of pamphlets, speeches, &c., on both sides;
Nicholson, Money and Monetary Problems; Walker, International
Bimetallism (1896); Darwin, Bimetallism (1898); and Carlile, The
Evolution of Modern Money (1901). An extreme monometallist position is
represented in Giffen, Case against Bimetallism (1892).


V.—: International Values (p. 606)

The Ricardian doctrine, followed and carried further by Mill, has
hitherto remained the almost exclusive possession of English economists.
It has been expounded by Cairnes, Leading Principles, part iii. ch. 3,
and by Bastable, Theory of International Trade (2nd ed. 1897). It has
been objected to from two diametrically opposite points of view.
Transferability of capital and labour, it has been argued, is true of
international trade as well as of domestic, so that no separate theory
is necessary for the determination of international values; e.g. Hobson,
International Trade (1904). On the other hand it has been asserted that
such a transferability is true neither of domestic nor of international
trade, and that therefore it is necessary to reject both the Ricardian
doctrine of home values and the Ricardian doctrine of international
values; e.g. Cliffe Leslie, Essays in Political and Moral Philosophy
(1879), Preface. A different theory has been put forward by Sidgwick,
Principles, bk. ii. ch. 3. A mathematical treatment of the whole
subject, with a criticism of all the leading writers, will be found in a
series of articles by Edgeworth on The Theory of International Values in
the Economic Journal, vol. iv. (1894). Bastable and Edgeworth, while
admiring and accepting Mill's first statement of the theory (ch. 18, §§
1–5), agree in regarding “the superstructure of later date” (§§ 6–8) as
“laborious and confusing.”


W.—: The Regulation of Currency (p. 677)

The question of the effect of the Bank Charter Act has lost much of its
importance in consequence of the growing use of cheques. These cheques
are now largely drawn not against actual deposits but against banking
credits; so that banks, while abandoning more and more the issue of
notes, “manufacture money” on a vast scale in another way. Hereon see
Withers, Meaning Edition: current; Page: [997] of Money, chs. 3 and 5.
On the effect of an increase in the supply of gold, see Walker, Money,
pt. i. ch. 4, and Withers, ch. 1.


X.—: Prices in the Nineteenth Century (p. 704)

The actual movement of prices has been much investigated since the time
of Mill; and attempts, in large measure successful, have been made by
Jevons and others to reduce the statement of it to precision by the use
of Index Numbers. On the theory and practice of Index Numbers, see
article by Edgeworth, s. v., in Palgrave's Dictionary of Political
Economy, vol. ii.; Fountain's Memorandum in Report on Wholesale and
Retail Prices (Board of Trade, 1903); and the article of Flux in
(Harvard) Quarterly Journal of Economics (Aug. 1907).

The following table, taken from the Blue-book of the Local Government
Board on Public Health and Social Conditions (1909), presents the
conclusions of Sauerbeck as to prices, and of Bowley as to wages, in a
form convenient for comparison.

INDEX NUMBERS SHOWING COURSE OF AVERAGE WHOLESALE PRICES AND
 GENERAL MONEY WAGES.
 [The wages and prices in 1850 being taken as 100 ; wages and prices in
other
 years in percentages of 1850 figures.]
Year.
Index Numbas of
Year.
Index Number of
Prices.
Wages.
Prices.
Wages.
1850
100
100
1895
80·5
159·2
1855
131·2
—
1896
79·2
160·7
1897
80·5
162·3
1860
128·6
119·2
1898
83·1
166·5
1899
88·3
170·4
1865
131·2
127·5
1900
97·4
178·7
1870
124·7
134·1
1901
90·9
177·0
1902
89·6
174·7
1875
124·7
161·4
1903
89·6
173·7
1904
90·9
172·8
1880
114·3
148·8
1905
93·5
173·3
1885
93·5
149·6
1906
100·0
175·7
1907
103·9
181·7
1890
93·5
161·7

NOTE.—The Index Numbers here given have been calculated as regards Wages
for the years to 1873 on the averages ascertained by Mr. Bowley—see the
Economic Journal (Dec. 1898) and the Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society (Dec. 1899)—and for later years on the percentages in the 12th
Abstract of Labour Statistics of the United Kingdom (1906–7), p. 54. As
regards Prices, Edition: current; Page: [998] the Numbers are based on
the Index Numbers calculated by Mr. Sauerbeck—see Report on Wholesale
and Retail Prices (1903), p. 451, and particulars in the Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society (March 1908).

With this may be compared the calculation of the Board of Trade, taking
the level of 1900 as 100, as given in the Twelfth Abstract of Labour
Statistics (1908), p. 80.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------
  Year.   Index   Year.   Index   Year.   Index   Year.   Index
           No.             No.             No.             No.
  ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- -------
  1871    136.0   1881    127.3   1891    107.4   1901    96.9

  1872    145.8   1882    128.4   1892    101.8   1902    96.5

  1873    152.7   1883    126.8   1893    100.0   1903    96.9

  1874    148.1   1884    114.7   1894    94.2    1904    98.3

  1875    141.4   1885    107.7   1895    91.0    1905    97.6

  1876    138.0   1886    101.6   1896    88.2    1906    100.5

  1877    141.6   1887    99.6    1897    90.1    1907    105.7

  1878    132.6   1888    102.7   1898    93.2            

  1879    126.6   1889    104.0   1899    92.3            

  1880    129.6   1890    104.0   1900    100.0           
  ---------------------------------------------------------------

  : INDEX NUMBERS OF WHOLESALE PRICES, 1871–1907. 1900=100.

Before making use of these figures it must be remembered that they
indicate the movement of wholesale prices; and attention would need also
to be paid to the selection of commodities and the method of
“weighting.”

To the Report on Wholesale and Retail Prices (1903) and to the “First
Fiscal Blue-book” (British and Foreign Trade and Industry, Memoranda,
&c., 1903) is prefixed as Frontispiece a chart combining the Index
Numbers of Jevons for 1801–1846, of Sauerbeck for 1846–1871, and of the
Board of Trade itself for 1871–1902; and so giving in one view the
course of prices, so far as those materials indicate it, for the whole
period 1801–1902.

As to Retail Prices, calculations will be found in the First “Fiscal
Blue-book,” p. 215, and in the Second (British and Foreign Trade and
Industry, Second Series, 1904), as to changes in the Average Retail
Price of Workmen's Food in large towns in Great Britain during recent
decades, as well as of the other principal items of the workman's
budget, viz. rent, clothing, fuel, and light, during a quarter of a
century. A considerable fall in food prices and a slight fall in the
price of clothing since 1880 were in part counterbalanced by a rise in
rents and, in the latter years, in fuel; with the result indicated below
(Second Series, p. 32):

Statement showing Estimated Changes in Cost of Living of the Working
Classes, based on Cost of Food, Rent, Clothing, Fuel, and Light, in a
series of averages for quinquennial periods. (Cost in the year
1900=100.)

Edition: current; Page: [999]


Y.—: Commercial Cycles (p. 709)

In England there has been no “commercial crisis” since 1866, though
crises have continued to make their appearance in the United States, as
e.g. in 1893 and 1907. But the alternations of commercial prosperity and
depression continue; and the cyclical movement, as Jevons first showed,
seems to occupy about ten years. The study of the subject must begin
with Jevons' papers (1875–1882) on the Periodicity of Commercial Crises,
printed in his Investigations in Currency and Finance (1884). A guide to
the history and literature of the subject will be found in Herkner's
article Krisen in Conrad's Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften. The
relation between Foreign Trade, Bank Rate, Employment, Marriage Rate,
Pauperism, &c., for the period 1856–1907 can be conveniently observed in
Table IX, and Chart II, “The Pulse of the Nation,” in Beveridge,
Unemployment. On American conditions and their connexion with currency
questions, see the papers of Seligman and others in The Currency Problem
and the Present Financial Situation (N. Y. 1908).


Z.—: Rents in the Nineteenth Century (p. 724)

According to an estimate of Mr. R. J. Thompson printed in the Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society (Dec. 1907) the rent of agricultural land
in England and Wales advanced by probably 40 per cent. in the first
twenty years of the nineteenth century. After 1820 a period of
depression ensued, followed in 1840 by the beginning of an upward
movement which continued with little intermission till 1878, when a
serious depression again set in. The average rent of agricultural land
in 1900 was 34 per cent. below the maximum of 1877, and 13 per cent.
below the figure of 1846. The average rent of farm land in 1900 was
estimated at about 20s. per acre; subject to charges for repairs, &c.,
amounting on the average to 35 per cent.; so that the net rent probably
averaged 13s. per acre. Estimating expenditure on buildings, fences,
drainage, &c., at 12l. per acre, 3½ per cent. on this would amount to
8s. 5d., leaving 4s. 7d. per acre as “economic rent,” in the Ricardian
sense of payment for the use of the “original and indestructible powers
of the soil.”


AA.—: Wages in the Nineteenth Century (p. 724)

There was undoubtedly a very large increase both in nominal or money
wages and in real wages (i.e. their purchasing power) in the United
Kingdom during the course of the century. The subject may be studied in
Giffen's paper on The Progress of the Working Classes in the last
half-century, reprinted in Essays in Finance (2nd series, 1886; and the
first and more important of them more recently in Economic Inquiries and
Studies, vol. i.); Webb, Labour in the Longest Reign (Fabian Tract,
1897); Bowley, Wages in the United Kingdom (1900), National Progress
(1904), and his articles in the Journal of the R. Statistical Society,
and Wood's article on Real Wages and the Standard of Comfort since 1850,
in Jour. R. Stat. Soc. (March 1909).

The conclusions arrived at by the last two statisticians for the period
since 1850 are thus summarised in the article last quoted, 1900–1904
being taken by Bowley, and 1900–1902 by Wood, as basis, and called 100:

Edition: current; Page: [1000]
REAL WAGES, 1850–1902.
1850–4
1855–9
1860–4
1865–9
1870–4
1875–9
Bowley .. ..
50
50
50
55
60
65
Wood .. ..
56
54
59
63
69
75
1880–4
1885–9
1890–4
1894–9
1900–2 or 4
Bowley....
65
75
85
95
100
Wood....
76
86
92
97
100

Compare also the table in Appendix X above.

The progress in real wages began before 1850; thus, e.g. Bowley's Index
Numbers for 1830 and 1840 are 45 and 50 respectively (see National
Progress, p. 33); and, for earlier periods, his conclusions are that
while during 1790–1810 real wages were falling slowly, during 1810–1830
they were rising slowly (see Appendix (1908) to Palgrave's Dictionary of
Political Economy). The general result would seem to be a large rise on
the whole between 1810 and 1900, though between 1840 and 1860 and again
between 1873 and 1879 wages were almost stationary.

During the century a progress in real wages of substantially the same
character took place in other countries. For a comparison by Bowley of
the United Kingdom, the United States and France for the period
1844–1891, see Econ. Jour. viii. 488; and for France, 1806–1900, see
Gide, Économie Sociale, p. 64.


BB.—: The Importation of Food (p. 738)

The following figures are given in the Report of the Agricultural
Committee (1906) of the Tariff Commission:

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Period.     Imports      Percentage          Period.     Imports      Percentage
               per head.    of Population                   per head.    of Population
               Cwts.        fed from                        Cwts.        fed from home-grown
                            home-grown corn.                             corn.
  ----------- ------------ ------------------- ----------- ------------ ----------------------
  1831–1835   .119         96.0                1871–1875   1.56         48.0

  1836–1840   .267         90.0                1876–1880   1.85         37.2

  1841–1845   .308         89.55               1881–1885   2.17         26.4

  1846–1850   .644         78.45               1886–1890   2.09         29.0

  1851–1855   .755         74.4                1891–1895   2.51         15.2

  1856–1860   .837         71.9                1896–1900   2.38         19.1

  1861–1865   1.196        59.4                1901–1905   2.54         10.6

  1866–1870   1.224        58.4                                         
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : IMPORTS OF WHEAT AND FLOUR

Edition: current; Page: [1001]
For other estimates, and for sources of import, see “First Fiscal
Blue-book” (British and Foreign Trade and Industry, 1903), p. 108.


CC.—: The Tendency of Profits to a Minimum (p. 739)

Compare Cliffe Leslie's article on The History and Future of Interest
and Profit in the Fortnightly Review (Nov. 1881: reprinted in Essays,
2nd ed.); and Leroy-Beaulieu, Repartition des Richesses (3rd ed. 1888),
ch. 8; and for the history of the rate of interest, see Schmoller,
Grundriss, § 191 (Principes, vol. iii).


DD.—: The Subsequent History of Co-Operation (p. 794)

Since Mill wrote, Industrial Co-operation in England has taken the
direction mainly of the multiplication of retail stores, deriving their
supplies in great measure from a great Wholesale Society: this
“Wholesale” producing some of its goods in its own factories and
purchasing the rest in the open market. It has not taken the form
anticipated by him of self-governing productive associations, providing
their own capital. The history of the various movements grouped under
the name of Co-operation may be examined in Schloss, Methods of
Industrial Remuneration (3rd ed. 1898), chs. 22–24; Potter, The
Co-operative Movement (1891); Webb, Industrial Co-operation (1904);
Aves, Co-operative Industry (1907); and Fay Co-operation at Home and
Abroad (1908). For recent developments in “independent” productive
co-operation, see Ashley, Surveys, Historic and Economic (1900), p. 399.


EE.—: The Subsequent History of Income Tax (pp. 806, 817)

For developments later than the time of Mill, reference should be had to
Bastable, Public Finance (3rd ed. 1903), bk. iii. ch. 3 and bk. iv. ch.
4; Hill, The English Income Tax (Publications of the American Economic
Association, 1889); Seligman, Progressive Taxation (Am. Econ. Assoc.
Quarterly, 2nd ed. 1908); and two recent Reports, one of a Departmental
Committee on the present working of the income tax (1905), and one of a
Select Committee on Graduation (1906). In the Finance Bill now (1909)
before Parliament it is proposed to introduce a super-tax on incomes
above a certain point, and give an abatement on incomes below a certain
point in respect of every child (up to a specified number) below a
certain age.


FF.—: The Taxation of Land (p. 819)

In the Finance Bill now (1909) before Parliament it is proposed to
impose a tax (1) of 20. per cent. on the future Unearned Increment in
value of non-agricultural land; (2) of ½d. in the pound of the capital
value of “undeveloped” land. The proposed exemption of agricultural
land, when compared with Mill's assumption that there was likely to be a
constant increase in the value of agricultural land owing to a rise in
the price of food due to the growth of population, indicates the effect
upon the public mind of the agricultural depression of the last two
decades of the nineteenth century. On the general question of the
assessment and special taxation of land values, see Report of the Royal
Commission on Local Taxation (1901); Fox, The Rating of Land Values
(1906); and the Blue-book on Taxation of Land in Foreign Countries
(1909).

Edition: current; Page: [1002]


GG.—: The Incidence of Taxation (p. 863)

On the whole subject of The Shifting and Incidence of Taxation recourse
can now be had to the treatise of Seligman bearing that title (2nd ed.
1899). For the incidence of Death Duties, Rates on Houses and Land,
Inhabited House Duty, Taxes on Trade Profits and Taxes on Transfer of
Property, see in particular the elaborate replies by “financial and
economic experts” in the Blue-book, Memoranda relating to the
Classification and Incidence of Imperial and Local Taxes (1899); and on
the incidence of Import and Export Duties, see Edgeworth in Economic
Journal, iv. pp. 43 seq.


HH.—: Company and Partnership Law (p. 904)

Partnership en commandite, as it is called abroad, is now allowed in the
United Kingdom by the Limited Partnerships Act of 1907. This Act makes
it possible to create a “limited partnership, wherein one or more
persons, called general partners... shall be liable for all debts and
obligations of the firm,” and “one or more persons, to be called limited
partners, who shall at the time of entering into such partnership
contribute thereto a sum as capital... shall not be liable for the
obligations of the firm beyond the amount so contributed.” A limited
partner must not take part in the management of the business.

The most important development since Mill wrote, however, has been the
growth in commercial practice of what came to be known in business
language as “private companies,” though organised under the general
company law. This form has been increasingly adopted by businesses which
wished to combine the advantages of Limited Liability with the advantage
of unity and privacy of management belonging to the sole trader or
old-fashioned firm. The legality of such arrangements, which were
certainly not contemplated by the legislature when it introduced Limited
Liability, was finally settled by the decision of the House of Lords in
1896 in the case of Broderip v. Salamon. See hereon Palmer, Private
Companies and Syndicates. The conception of a “private company” was
finally recognised and defined by the Companies Act of 1907. According
to this Act a private company “means a company which by its articles (a)
restricts the right to transfer its shares; and (b) limits the number of
its members (exclusive of persons who are in the employment of the
company) to fifty; and (c) prohibits any invitation to the public to
subscribe for shares or debentures.” For the formation of such a
company, instead of the seven members formerly required by the Companies
Acts, two members will now suffice.


II.—: Protection (p. 926)

Mill's general line of argument has been further pursued and applied to
contemporary conditions by Cairnes, Leading Principles; Fawcett, Free
Trade and Protection (6th ed. 1885); and Farrar, Free Trade and Fair
Trade (4th ed. 1887). Criticisms and considerations of other kinds will
be found in Sidgwick, Principles of Political Economy, ch. v.; Patten,
Economic Basis of Protection (Philadelphia, 1890); Johnson, Protection
and Capital, in Political Science Quarterly, xxiii. (N. Y. 1908); Lexis,
Handel, in Schönberg's Handbuch der Politischen Oekonomie (4th ed.
1898), vol. ii.; and Schmoller, Grundriss, §§ 253–271 (in Fr. trans.:
Principes d'Économie Politique, vol. v.).

Mill's concession in favour of “infant industries” (bk. v. ch. 10, § 1)
was much quoted subsequently in America, Australia and Canada. Writing
to a Edition: current; Page: [1003] correspondent in 1869 (see Letters,
ed. Elliot), he expressed an intention to “withdraw” the opinion, and
remarked: “Even on this point I continue to think my opinion was well
grounded, but experience has shown that protectionism, once introduced,
is in danger of perpetuating itself... and I therefore now prefer some
other mode of public aid to new industries, though in itself less
appropriate”; but in preparing the edition of 1871 he contented himself
with the verbal changes indicated on p. 922 n. 1.

Mill makes no reference in his Principles to the writings of Friedrich
List, the intellectual founder of the Zollverein, whose ideas have
greatly influenced the subsequent commercial policy as well as the
economic thought of Germany. Thereon see List's National System of
Political Economy (1840, Eng. trans. by Lloyd: new ed. with Introduction
by Nicholson, 1904), and Schmoller's article on List in Zur
Litteraturgeschichte der Staats- und Sozialwissenschaften (1884).

A new stage in the discussion was opened by the grant of Preference to
imports from England by the Dominion of Canada in 1897—an example since
followed by the other great self-governing Dominions of the British
Empire; and by the movement in favour of a policy of reciprocal
Preference by the Mother Country, initiated by Mr. Joseph Chamberlain,
then Colonial Secretary, in 1903. The most important collections of
political speeches on this subject are, on one side, those of
Chamberlain, Imperial Union and Tariff Reform (1903); Bonar Law, The
Fiscal Question (1908); and Milner, Imperialism and Social Reform
(1908); and, on the other Asquith, Trade and the Empire (1903); Haldane,
Army Reform and Other Addresses (1907); and Russell Rea, Insular Free
Trade (1908). See also Balfour, Economic Notes on Insular Free Trade
(1903).

Among the writings called forth by the controversy may be mentioned, of
those in favour of some modification of the present tariff policy:
Caillard, Imperial Fiscal Reform (1903); Ashley, The Tariff Problem (2nd
ed. 1904); Cunningham, The Rise and Decline of the Free Trade Movement
(1904) and The Words of the Wise (1906); Graham, Free Trade and the
Empire (1904); Palgrave, An Enquiry into the Economic Condition of the
Country (1904); Price, Economic Theory and Fiscal Policy, in the
Economic Journal, xiv. (Sept. 1904); Compatriots' Club Lectures (1905);
Kirkup, Progress and the Fiscal Problem (1905); Welsford, The Strength
of Nations (1907); Lethbridge, India and Imperial Preference (1907); and
Milner's article on Colonial Policy and Vince's on The Tariff Reform
Movement in Palgrave, Dictionary of Political Economy, Appendix (1908).

Among the writings in favour of the present policy may be mentioned:
Money, Elements of the Fiscal Problem (1903); Avebury, Essays and
Addresses (1903); British Industries under Free Trade, ed. Cox (1903);
Labour and Protection, ed. Massingham (1903); Smart, The Return to
Protection (1904); Hobson, International Trade (1904); Bowley, National
Progress (1904); various papers by Giffen in Economic Enquiries (1904);
Brassey, Sixty Years of Progress (new ed. 1906); Pigou, Protective and
Preferential Import Duties (1906); The Colonial Conference (Cobden Club,
1907); and Marshall, Memorandum on the Fiscal Policy of International
Trade (White Paper, 1908).

Materials, statistical and political, for a judgment will be found in
the two “Fiscal Blue-books”—British and Foreign Trade and Industry,
Memoranda, &c., 1st series, 1903; 2nd series, 1904; in the Proceedings
of the Colonial Conferences of 1887, 1894, 1897, 1902, 1907; and in the
Reports and Memoranda of the Tariff Commission, since 1904. Among
foreign works bearing upon the problem may be particularly mentioned:
Fuchs, The Trade Policy of Great Britain (1893: Eng. trans. 1905);
Wagner, Agrar- und Industriestaat (2nd ed. 1902); Schwab, Chamberlain's
Handelspolitik, with Preface by Wagner (1905); and Schulze-Gaevernitz,
Britischer Imperialismus (1906). On the history of the English Corn
Laws, Nicholson's book with that title (1904) should be consulted. Free
Trade and the Manchester School, ed. Hirst (1903), is a convenient
collection of speeches, &c. of the thirties and forties.

Edition: current; Page: [1004]


JJ.—: Usury Laws (p. 930.)

The pretty general repeal all over Europe of the old usury laws has been
followed since 1878 by a reaction, and a great number of “usury laws”
have been passed in Germany, Austria, Hungary, Switzerland, and other
countries; as well as for the possessions of the Great Powers outside
Europe, as e.g. for the Punjaub, the Soudan, Algiers, &c. For an account
and estimate of this movement, see Schmoller, Grundriss, § 189
(Principes, vol. iii.). As to the English “Money-lenders Act” of 1900,
see the observations from a point of view identical with that of Mill in
Dicey, Law and Public Opinion in England (1905), pp. 33 and 45.


KK.—: The Factory Acts (p. 759)

See, on the whole subject, Hutchins and Harrison, A History of Factory
Legislation (1907). The legislature, after restricting the freedom of
contract of adult men in various other ways, began very tentatively in
1893 to regulate their hours of labour by the Act of that year giving
power to the Board of Trade to order railway companies to submit revised
schedules of hours of duty for their servants: hereon see Bulletin of
the U.S. Department of Labour, No. 20 (1899). Since then, by the Miners'
Eight Hours Act (1908), it has introduced a “normal day” for a large
number of adult men.


LL.—: The Poor Law (p. 969)

The Report of the Royal Commission on the Poor Law (1909) contains
copious and systematically arranged treatises, in the Majority and
Minority Reports, and in the supplementary volumes of Reports of special
inquiries, on all aspects of the history and practice of the Poor Law
since 1834; and will doubtless lead to considerable legislative changes.


MM.—: The Province or Government (p. 979)

On this subject, in its general philosophical aspects, the most
influential English writings since the time of Mill have perhaps been
those of Sidgwick, Principles of Political Economy (1883), bk. iii. chs.
3 and 4; and Elements of Politics (1891); and Green, Lectures on the
Principles of Political Obligation in Works (1886), vol. ii. See also
Ritchie, Natural Rights (1895), and, with regard to certain arguments
drawn from modern biology, his Darwinism and Politics (1889).

Edition: current; Page: [1005]


INDEX

-   

    A
    -   

        AnrtKiircK, remuneration for, 32,86, 729
    -   

        Agriculture, natural advantages, 102; much division of labour
        impossible in, 131; grande and petite culture, 144–5;
        improvements in, 183; British, ib.; produce, 572–3
    -   

        Allotment system, 368
    -   

        America, Indiana in North A., 104; work in, 105 n.; Indian
        villages, 167–9; farming in, 180; emigration, 197; slavery
        (q.v.), 251; tenure in North A., 258; population, 350, 353;
        cotton trade, 414; profita, 420; silver mines, 485, 507; Spanish
        A., 655 cotton failure, 665; wages, 681 cotton, 682; rates of
        profits, 731 wealth and population, 761, 892
    -   

        Arctic whale fisheries, 27
    -   

        Argovie, population, 291; laws of marriage, 355
    -   

        Arkwright, invention of, 96; its effect, 193, 350
    -   

        Asia, economical condition, 14; cause of poverty in, 113;
        population in, 159; high rate of interest in, 176; limits of
        production in, 189
    -   

        Attwood, on currency, 550
    -   

        Australia, wool-growers, 43; Western A., 65; agriculture in,
        194; colonisation, 197; growth of population in, 350; gold
        mines, 485; annual gold produce, 673; wealth and population,
        761; colonisation, 973
    -   

        Austria, serf labour, 252; currency reform, 667

-   

    B
    -   

        BABBAOE, Mr., Economy of Machinery and Manufacture, 107;
        instances of frauds, 112; value of trust in business, ib.; on
        division of labour, 123, 125–6, 129; on production on a large
        scale, 132; on co-operation, 765, 772 n.
    -   

        Bank Charter Act, 651
    -   

        Bank notes, 519, 529
    -   

        Barbara, Dr., 765
    -   

        Bastiat, metayers, 305 n; on property in land, 430
    -   

        Bavaria, farms, 298; laws of marriage, 354
    -   

        Béam, small farms in, 279
    -   

        Bedford Level, the, 92, 182, 230, 430
    -   

        Bedfordshire, lace-making, 311; agricultural labourers, 357
    -   

        Belgium, cattle in, 147 n.; peasant proprietors, 239, 271;
        manufacturing distress (in 1849), 275 n.; population, 296; Poor
        Colonies of. 424; peasant-class, 482
    -   

        Bengal, Sand tenure, 327
    -   

        Bentham, 223, 397, 806, 861, 885, 927
    -   

        Bequest, 226
    -   

        Berlin Decrees, the, 112
    -   

        Berne, farms, 262 n., 269
    -   

        Berwickshire, farmers in, 265
    -   

        Birmingham, currency school, 550
    -   

        Blacker, William, 146 n.
    -   

        Blackstone, on entails, 895
    -   

        Blanc, Louis, 203, 773, 780 n.
    -   

        Bombay, land tenure, 327
    -   

        Brazil, slavery in, 255; bullion, 608
    -   

        Briggs, Messrs., co-operation, 771
    -   

        Browne, Mr.,oonsul at Copenhagen, 292
    -   

        Buckinghamshire, lace-making, 311; agricultural labourers, 357

-   

    C
    -   

        CABBT, 203
    -   

        Cairnes, Prof., on Ireland, 338 n.
    -   

        California, gold mines, 485; gold from, 673
    -   

        Edition: current; Page: [1006] Campagna of Rome, agricultural
        tenure, 240, 258; small farms in, 276 n.
    -   

        Campbell, Lord, 886
    -   

        Campine, the sands in, 271
    -   

        Canada, emigration to, 197; timber trade, 415
    -   

        Capital, defined, 54; distinction between C. and not-C., 56;
        wages a part of C., 57; further examples of use of, 59;
        fundamental propositions respecting C., 63; distinction between
        industry and C., 64; C. may perish for want of labour, 65; error
        that unproductive expenditure of C. will employ the poor, 66; C.
        and luxuries, 67–8; source of, 68; how consumed, 70; perpetual
        consumption and reproduction of C., 74; C. of producer pays
        labour, 79; circulating C. denned, 91; fixed C, defined, 92;
        distinction between circulating C. and fixed C., 93, 99; a
        primary requisite of production (g.c.). 101; law of increase of,
        163; net-produce of, 164; great accumulation in England, 173;
        transfer among employments, 412; C. and profits, 452, 639; waste
        of, 731; sinking of, 742
    -   

        Qarey, H. C., population, 157 n., 158 n.; on law of agricultural
        industry, 181–2; on rent, 430–2; on partnership, 902 n.; on
        chartered companies, 907; on protection, 922–5
    -   

        Chalmers, Dr., 67 n., 75, 77; on land, 424, 557, 562, 690, 727,
        840
    -   

        Chancery, Court of, 885, 906
    -   

        Channel Islands, peasant properties in, 276–7
    -   

        Charity, 969
    -   

        Charlevoix, 169
    -   

        Cnateanvieux, on metayers, 303, 308, 310, 311
    -   

        Cherbuliez, 777 n., 780 n.
    -   

        Cheques, and prices, 536
    -   

        Chevalier, on co-operation, 769
    -   

        China, 105 n., 170; stationary state in, 172–3, 565; American
        ships trading to, 764
    -   

        Circulating and fixed capital, 91
    -   

        Clément, 295 n.
    -   

        Colonisation, Wakefield on, 121; remedy for low wages, 381 (see
        Wakefield)
    -   

        Commandite, 900
    -   

        Communism, 202 n., 203; examined, 204–11
    -   

        Competition, 242; in prices, 245; of different countries in the
        same market, 678–87; underselling, 679–84; advantage of, 793
    -   

        Co-operation, increases productiveness of labour, 116; in
        agriculture (q.v.), 144; growth of, 698; forms of. 764–94;
        English, 783–8
    -   

        Coquelin. 902, 904–5
    -   

        Corn, laws, 186, 338; taxes, 840–7; laws (again), 920
    -   

        Cornish miners, 765
    -   

        Cost of production, 451–68, 566, 569
    -   

        Cottiers, 318–28; means of abolishing cottier tenancy, 329–42
    -   

        Cotton famine, 757
    -   

        Credit, effect on profits, 413; as a substitute for money
        (q.v.), 511- 22; defined, 511; credit and commerce, 514; bills
        of exchange, 515; cheques, 520; influence on prices, 523–41;
        commercial prices, 527; bank notes, 531–52; Bank of England
        notes, 539; an inconvertible paper currency, 542–55; Bank of
        England (1819), 552
    -   

        Crimean War, effect on currency, 665
    -   

        Crises, 641, 644, 651, 709, 734, 845
    -   

        Cuba, slavery in, 249, 255, 686
    -   

        Cumberland, 257
    -   

        Currency, influence of, on exchanges and foreign trade, 629–38;
        depreciated, 646; on the regulation of a convertible C., 656–7
        n.; paper C., 651–77; Bank Charter Act (1844), 657–8; drains on
        Bank reserve, 672 n.; bank-note C., 674
    -   

        Custom, 242; defined, 243; in prices, 247

-   

    D
    -   

        DE L'ISLE BROCK, on Guernsey labouring classes, 276–7
    -   

        Demand for commodities, 79; determines direction of labour, 87
    -   

        Demand and supply, and value, 442; defined, 445; demand
        exceeding supply, 446; monopolies, 449; value of labour depends
        upon, 450; real law of, 455; recapitulation, 456
    -   

        Denmark, 239 n.; abolition of slavery, 255; population, 292;
        currency reform, 667
    -   

        Edition: current; Page: [1007] Deposits, bank, 648
    -   

        De Quinoey, on value, 436–7, 442, 446, 449, 454
    -   

        Devon Commiaaion on Ireland, 323, 337 n.
    -   

        Diminishing Returns, law of, 177, 179, 181, 183, 185, 188, 190,
        427, 469
    -   

        Distributing class, defined, 39, 789
    -   

        Distribution, laws of, 21, 200; digtribntion as affected by
        exchange, 688–94; influence of the progress of society on
        production and distribution, 695
    -   

        Domestic manufactures, 683
    -   

        Dorsetshire, agricultural labourers, 357
    -   

        Doubleday, on population, 157 n., 158 n.
    -   

        Dunning, T. J., 939 n.
    -   

        Dunoyer, on extractive industry, 33, 950–2, 954 n.

-   

    E
    -   

        ELLIOTT, J. H., 911 n.
    -   

        Ellis, William, oa machinery, 728
    -   

        Emigration, cause of, 193; in form of colonisation, 197, 701
    -   

        Engadine, peasant proprietors, 261
    -   

        Engineers, Society of, 936, 938
    -   

        England, agriculture, 31; reproduction of wealth (q.v.), 74;
        compared with other nations, 101; workmen in, 105 n.; law and
        police, 111; security, 115; increase of production on a large
        scale, 142; small farms, 146; cattle, 147 n.; population, 160–1;
        accumulation of capital (q.v.), 173; land cultivation, 175,
        182–5; Poor Laws (q.v.), 187; population progress, 192; wages
        (q.v.), 220; bequest, 228–9 n.; landed property, 232; yeomen,
        256; farmers, 265; peasant!, 267; agriculture, compared with the
        Channel Islands (q.v.), 277; rate of population, 294; tenant
        farmers, 306; wages and food, 347–8; agricultural population,
        356; retail pronto, 415–20; land in, 426–31; gold standard, 509;
        high prices, 610; currency, 633; banking, 677; agriculture, 704;
        interest, 730–5; overflow of capital abroad, 738; railways,
        743–5; co-operation, 783–8; land-tax. 819; tithes, 845; law of
        inheritance. 890
    -   

        Escher, Mr., of Zurich, 109
    -   

        Europe, 2; ancient agriculture in, 14; source of wealth of
        modern E., 17; temperate regions, 102; security, 113; market for
        Indian goods, 122; population, 153, 159, 161; effective desire
        of accumulation, 170; cultivation, 179; property, 208; laws,
        227; usage of tenure, 245; custom of prices, 247; farms, 270;
        hoarding, 554; profit and savings, 731; taxation of land, 819
    -   

        Exchange, the operation of, 88; bflh of, 515, 529, 613
    -   

        Exports and Imports, 578, 611, 619; disturbances of, 618, 624;
        undisturbed, 625; taxes on, 850–6

-   

    F
    -   

        FANE, Cecil, 898 n., 905 n., 914 n.
    -   

        Fawoett, Prof., 937
    -   

        Feugueray, 774, 780 n., 781–2, 793
    -   

        Flanders, 18; security, 114; small farms and peasant-farming,
        147–8; high farming, 179; crops, 265, 271–5, 280; peasant
        proprietors, 284; population, 291; free cities, 882
    -   

        Fkmuk Husbandry, treatise on, 147 n.
    -   

        Florence, metayers near, 309–11
    -   

        Food, importation of, 193; exports of, 195
    -   

        Foreign exchanges, 612–18
    -   

        Fourierism, 204, 212; examined, 213–16
    -   

        France, agriculture, 31; railways, 144; cattle, 148 n.; labour,
        compared with England, 150–2; population, 153, 161; cultivation,
        182; Socialism, 204, 211; bequest, 227, 229 n.; trades, 236;
        peasant proprietors, 239; agricultural tenure, 240, 260 n., 278;
        metayers, 306–7; food, 481; silver standard, 509 n.; credit,
        522; assignals, 547; trade, 575; bank notes, 666; agriculture,
        704; co-operation, 783; taxes, 820; law of inheritance, 890;
        partnership laws, 900; manufactures, 900–2
    -   

        Frankfort, laws of marriage, 354
    -   

        French Economists, on rent, 26
    -   

        Fullarton, on currency, 498, 500 n., 537; bank circulation,
        652–5, 668–70, 675

-   

    Edition: current; Page: [1008] G
    -   

        GERMANY, medieval free towns, 18; wood-cutters, 34; peasant
        proprietors, 239; northern provinces, 252; cultivation of land,
        260 n., 264 n., 267; population, 291; peasant class, 482; trade
        with, 575; international values with, 584–606; co-operation, 783
    -   

        Gisquet, co-operation, 77 n.
    -   

        Gladstone, income-tax, 806 n. taxation, 871
    -   

        Godley, J. R., 179 n.
    -   

        Gold and silver, at money (q.v.), 484; as commodities, 502,
        607–11; their distribution in commerce, 619- 28; their cost of
        production varies, 629
    -   

        Government, its functions, 795–801; revenues from taxation
        (q.v.), 802; on the ordinary functions of, considered as to
        their economical effects, 881–8; further effects, 889–915;
        interference of, 916–40; protection, 917–26; monopolies, 932;
        combinations of workmen, 933–9; limits of G., 941–79;
        laiuez-faire, 950
    -   

        Graduated taxation, 806, 808
    -   

        Gray, John, on money, 549
    -   

        Great Britain, coal-fields, 103; farming, 180; emigration, 197;
        landed proprietors, 231; workmen, 239 n.; emigration for
        colonisation (q.v.), 384; land value, 431; credit, 521;
        agriculture, 704; population, 704; tithes, 845
    -   

        Greece, soldiers' gains, 50; sculptores of, 74; its colonies,
        114
    -   

        Greeks, ancient, 48, 104
    -   

        Guernsey, peasant farms, 278

-   

    H
    -   

        HAINAULT, crops in, 271
    -   

        Hanse towns, 686, 882
    -   

        Hardenberg, land reforms, 334
    -   

        Hargreaves, invention of, 96
    -   

        Harlem, Lake of, 182
    -   

        Head, Sir George, on Guernsey, 276
    -   

        Holland, cattle in, 147 n.; low rate of interest, 173, 175; fens
        of, 185; crops in, 265; peasant farms, 271; trade, 687; profits,
        884
    -   

        Holyoake, 784–8
    -   

        Howitt, W., 266
    -   

        Hubbard, on income-tax, 815 n.
    -   

        Huber, Prof., 780 n.
    -   

        Hume, on money, 496, 550–1
    -   

        Hungary, 20 n., 252 n., 738

-   

    I
    -   

        INCAME-TAX 806–17; graduated, 808–10; on annuities, 811;
        savings, 813–17; defined, 829–32
    -   

        Inconvertible currency, 642–55, 634
    -   

        Increasing returns, 703
    -   

        India, 13, 121; small towns, 122; native states, 173; tenure,
        240; ryots, 243; customs in tenure, 244; land tenure, 324–8;
        high interest on loans, 409
    -   

        Industry, extractive, defined, 33; limited by capital (q.v.),
        63; distinction between I. and capital, 64; influence oi the
        progress of L and population on values and prices, 700–9;
        influence of the progress of I. and population on rents,
        profits, and wages, 710–24
    -   

        Inglis, 260
    -   

        Inheritance, 221
    -   

        Inquisition, the, 940
    -   

        Interest, defined, 406; market rate of, 411; on the rate of,
        639–50; and loans, 639; fluctuations, 641; war loans, 643; rate
        depends on capital loaned, 647; value sod price of funds
        determined by, 649; low interest, 732–3
    -   

        International trade, 574–606
    -   

        Ireland, 102; farms small, 145–9, 180; tenancy, 187; emigration,
        197; landed property, 232; tenure, 318; cottiers, ib.;
        peasantry, 322- 34; proposed reforms in cottier tenancy, 331–7;
        low wages, 419; low profits, 420; emigration for colonisation,
        975
    -   

        Irish peasantry, 56; landowners, 2341 cottier tenants, 258
    -   

        Italy, ancient, 16; towns in medieval I., 18; security in, 114;
        peasant fanning in, 148, 239; agricultural tenure, 240, 268,
        260n.; crops in, 280; peasant farming, 284; metayers, SOS, 307.
        308, 311, 316; peasant-class, 482; free cities of, 882

-   

    Edition: current; Page: [1009] J
    -   

        JACOB, L. H., on serf labour, 252
    -   

        Jamaica, negroes, 105
    -   

        Japan, Hfe in, 105 n.
    -   

        Jersey, farms, 277
    -   

        Johnson, Dr., on inheritance, 891
    -   

        Joint-stock companies, promote production on a large scale, 137;
        disadvantages of, 138–40; with United liability, 642, 903
    -   

        Jones, Prof. K., on serf labour, 252; population, 288; metayers,
        307, 310, 316

-   

    K
    -   

        KIT, Mr., 263 n., 269, 270 n., 271; population, 291, 354

-   

    L
    -   

        LABOUB, a requisite ot production (q.v.), 22–9; various kinds of
        productive, 33–41; unproductive, 44; three classes of, 47;
        productive L. defined, 48; unproductive L. defined, 49; L.
        depends on capital (q.v.), 79; ta a primary requisite of
        production, 101; division of L., 116–18; of women, 119; limited
        by markets, 130; law of increase of L., 155–62; the produce does
        not increase in proportion to L., 177; cost of L. 420; value of.
        450; cost of (again), 681, 691–4
    -   

        Labourers, 20,31; effect on, of change of circulating capital
        (q.v.) into Axed capital, 94–9; Italian, French, English, Swiss,
        German, Dutch, Saxon, compared, 109–10; probable future of the
        labouring classes, 752–94
    -   

        Labourers, Statute of, 934
    -   

        Lacedemon, iron money, 485
    -   

        Laiag [d. 1868], on productiveness, 106 n.; on peasant
        proprietors, 263–4, 289; English fanning, 298 n.; wages on the
        Continent, 371
    -   

        Laug [d. 1897], on Cornish minera, 765 n.
    -   

        Laitftr faire, 940, 950, 957
    -   

        Lancashire, bills of exchange, 519
    -   

        Land, 26, 74, 93, 108, 145, 155; is a requisite of production,
        156; law of increase of production from, 176; limited quantity,
        ib.; law of production from, defined, 177; property in, 231;
        taxation of, 818–21
    -   

        Latium, 258
    -   

        Lavergne, Léonoe de, 154 n., 266 n., 285, 294, 295 n., 298
    -   

        Leatham, on bill-circulation, 536 n.
    -   

        Leclaire, and co-operation, 768–70
    -   

        Legoyt, on population, 293 n., 294
    -   

        Limited Liability, 899
    -   

        Limited Partnership, 900, 903
    -   

        Limousin, metayers, 307, 308
    -   

        Lincolnshire Wolds, rent of, 430
    -   

        Liverpool, population, 352
    -   

        Loans, war, 77 n. (see Interest)
    -   

        Lombardy, cattle in, 147 n; peasant proprietors, 264 n.; farming
        in, 265; metayers, 308
    -   

        London, post office, 134; population, 352; wages, 387; the
        Clearing House, 521
    -   

        Lubeok, laws of marriage, 354
    -   

        Lyell, Sir Charles, farming in America, 179 n.; bequest in
        America, 229 n.

-   

    M
    -   

        MoCULLOCH, 44; peasant farms, 271; population, 288; metayers,
        307; property, 747; income-tax, 816 n.; tax on cost of
        production, 837
    -   

        Machinery, effects, 94, 742
    -   

        Madras, land tenure, 327
    -   

        Maine, Ancient Law, 222 n.
    -   

        Malthus, 67 n., 156, 157 n., 158 n., 160, 165, 349 n., 351–2,
        359, 365. 376; rediscovered theory of rent, 425; on over-supply,
        557, 562; on measure of value, 568; on population, 747
    -   

        Manilla, Chinese co-operation, 771 n.
    -   

        Manufactures, domestic, 64 n.; improvements in, 108
    -   

        Margin of cultivation, 690, 716, 840
    -   

        Market for commodities is not employment of labour (q.v.), 120
    -   

        Massachusetts, 229 n., 907
    -   

        Mecklenburg, laws of marriage, 353
    -   

        Mercantile system, 2, 677, 918
    -   

        Metayers, 302; defined, 303; Adam Smith on, 305; Arthur Young
        on, 306
    -   

        Miohelet, on peasant proprietors, 284 n., 300 n.
    -   

        Milan decrees, the, 112
    -   

        Milanese, the, metayers. 307
    -   

        Edition: current; Page: [1010] Mill, James, on over-supply, 562;
        on international trade (q.v.), 576; income-tax, 816 n.
    -   

        Miiter, Prof., 165 n.
    -   

        Honey, 3. 64, 72; defined, 483; gold Mid silver, 485; a
        commodity, 488; its valne depends on demand and supply, 490; M.
        and prices, 496; M. and cost of production (q.v.), 499–506;
        coining, 501; doable standard, 507–10; credit (q.v.), 511;
        commercial crisis, 561; as an imported commodity, 607–11; bills
        of exchange, 612–18; ita distribution in commerce, 619–23; M.
        and laws of value (q.v.), 626; loans, 645
    -   

        Monopoly, 410, 449
    -   

        Montesquieu, 482, 484
    -   

        Mora-nans, the, 202
    -   

        Munich, laws of marriage, 354
    -   

        Mushet, Mr., on Bank restriction, 554

-   

    N
    -   

        NAPLES, tenure, 245; metayers, 304 n.
    -   

        Napoleonic wars, 77 n.
    -   

        National Debt, 873–80; paying off, 876–80
    -   

        Natural objects, as requisite of production (q.v.), 22, 101
    -   

        Nature, man's power over, 25
    -   

        Navigation laws, 920
    -   

        New England, 197, 229 n.
    -   

        New York, shipping, 903
    -   

        New Zealand, colonisation, 973
    -   

        Newmarch, on bill-circulation, 536 n.
    -   

        Newry, tenant-right, Ireland, 341
    -   

        Niebuhr, on peasant farms, 276 n.
    -   

        Norway, 34; population, 160, 290; peasant proprietors, 239, 263;
        laws of marriage, 353

-   

    O
    -   

        OLMSTED, on slave states, 251
    -   

        One-pound notes, 656, 676
    -   

        Oriental opulence, belief in, 12; famines in O. countries, 19;
        modern O. society, 20
    -   

        Overstone, Lord, regulation of the currency, 656
    -   

        Owen, Robert, 203, 773, 783
    -   

        Owenism, 202 n., 210

-   

    P
    -   

        PALATINATE, the, peseant proprietors 266, 296 n.
    -   

        Paraguay, Indians in, 169, 212
    -   

        Parennin, Father, on the Chinese, 171
    -   

        Paris, population, 153 n; farms near, 285, 296; co-operation in,
        768
    -   

        Parliament, railway Acts, 98, 176
    -   

        Passy, M., farms, 147 n.; large and small farms, 152; net
        produce, 153 n.; farming in France, 297; metayers, 307 n.
    -   

        Peasant proprietors, 256; English, 257; Swiss, 258–63; Norway,
        263; Flanders, 265; Germany, 266–71; Belgium, 271–5; the Channel
        Islands, 276–7; Fiance, 277–82; Arthur Young (q.v.), 283; of the
        Continent, 286
    -   

        Peel, Sir Bobert (his Act of 1844), 651
    -   

        Piedmont, small farms, 264 n.; metayers, 303 n., 308, 309;
        co-operation, 783
    -   

        Plnmmer, 783 n., 784 n.
    -   

        Poland, population, 195; trade with, 576; capital in, 738
    -   

        Politics, science of, 891
    -   

        Poor Law, the, 84; Report (1840), 109; English poor laws, 160;
        Irish poor laws, 197; Swiss, 262; new English, ib.; Act of
        Elizabeth. 368; Poor Law (of 1834), 368; Actof Queen Anne, 395;
        Poor Laws, 967
    -   

        Population, 12, 120–1; increase of, 153, 156–61;
        over-population, 191; peasantry population, 288–96: table of
        various nations' population, 293 n.; progress of, 561; influence
        of the progress of industry and population on values and prices,
        700–9; influence of the progress of industry and population on
        rents and profits and wages, 710–24
    -   

        Possessions, origin of inequality of, 10
    -   

        Prescription, 220
    -   

        Prices, 245; retail and wholesale, 441; money and, 624;
        influence of credit (q.v.), 523–41; general rise, 551; influence
        of industrial progress on, 700–9; speculators, 706–8;
        fluctuations from supply, 709
    -   

        Production, laws of, 22–8; the three Edition: current; Page:
        [1011] requisites of, 54, 101; on a large and on a small scale,
        132, 134, 136- 7; law of increase of, 155; the three requisites
        (again), 156, 163; law of P. from land (q.v.), 177; cost of P.,
        183; laws of P. from wealth (q.v.), 199; cost of P. (again),
        451, 453, 457–68; progress of, 561; Joint cost of P., 570–3;
        cost of P. (again), 700; increase of P., capital and population,
        722; improvements inP., 735–6; tax on cost of P., 837
    -   

        Productive agents, on what their degree of productiveness
        depends, 101; natural advantages of, 102; skilled labour in
        using, 109; security, 113
    -   

        Productive and tutprodutitivo labour, 44–53
    -   

        Profit, origin of, 32; P. of stock defined, 164; P. of capital,
        462–4; extra P., 476; part of production, 477
    -   

        Profits, 405; gran, 406; lowest rate possible, 407; retail, 409;
        vary, 412; custom affects, 415; causes determining amount of,
        416; the rate of P, depends on wages, 419; tax on P., 824–7
    -   

        Progress of society, summed op, 723–4
    -   

        Progreotre taxation, 806, 808
    -   

        Property, private, 201; P. and European nations, ib.; P.
        defined, 218–21; bequest of, 222,226
    -   

        Prussia, serf labour, 252; peasant farms, 271; landed property
        reforms, 334; marriage laws, 354; ourancy reform, 667

-   

    Q
    -   

        QUETELET, 293 n.

-   

    R
    -   

        RAB, John, 129 n., 165 n., 106, 169, 170, 172,870 n., 922
    -   

        Railway Board, 946
    -   

        Ran, Prof., on small farms, 162, 269, 270
    -   

        Registration of land, 886
    -   

        Reiohensperger, Herr, 263 n., 270
    -   

        Rent, of land, 26; not productive, 57; cause of, 422; theory of,
        425; some agricultural capital pays no R., 427; R. and profits,
        429; is not part of cost of production, 433, 468; R. in relation
        to value, 469–71; law of R., 472, 691; rents rise, 712–14; rents
        fall, 717- 20; tax on house and ground R., 823–36
    -   

        Revans, Mr., on Irish peasantry, 322; on income-tax, 831
    -   

        Rhine province, 269; crops in, 280, 285; division of farms, 298
    -   

        Ricardo, 80; on wages, 347; on rent, 425, 432; on profits, 419;
        on value, 452, 458–9, 461; on over- snpply, 663; on
        international trade, 576; on gold and silver, 625; on interest,
        638; on taxes, 822
    -   

        Riokmanaworth, land experiments at, 336 n.
    -   

        Roads, value of, 184
    -   

        Robinson, on Irish Waste Land Society, 337 n.
    -   

        Rochdale Pioneers, the, 784–8
    -   

        Romans, the, 16, 50, 104, 114, 167, 485
    -   

        Russia, emancipation of slaves [1861], 17; com from, 30; state
        of, 101, 190, 195; serf labour, 252; table of various
        populations, 293 n.; trade with, 576; currency reform, 667;
        capital in, 697, 738
    -   

        Ryota, 243, 324

-   

    S
    -   

        ST. SIMONISM, 204; examined, 212
    -   

        Saving, defined, 70; enriches the com inanity, 72, 728
    -   

        Savoy, 260 n.
    -   

        Saxony, 269; peasant farms, 271; laws of marriage, 353
    -   

        Say, 44,45,69; on demand for labour (q.v.), 80; on division of
        labour, 123; CourS d'Economie Politiqve Pratique, ib. n.; on
        demand and supply, 446; on over-supply, 562
    -   

        Scotland, farming, 95 n., 102, 178, 263; colliers, 387; banking,
        677; agriculture, 704; co-operation, 783 n.
    -   

        Senior, on Continental marriage laws, 353; definition of
        profits, 405; on money, 505; on imports, 605; on gold and silver
        imports, 609; taxes. 842–5
    -   

        Edition: current; Page: [1012] Serfs, origin of, 17, 244;
        unproductiveness of their labour, 252; gradual extinction, 253
    -   

        Siamondi, on capital, 67 n.; on property, 231 n.; on peasant
        pro-prieton, 258, 260 n., 289; on metayers, 303, 304 n., 311,
        315 n., 316 n.; on corporations, 355 n.; on population, 375; on
        over-supply, 557, 561–2; on usury, 926
    -   

        Slaney, Mr., 783, 906 n.
    -   

        Slavery, 249; unproductive labour of, 251; in America, ib.;
        compared with free labour, 253; negro S. abolished by England,
        Denmark, America, the Dutch (by 1865), 254 n.; still allowed by
        Spain in Brazil and Cuba (1863), 255
    -   

        Slaves, ate not wealth, 8; Roman, 17; West Indian 8. ransomed
        [1834], 19; how maintained, 69; property in, 236; owned by the
        landowners, 239
    -   

        Sleswick-Holstein, 239 n.
    -   

        Smith, Adam, 2, 26, 67,122–8; joint-stock companies, 140;
        Malthas, 165; metayers, 305; workmen, 366 n.; on difference of
        wages in different employments, 385–97; retail profits, 410;
        value, 436–7, 462, 566–8; foreign trade, 579; paper money, 632;
        interest, 638; capital, 726–7; on a stationary state, 747;
        taxation, 802; tax on wages, 828; house-rent, 832; usury, 926,
        928–9; market-rate, 937
    -   

        Socialism, 202 n., 203; examined, 209–17, 792
    -   

        Spam, 190, 255; trade with, 683; capital in, 738; state of, 940
    -   

        Spice Islands, Dutch monopoly in, 449
    -   

        Statics and Dynamics of political economy, 695
    -   

        Stationary state, the, 746–51
    -   

        Stein, land reforms, 334
    -   

        Supply, defined, 445; excess, 556–63; a general over-supply,
        558–62
    -   

        Swan River Settlement, 65
    -   

        Sweden, trade with, 576; currency reform, 667
    -   

        Switzerland, 239; peasant proprietors, 268, 265, 271;
        population, 291; laws of marriage, 354; trade with, 575;
        co-operation, 783

-   

    T
    -   

        TAILLB, 883
    -   

        Taxation, fallacies of, 89; general principles of, 802–22;
        equality in, 804, 813, 817; of land, 819; comparison between
        direct and indirect T., 864–72
    -   

        Taxes, 16, 57, 466; income-T., 806- 17; property T., 806–10; on
        profits, savings, and land, 811–19; direct T., 823–36; defined,
        823; on rents, 832–6; oa commodities, 837–66; indirect T.
        defined, 837; tithes, 841; duties, 847–50; on imports and
        exports, 850–06; miscellaneous T., 857–63
    -   

        Thaer, on peasant proprietors, 271
    -   

        Thornton, on peasant proprietors, 276; on English peasantry, 348
        n.; on allotments, 371; on paper credit (q.v.), 515, 519; oa
        international values, 596
    -   

        Thurgao, peasant-farms in, 263
    -   

        Tithes, incidence of, 841; see also Taxes
    -   

        Tooke, on com prices, 447 n.; on ths currency, 521 n.; on
        credit, 533–5; on bills, 536 n.; on prices, 554; on bank credit,
        648; on bank circulation, 662–5, 665; on money-prices of
        agricultural produce, 704
    -   

        Torrens, on international trade (q.v.), 576 n., 693 n.;
        regulation of the currency, 657
    -   

        Trade, international, 674–82; defined, 674; fictitious examples,
        674–8; theories of, compared, 678- 82; international values in,
        684- 606; equation of international demand, law of, 692, 600;
        value and cost in, 604; money in international T., 607–11; bills
        of exchange, 613; law of international T.. 621, 629; free T.,
        701
    -   

        Turgot, on metayers, 307
    -   

        Tuscany, farming in, 179; agricultural tenure, 240; peasant
        proprietors, 264 n.; metayers, 303, 304 n., 311- 16

-   

    U
    -   

        ULSTER, tenant-right, 318,320, 335 n.
    -   

        United States, the, 103, 152, 157 n., 158 n., 179, 194. 220.
        229. 239, 213, Edition: current; Page: [1013] 430, 432, 655,
        682, 721, 738, 907–8, 921, 925
    -   

        Unsettled Questions of Political Economy, Essays on some, 48 n.
    -   

        Ural Mountains, gold mines, 485
    -   

        Dri, laws of marriage, 355
    -   

        Usury, 926–30
    -   

        Utility, 45, 442

-   

    V
    -   

        VALUE, 27; defined, 437; V. and price, 439–40; law of V., 448;
        natural V., 452; market V., 453–9; law of (again), 471; theory
        of V., summary of, 478–80; money V., 488–98; measure of V.,
        564–8; peculiar cases of V., 569–73; international V., 583–606;
        law of international V., 622–7
    -   

        Venice, 686
    -   

        Venn, farms, 297
    -   

        Villermé, on French labourers, 295 n.
    -   

        Villiaumé, on co-operation, 769, 777 n., 778 n.
    -   

        Voluntary system, 953. 977

-   

    W
    -   

        WAES, Pays de, 147 n., 230
    -   

        Wages, 57, 253, 343–6; W. and population, 349–60; popular
        remedies for low W., 361–2; allotment system, 368; Continental,
        371; emigration, 384; women's W. in factories, 400; fixed by
        custom, 403; W. depends on profits, 419, 477; low W. and
        underselling, 684; law of W., 688–9; tax on W., 827–9
    -   

        Wakefield, on co-operation, 116–17; on colonisation, 121; on
        agriculture, 144–52; his system of emigration, 330, 382; on
        capital, 727, 735; on protection, 925; on land in Colonies, 965;
        success of his colonisation system, 972–4
    -   

        Walker, G., on currency, 673
    -   

        Warehousing system, 867
    -   

        Watt, inventor, 41; effect of his inventions, 193, 350
    -   

        Wealth, 1, 6, 9, 19, 47, 48, 74, 108; distribution of, 200;
        progressive state of, 695–9; stationary state of, 746–51
    -   

        West, Sir E., on theory of rent, 425
    -   

        West Indies, ransom of slaves in [1834], 19; expenditure in,
        166; slaves in, 240; slave population, 250, 253; Colonies, 685–6
    -   

        Westbury, Lord, 887 n.
    -   

        Westmorland, small farmers, 257
    -   

        Wiltshire, agricultural labourers, 357
    -   

        Women, work of, 119; efficiency of, 128; wages of, 400;
        employments for, 401, 759–60, 959
    -   

        Wordsworth, on English peasantry, 257 n.
    -   

        Wurtemberg, peasant proprietors, 239 n.; laws of marriage, 353

-   

    Y
    -   

        YOUNG, Arthur, Travels in France (1787–9), 278–82; on
        population, 295 n,; on metayers, 303 n.; on English farmers,
        306; against metayers, 306, 307, 308, 310

-   

    Z
    -   

        ZEMINDABS, 325–7
    -   

        Zurich, workmen at, 109; peasant proprietors, 200, 262 n., 269;
        weavers, 398; manufacturers and agriculturists, 683;
        oo-operation, 783